========================================

LATTER-DAY PAMPHLETS.

by Thomas Carlyle



     But as yet struggles the twelfth hour of the Night.  Birds
     of darkness are on the wing; spectres uproar; the dead walk;
     the living dream.  Thou, Eternal Providence, wilt make the
     Day dawn!--JEAN PAUL.


     Then said his Lordship, "Well.  God mend all!"--"Nay, by
     God, Donald, we must help him to mend it!" said the other.--
     RUSHWORTH (_Sir David Ramsay and Lord Rea, in 1630_).




CONTENTS.

I. THE PRESENT TIME

II. MODEL PRISONS

III. DOWNING STREET

IV. THE NEW DOWNING STREET

V. STUMP-ORATOR




NO. I. THE PRESENT TIME. [February 1, 1850.]

The Present Time, youngest-born of Eternity, child and heir of all the
Past Times with their good and evil, and parent of all the Future, is
ever a "New Era" to the thinking man; and comes with new questions and
significance, however commonplace it look: to know _it_, and what it
bids us do, is ever the sum of knowledge for all of us. This new Day,
sent us out of Heaven, this also has its heavenly omens;--amid the
bustling trivialities and loud empty noises, its silent monitions, which
if we cannot read and obey, it will not be well with us! No;--nor is
there any sin more fearfully avenged on men and Nations than that same,
which indeed includes and presupposes all manner of sins: the sin which
our old pious fathers called "judicial blindness;"--which we, with our
light habits, may still call misinterpretation of the Time that now
is; disloyalty to its real meanings and monitions, stupid disregard of
these, stupid adherence active or passive to the counterfeits and mere
current semblances of these. This is true of all times and days.

But in the days that are now passing over us, even fools are arrested
to ask the meaning of them; few of the generations of men have seen
more impressive days. Days of endless calamity, disruption, dislocation,
confusion worse confounded: if they are not days of endless hope too,
then they are days of utter despair. For it is not a small hope that
will suffice, the ruin being clearly, either in action or in prospect,
universal. There must be a new world, if there is to be any world at
all! That human things in our Europe can ever return to the old sorry
routine, and proceed with any steadiness or continuance there; this
small hope is not now a tenable one. These days of universal death
must be days of universal new-birth, if the ruin is not to be total and
final! It is a Time to make the dullest man consider; and ask himself,
Whence _he_ came? Whither he is bound?--A veritable "New Era," to the
foolish as well as to the wise.


Not long ago, the world saw, with thoughtless joy which might have been
very thoughtful joy, a real miracle not heretofore considered possible
or conceivable in the world,--a Reforming Pope. A simple pious creature,
a good country-priest, invested unexpectedly with the tiara, takes up
the New Testament, declares that this henceforth shall be his rule
of governing. No more finesse, chicanery, hypocrisy, or false or foul
dealing of any kind: God's truth shall be spoken, God's justice shall be
done, on the throne called of St. Peter: an honest Pope, Papa, or Father
of Christendom, shall preside there. And such a throne of St. Peter;
and such a Christendom, for an honest Papa to preside in! The European
populations everywhere hailed the omen; with shouting and rejoicing
leading articles and tar-barrels; thinking people listened with
astonishment,--not with sorrow if they were faithful or wise; with awe
rather as at the heralding of death, and with a joy as of victory beyond
death! Something pious, grand and as if awful in that joy, revealing
once more the Presence of a Divine Justice in this world. For, to such
men it was very clear how this poor devoted Pope would prosper, with his
New Testament in his hand. An alarming business, that of governing
in the throne of St. Peter by the rule of veracity! By the rule of
veracity, the so-called throne of St. Peter was openly declared, above
three hundred years, ago, to be a falsity, a huge mistake, a pestilent
dead carcass, which this Sun was weary of. More than three hundred years
ago, the throne of St. Peter received peremptory judicial notice to
quit; authentic order, registered in Heaven's chancery and since legible
in the hearts of all brave men, to take itself away,--to begone, and
let us have no more to do with _it_ and its delusions and impious
deliriums;--and it has been sitting every day since, it may depend upon
it, at its own peril withal, and will have to pay exact damages yet for
every day it has so sat. Law of veracity? What this Popedom had to do
by the law of veracity, was to give up its own foul galvanic life, an
offence to gods and men; honestly to die, and get itself buried.

Far from this was the thing the poor Pope undertook in regard to
it;--and yet, on the whole, it was essentially this too. "Reforming
Pope?" said one of our acquaintance, often in those weeks, "Was there
ever such a miracle? About to break up that huge imposthume too, by
'curing' it? Turgot and Necker were nothing to this. God is great; and
when a scandal is to end, brings some devoted man to take charge of
it in hope, not in despair!"--But cannot he reform? asked many simple
persons;--to whom our friend in grim banter would reply: "Reform a
Popedom,--hardly. A wretched old kettle, ruined from top to bottom, and
consisting mainly now of foul _grime_ and _rust_: stop the holes of it,
as your antecessors have been doing, with temporary putty, it may hang
together yet a while; begin to hammer at it, solder at it, to what you
call mend and rectify it,--it will fall to sherds, as sure as rust is
rust; go all into nameless dissolution,--and the fat in the fire will be
a thing worth looking at, poor Pope!"--So accordingly it has proved. The
poor Pope, amid felicitations and tar-barrels of various kinds, went on
joyfully for a season: but he had awakened, he as no other man could
do, the sleeping elements; mothers of the whirlwinds, conflagrations,
earthquakes. Questions not very soluble at present, were even sages
and heroes set to solve them, began everywhere with new emphasis to be
asked. Questions which all official men wished, and almost hoped,
to postpone till Doomsday. Doomsday itself _had_ come; that was the
terrible truth!

For, sure enough, if once the law of veracity be acknowledged as the
rule for human things, there will not anywhere be want of work for the
reformer; in very few places do human things adhere quite closely to
that law! Here was the Papa of Christendom proclaiming that such was
actually the case;--whereupon all over Christendom such results as we
have seen. The Sicilians, I think, were the first notable body that set
about applying this new strange rule sanctioned by the general Father;
they said to themselves, We do not by the law of veracity belong to
Naples and these Neapolitan Officials; we will, by favor of Heaven and
the Pope, be free of these. Fighting ensued; insurrection, fiercely
maintained in the Sicilian Cities; with much bloodshed, much tumult and
loud noise, vociferation extending through all newspapers and countries.
The effect of this, carried abroad by newspapers and rumor, was great
in all places; greatest perhaps in Paris, which for sixty years past has
been the City of Insurrections. The French People had plumed themselves
on being, whatever else they were not, at least the chosen "soldiers of
liberty," who took the lead of all creatures in that pursuit, at least;
and had become, as their orators, editors and litterateurs diligently
taught them, a People whose bayonets were sacred, a kind of Messiah
People, saving a blind world in its own despite, and earning for
themselves a terrestrial and even celestial glory very considerable
indeed. And here were the wretched down-trodden populations of Sicily
risen to rival them, and threatening to take the trade out of their
hand.

No doubt of it, this hearing continually of the very Pope's glory as
a Reformer, of the very Sicilians fighting divinely for liberty
behind barricades,--must have bitterly aggravated the feeling of every
Frenchman, as he looked around him, at home, on a Louis-Philippism
which had become the scorn of all the world. "_Ichabod_; is the glory
departing from us? Under the sun is nothing baser, by all accounts and
evidences, than the system of repression and corruption, of shameless
dishonesty and unbelief in anything but human baseness, that we now live
under. The Italians, the very Pope, have become apostles of liberty, and
France is--what is France!"--We know what France suddenly became in the
end of February next; and by a clear enough genealogy, we can trace a
considerable share in that event to the good simple Pope with the New
Testament in his hand. An outbreak, or at least a radical change and
even inversion of affairs hardly to be achieved without an outbreak,
everybody felt was inevitable in France: but it had been universally
expected that France would as usual take the initiative in that matter;
and had there been no reforming Pope, no insurrectionary Sicily, France
had certainly not broken out then and so, but only afterwards and
otherwise. The French explosion, not anticipated by the cunningest men
there on the spot scrutinizing it, burst up unlimited, complete, defying
computation or control.

Close following which, as if by sympathetic subterranean electricities,
all Europe exploded, boundless, uncontrollable; and we had the year
1848, one of the most singular, disastrous, amazing, and, on the whole,
humiliating years the European world ever saw. Not since the irruption
of the Northern Barbarians has there been the like. Everywhere
immeasurable Democracy rose monstrous, loud, blatant, inarticulate
as the voice of Chaos. Everywhere the Official holy-of-holies was
scandalously laid bare to dogs and the profane:--Enter, all the world,
see what kind of Official holy it is. Kings everywhere, and reigning
persons, stared in sudden horror, the voice of the whole world bellowing
in their ear, "Begone, ye imbecile hypocrites, histrios not heroes! Off
with you, off!" and, what was peculiar and notable in this year for the
first time, the Kings all made haste to go, as if exclaiming, "We _are_
poor histrios, we sure enough;--did you want heroes? Don't kill us;
we couldn't help it!" Not one of them turned round, and stood upon his
Kingship, as upon a right he could afford to die for, or to risk
his skin upon; by no manner of means. That, I say, is the alarming
peculiarity at present. Democracy, on this new occasion, finds all Kings
conscious that they are but Play-actors. The miserable mortals, enacting
their High Life Below Stairs, with faith only that this Universe may
perhaps be all a phantasm and hypocrisis,--the truculent Constable of
the Destinies suddenly enters: "Scandalous Phantasms, what do _you_
here? Are 'solemnly constituted Impostors' the proper Kings of men?
Did you think the Life of Man was a grimacing dance of apes? To be led
always by the squeak of your paltry fiddle? Ye miserable, this Universe
is not an upholstery Puppet-play, but a terrible God's Fact; and you,
I think,--had not you better begone!" They fled precipitately, some
of them with what we may call an exquisite ignominy,--in terror of the
treadmill or worse. And everywhere the people, or the populace, take
their own government upon themselves; and open "kinglessness," what
we call _anarchy_,--how happy if it be anarchy _plus_ a
street-constable!--is everywhere the order of the day. Such was the
history, from Baltic to Mediterranean, in Italy, France, Prussia,
Austria, from end to end of Europe, in those March days of 1848. Since
the destruction of the old Roman Empire by inroad of the Northern
Barbarians, I have known nothing similar.

And so, then, there remained no King in Europe; no King except the
Public Haranguer, haranguing on barrel-head, in leading article; or
getting himself aggregated into a National Parliament to harangue. And
for about four months all France, and to a great degree all Europe,
rough-ridden by every species of delirium, except happily the murderous
for most part, was a weltering mob, presided over by M. de Lamartine, at
the Hotel-de-Ville; a most eloquent fair-spoken literary gentleman,
whom thoughtless persons took for a prophet, priest and heaven-sent
evangelist, and whom a wise Yankee friend of mine discerned to be
properly "the first stump-orator in the world, standing too on
the highest stump,--for the time." A sorrowful spectacle to men of
reflection, during the time he lasted, that poor M. de Lamartine; with
nothing in him but melodious wind and _soft sawder_, which he and others
took for something divine and not diabolic! Sad enough; the eloquent
latest impersonation of Chaos-come-again; able to talk for itself, and
declare persuasively that it is Cosmos! However, you have but to wait a
little, in such cases; all balloons do and must give up their gas in the
pressure of things, and are collapsed in a sufficiently wretched manner
before long.

And so in City after City, street-barricades are piled, and truculent,
more or less murderous insurrection begins; populace after populace
rises, King after King capitulates or absconds; and from end to end of
Europe Democracy has blazed up explosive, much higher, more irresistible
and less resisted than ever before; testifying too sadly on what
a bottomless volcano, or universal powder-mine of most inflammable
mutinous chaotic elements, separated from us by a thin earth-rind,
Society with all its arrangements and acquirements everywhere, in the
present epoch, rests! The kind of persons who excite or give signal to
such revolutions--students, young men of letters, advocates,
editors, hot inexperienced enthusiasts, or fierce and justly bankrupt
desperadoes, acting everywhere on the discontent of the millions
and blowing it into flame,--might give rise to reflections as to
the character of our epoch. Never till now did young men, and almost
children, take such a command in human affairs. A changed time since
the word _Senior_ (Seigneur, or _Elder_) was first devised to signify
"lord," or superior;--as in all languages of men we find it to have
been! Not an honorable document this either, as to the spiritual
condition of our epoch. In times when men love wisdom, the old man will
ever be venerable, and be venerated, and reckoned noble: in times that
love something else than wisdom, and indeed have little or no wisdom,
and see little or none to love, the old man will cease to be venerated;
and looking more closely, also, you will find that in fact he has ceased
to be venerable, and has begun to be contemptible; a foolish boy still,
a boy without the graces, generosities and opulent strength of young
boys. In these days, what of _lordship_ or leadership is still to be
done, the youth must do it, not the mature or aged man; the mature man,
hardened into sceptical egoism, knows no monition but that of his own
frigid cautious, avarices, mean timidities; and can lead no-whither
towards an object that even seems noble. But to return.

This mad state of matters will of course before long allay itself, as
it has everywhere begun to do; the ordinary necessities of men's daily
existence cannot comport with it, and these, whatever else is
cast aside, will have their way. Some remounting--very temporary
remounting--of the old machine, under new colors and altered forms, will
probably ensue soon in most countries: the old histrionic Kings will
be admitted back under conditions, under "Constitutions," with national
Parliaments, or the like fashionable adjuncts; and everywhere the old
daily life will try to begin again. But there is now no hope that
such arrangements can be permanent; that they can be other than poor
temporary makeshifts, which, if they try to fancy and make themselves
permanent, will be displaced by new explosions recurring more speedily
than last time. In such baleful oscillation, afloat as amid raging
bottomless eddies and conflicting sea-currents, not steadfast as
on fixed foundations, must European Society continue swaying, now
disastrously tumbling, then painfully readjusting itself, at ever
shorter intervals,--till once the _new_ rock-basis does come to light,
and the weltering deluges of mutiny, and of need to mutiny, abate again!

For universal _Democracy_, whatever we may think of it, has declared
itself as an inevitable fact of the days in which we live; and he
who has any chance to instruct, or lead, in his days, must begin by
admitting that: new street-barricades, and new anarchies, still more
scandalous if still less sanguinary, must return and again return, till
governing persons everywhere know and admit that. Democracy, it may be
said everywhere, is here:--for sixty years now, ever since the grand or
_First_ French Revolution, that fact has been terribly announced to all
the world; in message after message, some of them very terrible indeed;
and now at last all the world ought really to believe it. That the world
does believe it; that even Kings now as good as believe it, and know,
or with just terror surmise, that they are but temporary phantasm
Play-actors, and that Democracy is the grand, alarming, imminent and
indisputable Reality: this, among the scandalous phases we witnessed
in the last two years, is a phasis full of hope: a sign that we are
advancing closer and closer to the very Problem itself, which it will
behoove us to solve or die; that all fighting and campaigning and
coalitioning in regard to the _existence_ of the Problem, is hopeless
and superfluous henceforth. The gods have appointed it so; no Pitt, nor
body of Pitts or mortal creatures can appoint it otherwise. Democracy,
sure enough, is here; one knows not how long it will keep hidden
underground even in Russia;--and here in England, though we object to it
resolutely in the form of street-barricades and insurrectionary pikes,
and decidedly will not open doors to it on those terms, the tramp of
its million feet is on all streets and thoroughfares, the sound of its
bewildered thousand-fold voice is in all writings and speakings, in all
thinkings and modes and activities of men: the soul that does not now,
with hope or terror, discern it, is not the one we address on this
occasion.

What is Democracy; this huge inevitable Product of the Destinies, which
is everywhere the portion of our Europe in these latter days? There
lies the question for us. Whence comes it, this universal big black
Democracy; whither tends it; what is the meaning of it? A meaning it
must have, or it would not be here. If we can find the right meaning of
it, we may, wisely submitting or wisely resisting and controlling, still
hope to live in the midst of it; if we cannot find the right meaning,
if we find only the wrong or no meaning in it, to live will not be
possible!--The whole social wisdom of the Present Time is summoned, in
the name of the Giver of Wisdom, to make clear to itself, and lay deeply
to heart with an eye to strenuous valiant practice and effort, what
the meaning of this universal revolt of the European Populations, which
calls itself Democracy, and decides to continue permanent, may be.

Certainly it is a drama full of action, event fast following event; in
which curiosity finds endless scope, and there are interests at stake,
enough to rivet the attention of all men, simple and wise. Whereat the
idle multitude lift up their voices, gratulating, celebrating sky-high;
in rhyme and prose announcement, more than plentiful, that _now_ the
New Era, and long-expected Year One of Perfect Human Felicity has
come. Glorious and immortal people, sublime French citizens, heroic
barricades; triumph of civil and religious liberty--O Heaven! one of the
inevitablest private miseries, to an earnest man in such circumstances,
is this multitudinous efflux of oratory and psalmody, from the universal
foolish human throat; drowning for the moment all reflection whatsoever,
except the sorrowful one that you are fallen in an evil, heavy-laden,
long-eared age, and must resignedly bear your part in the same. The
front wall of your wretched old crazy dwelling, long denounced by you
to no purpose, having at last fairly folded itself over, and fallen
prostrate into the street, the floors, as may happen, will still hang
on by the mere beam-ends, and coherency of old carpentry, though in a
sloping direction, and depend there till certain poor rusty nails
and worm-eaten dovetailings give way:--but is it cheering, in such
circumstances, that the whole household burst forth into celebrating
the new joys of light and ventilation, liberty and picturesqueness of
position, and thank God that now they have got a house to their mind? My
dear household, cease singing and psalmodying; lay aside your fiddles,
take out your work-implements, if you have any; for I can say with
confidence the laws of gravitation are still active, and rusty nails,
worm-eaten dovetailings, and secret coherency of old carpentry, are not
the best basis for a household!--In the lanes of Irish cities, I
have heard say, the wretched people are sometimes found living, and
perilously boiling their potatoes, on such swing-floors and inclined
planes hanging on by the joist-ends; but I did not hear that they sang
very much in celebration of such lodging. No, they slid gently about,
sat near the back wall, and perilously boiled their potatoes, in silence
for most part!--

High shouts of exultation, in every dialect, by every vehicle of speech
and writing, rise from far and near over this last avatar of Democracy
in 1848: and yet, to wise minds, the first aspect it presents seems
rather to be one of boundless misery and sorrow. What can be more
miserable than this universal hunting out of the high dignitaries,
solemn functionaries, and potent, grave and reverend signiors of
the world; this stormful rising-up of the inarticulate dumb masses
everywhere, against those who pretended to be speaking for them and
guiding them? These guides, then, were mere blind men only pretending
to see? These rulers were not ruling at all; they had merely got on the
attributes and clothes of rulers, and were surreptitiously drawing
the wages, while the work remained undone? The Kings were Sham-Kings,
play-acting as at Drury Lane;--and what were the people withal that took
them for real?

It is probably the hugest disclosure of _falsity_ in human things that
was ever at one time made. These reverend Dignitaries that sat amid
their far-shining symbols and long-sounding long-admitted professions,
were mere Impostors, then? Not a true thing they were doing, but a
false thing. The story they told men was a cunningly devised fable; the
gospels they preached to them were not an account of man's real position
in this world, but an incoherent fabrication, of dead ghosts and unborn
shadows, of traditions, cants, indolences, cowardices,--a falsity
of falsities, which at last _ceases_ to stick together. Wilfully and
against their will, these high units of mankind were cheats, then; and
the low millions who believed in them were dupes,--a kind of _inverse_
cheats, too, or they would not have believed in them so long. A
universal _Bankruptcy of Imposture_; that may be the brief definition
of it. Imposture everywhere declared once more to be contrary to Nature;
nobody will change its word into an act any farther:--fallen insolvent;
unable to keep its head up by these false pretences, or make its pot
boil any more for the present! A more scandalous phenomenon, wide as
Europe, never afflicted the face of the sun. Bankruptcy everywhere; foul
ignominy, and the abomination of desolation, in all high places: odious
to look upon, as the carnage of a battle-field on the morrow morning;--a
massacre not of the innocents; we cannot call it a massacre of the
innocents; but a universal tumbling of Impostors and of Impostures into
the street!--

Such a spectacle, can we call it joyful? There is a joy in it, to the
wise man too; yes, but a joy full of awe, and as it were sadder than
any sorrow,--like the vision of immortality, unattainable except through
death and the grave! And yet who would not, in his heart of hearts, feel
piously thankful that Imposture has fallen bankrupt? By all means let it
fall bankrupt; in the name of God let it do so, with whatever misery to
itself and to all of us. Imposture, be it known then,--known it must
and shall be,--is hateful, unendurable to God and man. Let it understand
this everywhere; and swiftly make ready for departure, wherever it yet
lingers; and let it learn never to return, if possible! The eternal
voices, very audibly again, are speaking to proclaim this message,
from side to side of the world. Not a very cheering message, but a very
indispensable one.

Alas, it is sad enough that Anarchy is here; that we are not permitted
to regret its being here,--for who that had, for this divine Universe,
an eye which was human at all, could wish that Shams of any kind,
especially that Sham-Kings should continue? No: at all costs, it is
to be prayed by all men that Shams may _cease_. Good Heavens, to what
depths have we got, when this to many a man seems strange! Yet strange
to many a man it does seem; and to many a solid Englishman, wholesomely
digesting his pudding among what are called the cultivated classes, it
seems strange exceedingly; a mad ignorant notion, quite heterodox, and
big with mere ruin. He has been used to decent forms long since
fallen empty of meaning, to plausible modes, solemnities grown
ceremonial,--what you in your iconoclast humor call shams, all his life
long; never heard that there was any harm in them, that there was any
getting on without them. Did not cotton spin itself, beef grow, and
groceries and spiceries come in from the East and the West, quite
comfortably by the side of shams? Kings reigned, what they were pleased
to call reigning; lawyers pleaded, bishops preached, and honorable
members perorated; and to crown the whole, as if it were all real and
no sham there, did not scrip continue salable, and the banker pay in
bullion, or paper with a metallic basis? "The greatest sham, I have
always thought, is he that would destroy shams."

Even so. To such depth have _I_, the poor knowing person of this epoch,
got;--almost below the level of lowest humanity, and down towards the
state of apehood and oxhood! For never till in quite recent generations
was such a scandalous blasphemy quietly set forth among the sons of
Adam; never before did the creature called man believe generally in
his heart that lies were the rule in this Earth; that in deliberate
long-established lying could there be help or salvation for him, could
there be at length other than hindrance and destruction for him. O
Heavyside, my solid friend, this is the sorrow of sorrows: what on earth
can become of us till this accursed enchantment, the general summary and
consecration of delusions, be cast forth from the heart and life of
one and all! Cast forth it will be; it must, or we are tending, at all
moments, whitherward I do not like to name. Alas, and the casting of
it out, to what heights and what depths will it lead us, in the sad
universe mostly of lies and shams and hollow phantasms (grown very
ghastly now), in which, as in a safe home, we have lived this century
or two! To heights and depths of social and individual _divorce_ from
delusions,--of "reform" in right sacred earnest, of indispensable
amendment, and stern sorrowful abrogation and order to depart,--such
as cannot well be spoken at present; as dare scarcely be thought at
present; which nevertheless are very inevitable, and perhaps rather
imminent several of them! Truly we have a heavy task of work before us;
and there is a pressing call that we should seriously begin upon it,
before it tumble into an inextricable mass, in which there will be no
working, but only suffering and hopelessly perishing!


Or perhaps Democracy, which we announce as now come, will itself manage
it? Democracy, once modelled into suffrages, furnished with ballot-boxes
and such like, will itself accomplish the salutary universal change from
Delusive to Real, and make a new blessed world of us by and by?--To the
great mass of men, I am aware, the matter presents itself quite on this
hopeful side. Democracy they consider to _be_ a kind of "Government."
The old model, formed long since, and brought to perfection in England
now two hundred years ago, has proclaimed itself to all Nations as the
new healing for every woe: "Set up a Parliament," the Nations everywhere
say, when the old King is detected to be a Sham-King, and hunted out or
not; "set up a Parliament; let us have suffrages, universal suffrages;
and all either at once or by due degrees will be right, and a real
Millennium come!" Such is their way of construing the matter.

Such, alas, is by no means my way of construing the matter; if it were,
I should have had the happiness of remaining silent, and been without
call to speak here. It is because the contrary of all this is deeply
manifest to me, and appears to be forgotten by multitudes of my
contemporaries, that I have had to undertake addressing a word to them.
The contrary of all this;--and the farther I look into the roots of all
this, the more hateful, ruinous and dismal does the state of mind all
this could have originated in appear to me. To examine this recipe of a
Parliament, how fit it is for governing Nations, nay how fit it may now
be, in these new times, for governing England itself where we are used
to it so long: this, too, is an alarming inquiry, to which all thinking
men, and good citizens of their country, who have an ear for the small
still voices and eternal intimations, across the temporary clamors and
loud blaring proclamations, are now solemnly invited. Invited by the
rigorous fact itself; which will one day, and that perhaps soon, demand
practical decision or redecision of it from us,--with enormous penalty
if we decide it wrong! I think we shall all have to consider this
question, one day; better perhaps now than later, when the leisure
may be less. If a Parliament, with suffrages and universal or any
conceivable kind of suffrages, is the method, then certainly let us set
about discovering the kind of suffrages, and rest no moment till we
have got them. But it is possible a Parliament may not be the method!
Possible the inveterate notions of the English People may have settled
it as the method, and the Everlasting Laws of Nature may have settled it
as not the method! Not the whole method; nor the method at all, if
taken as the whole? If a Parliament with never such suffrages is not the
method settled by this latter authority, then it will urgently behoove
us to become aware of that fact, and to quit such method;--we may depend
upon it, however unanimous we be, every step taken in that direction
will, by the Eternal Law of things, be a step _from_ improvement, not
towards it.

Not towards it, I say, if so! Unanimity of voting,--that will do nothing
for us if so. Your ship cannot double Cape Horn by its excellent plans
of voting. The ship may vote this and that, above decks and below, in
the most harmonious exquisitely constitutional manner: the ship, to get
round Cape Horn, will find a set of conditions already voted for, and
fixed with adamantine rigor by the ancient Elemental Powers, who are
entirely careless how you vote. If you can, by voting or without voting,
ascertain these conditions, and valiantly conform to them, you will get
round the Cape: if you cannot, the ruffian Winds will blow you ever back
again; the inexorable Icebergs, dumb privy-councillors from Chaos, will
nudge you with most chaotic "admonition;" you will be flung half frozen
on the Patagonian cliffs, or admonished into shivers by your iceberg
councillors, and sent sheer down to Davy Jones, and will never get round
Cape Horn at all! Unanimity on board ship;--yes indeed, the ship's crew
may be very unanimous, which doubtless, for the time being, will be very
comfortable to the ship's crew, and to their Phantasm Captain if they
have one: but if the tack they unanimously steer upon is guiding them
into the belly of the Abyss, it will not profit them much!--Ships
accordingly do not use the ballot-box at all; and they reject the
Phantasm species of Captains: one wishes much some other Entities--since
all entities lie under the same rigorous set of laws--could be brought
to show as much wisdom, and sense at least of self-preservation, the
first command of Nature. Phantasm Captains with unanimous votings: this
is considered to be all the law and all the prophets, at present.

If a man could shake out of his mind the universal noise of political
doctors in this generation and in the last generation or two, and
consider the matter face to face, with his own sincere intelligence
looking at it, I venture to say he would find this a very extraordinary
method of navigating, whether in the Straits of Magellan or the
undiscovered Sea of Time. To prosper in this world, to gain felicity,
victory and improvement, either for a man or a nation, there is but
one thing requisite, That the man or nation can discern what the true
regulations of the Universe are in regard to him and his pursuit, and
can faithfully and steadfastly follow these. These will lead him to
victory; whoever it may be that sets him in the way of these,--were
it Russian Autocrat, Chartist Parliament, Grand Lama, Force of Public
Opinion, Archbishop of Canterbury, M'Croudy the Seraphic Doctor with his
Last-evangel of Political Economy,--sets him in the sure way to please
the Author of this Universe, and is his friend of friends. And again,
whoever does the contrary is, for a like reason, his enemy of enemies.
This may be taken as fixed.

And now by what method ascertain the monition of the gods in regard to
our affairs? How decipher, with best fidelity, the eternal regulation
of the Universe; and read, from amid such confused embroilments of
human clamor and folly, what the real Divine Message to us is? A divine
message, or eternal regulation of the Universe, there verily is, in
regard to every conceivable procedure and affair of man: faithfully
following this, said procedure or affair will prosper, and have the
whole Universe to second it, and carry it, across the fluctuating
contradictions, towards a victorious goal; not following this, mistaking
this, disregarding this, destruction and wreck are certain for every
affair. How find it? All the world answers me, "Count heads; ask
Universal Suffrage, by the ballot-boxes, and that will tell." Universal
Suffrage, ballot-boxes, count of heads? Well,--I perceive we have got
into strange spiritual latitudes indeed. Within the last half-century or
so, either the Universe or else the heads of men must have altered very
much. Half a century ago, and down from Father Adam's time till then,
the Universe, wherever I could hear tell of it, was wont to be of
somewhat abstruse nature; by no means carrying its secret written on its
face, legible to every passer-by; on the contrary, obstinately hiding
its secret from all foolish, slavish, wicked, insincere persons, and
partially disclosing it to the wise and noble-minded alone, whose number
was not the majority in my time!

Or perhaps the chief end of man being now, in these improved epochs,
to make money and spend it, his interests in the Universe have become
amazingly simplified of late; capable of being voted on with effect
by almost anybody? "To buy in the cheapest market, and sell in the
dearest:" truly if that is the summary of his social duties, and the
final divine message he has to follow, we may trust him extensively
to vote upon that. But if it is not, and never was, or can be? If the
Universe will not carry on its divine bosom any commonwealth of mortals
that have no higher aim,--being still "a Temple and Hall of Doom," not
a mere Weaving-shop and Cattle-pen? If the unfathomable Universe
has decided to _reject_ Human Beavers pretending to be Men; and will
abolish, pretty rapidly perhaps, in hideous mud-deluges, their "markets"
and them, unless they think of it?--In that case it were better to think
of it: and the Democracies and Universal Suffrages, I can observe, will
require to modify themselves a good deal!

Historically speaking, I believe there was no Nation that could subsist
upon Democracy. Of ancient Republics, and _Demoi_ and _Populi_, we have
heard much; but it is now pretty well admitted to be nothing to our
purpose;--a universal-suffrage republic, or a general-suffrage one, or
any but a most-limited-suffrage one, never came to light, or dreamed of
doing so, in ancient times. When the mass of the population were slaves,
and the voters intrinsically a kind of _kings_, or men born to
rule others; when the voters were real "aristocrats" and manageable
dependents of such,--then doubtless voting, and confused jumbling of
talk and intrigue, might, without immediate destruction, or the need of
a Cavaignac to intervene with cannon and sweep the streets clear of it,
go on; and beautiful developments of manhood might be possible beside
it, for a season. Beside it; or even, if you will, by means of it,
and in virtue of it, though that is by no means so certain as is often
supposed. Alas, no: the reflective constitutional mind has misgivings as
to the origin of old Greek and Roman nobleness; and indeed knows not how
this or any other human nobleness could well be "originated," or brought
to pass, by voting or without voting, in this world, except by the grace
of God very mainly;--and remembers, with a sigh, that of the Seven
Sages themselves no fewer than three were bits of Despotic Kings, [Gr.]
_Turannoi_, "Tyrants" so called (such being greatly wanted there);
and that the other four were very far from Red Republicans, if of any
political faith whatever! We may quit the Ancient Classical concern, and
leave it to College-clubs and speculative debating-societies, in these
late days.

Of the various French Republics that have been tried, or that are still
on trial,--of these also it is not needful to say any word. But there
is one modern instance of Democracy nearly perfect, the Republic of
the United States, which has actually subsisted for threescore years or
more, with immense success as is affirmed; to which many still appeal,
as to a sign of hope for all nations, and a "Model Republic." Is not
America an instance in point? Why should not all Nations subsist and
flourish on Democracy, as America does?

Of America it would ill beseem any Englishman, and me perhaps as little
as another, to speak unkindly, to speak unpatriotically, if any of us
even felt so. Sure enough, America is a great, and in many respects a
blessed and hopeful phenomenon. Sure enough, these hardy millions of
Anglo-Saxon men prove themselves worthy of their genealogy; and, with
the axe and plough and hammer, if not yet with any much finer kind of
implements, are triumphantly clearing out wide spaces, seedfields for
the sustenance and refuge of mankind, arenas for the future history of
the world; doing, in their day and generation, a creditable and cheering
feat under the sun. But as to a Model Republic, or a model anything, the
wise among themselves know too well that there is nothing to be said.
Nay the title hitherto to be a Commonwealth or Nation at all, among the
[Gr.] _ethne_ of the world, is, strictly considered, still a thing
they are but striving for, and indeed have not yet done much towards
attaining. Their Constitution, such as it may be, was made here,
not there; went over with them from the Old-Puritan English
workshop ready-made. Deduct what they carried with them from England
ready-made,--their common English Language, and that same Constitution,
or rather elixir of constitutions, their inveterate and now, as it
were, inborn reverence for the Constable's Staff; two quite immense
attainments, which England had to spend much blood, and valiant sweat of
brow and brain, for centuries long, in achieving;--and what new elements
of polity or nationhood, what noble new phasis of human arrangement, or
social device worthy of Prometheus or of Epimetheus, yet comes to light
in America? Cotton crops and Indian corn and dollars come to light;
and half a world of untilled land, where populations that respect the
constable can live, for the present _without_ Government: this comes
to light; and the profound sorrow of all nobler hearts, here uttering
itself as silent patient unspeakable ennui, there coming out as vague
elegiac wailings, that there is still next to nothing more. "Anarchy
_plus_ a street-constable:" that also is anarchic to me, and other than
quite lovely!

I foresee, too, that, long before the waste lands are full, the very
street-constable, on these poor terms, will have become impossible:
without the waste lands, as here in our Europe, I do not see how he
could continue possible many weeks. Cease to brag to me of America, and
its model institutions and constitutions. To men in their sleep there
is nothing granted in this world: nothing, or as good as nothing, to men
that sit idly caucusing and ballot-boxing on the graves of their heroic
ancestors, saying, "It is well, it is well!" Corn and bacon are granted:
not a very sublime boon, on such conditions; a boon moreover which, on
such conditions, cannot last!--No: America too will have to strain its
energies, in quite other fashion than this; to crack its sinews, and all
but break its heart, as the rest of us have had to do, in thousand-fold
wrestle with the Pythons and mud-demons, before it can become a
habitation for the gods. America's battle is yet to fight; and we,
sorrowful though nothing doubting, will wish her strength for it. New
Spiritual Pythons, plenty of them; enormous Megatherions, as ugly as
were ever born of mud, loom huge and hideous out of the twilight Future
on America; and she will have her own agony, and her own victory, but on
other terms than she is yet quite aware of. Hitherto she but ploughs
and hammers, in a very successful manner; hitherto, in spite of her
"roast-goose with apple-sauce," she is not much. "Roast-goose with
apple-sauce for the poorest workingman:" well, surely that is something,
thanks to your respect for the street-constable, and to your continents
of fertile waste land;--but that, even if it could continue, is by
no means enough; that is not even an instalment towards what will be
required of you. My friend, brag not yet of our American cousins! Their
quantity of cotton, dollars, industry and resources, I believe to be
almost unspeakable; but I can by no means worship the like of these.
What great human soul, what great thought, what great noble thing that
one could worship, or loyally admire, has yet been produced there? None:
the American cousins have yet done none of these things. "What they have
done?" growls Smelfungus, tired of the subject: "They have doubled
their population every twenty years. They have begotten, with a rapidity
beyond recorded example, Eighteen Millions of the greatest _bores_
ever seen in this world before,--that hitherto is their feat in
History!"--And so we leave them, for the present; and cannot predict the
success of Democracy, on this side of the Atlantic, from their example.

Alas, on this side of the Atlantic and on that, Democracy, we apprehend,
is forever impossible! So much, with certainty of loud astonished
contradiction from all manner of men at present, but with sure appeal
to the Law of Nature and the ever-abiding Fact, may be suggested and
asserted once more. The Universe itself is a Monarchy and Hierarchy;
large liberty of "voting" there, all manner of choice, utmost free-will,
but with conditions inexorable and immeasurable annexed to every
exercise of the same. A most free commonwealth of "voters;" but with
Eternal Justice to preside over it, Eternal Justice enforced by Almighty
Power! This is the model of "constitutions;" this: nor in any Nation
where there has not yet (in some supportable and withal some constantly
increasing degree) been confided to the _Noblest_, with his select
series of _Nobler_, the divine everlasting duty of directing and
controlling the Ignoble, has the "Kingdom of God," which we all pray
for, "come," nor can "His will" even _tend_ to be "done on Earth as
it is in Heaven" till then. My Christian friends, and indeed my
Sham-Christian and Anti-Christian, and all manner of men, are invited
to reflect on this. They will find it to be the truth of the case. The
Noble in the high place, the Ignoble in the low; that is, in all times
and in all countries, the Almighty Maker's Law.

To raise the Sham-Noblest, and solemnly consecrate him by whatever
method, new-devised, or slavishly adhered to from old wont, this,
little as we may regard it, is, in all times and countries, a practical
blasphemy, and Nature will in nowise forget it. Alas, there lies the
origin, the fatal necessity, of modern Democracy everywhere. It is
the Noblest, not the Sham-Noblest; it is God-Almighty's Noble, not the
Court-Tailor's Noble, nor the Able-Editor's Noble, that must, in
some approximate degree, be raised to the supreme place; he and not a
counterfeit,--under penalties! Penalties deep as death, and at
length terrible as hell-on-earth, my constitutional friend!--Will the
ballot-box raise the Noblest to the chief place; does any sane
man deliberately believe such a thing? That nevertheless is the
indispensable result, attain it how we may: if that is attained, all is
attained; if not that, nothing. He that cannot believe the ballot-box
to be attaining it, will be comparatively indifferent to the ballot-box.
Excellent for keeping the ship's crew at peace under their Phantasm
Captain; but unserviceable, under such, for getting round Cape Horn.
Alas, that there should be human beings requiring to have these things
argued of, at this late time of day!

I say, it is the everlasting privilege of the foolish to be governed
by the wise; to be guided in the right path by those who know it better
than they. This is the first "right of man;" compared with which all
other rights are as nothing,--mere superfluities, corollaries which will
follow of their own accord out of this; if they be not contradictions
to this, and less than nothing! To the wise it is not a privilege; far
other indeed. Doubtless, as bringing preservation to their country, it
implies preservation of themselves withal; but intrinsically it is the
harshest duty a wise man, if he be indeed wise, has laid to his hand. A
duty which he would fain enough shirk; which accordingly, in these
sad times of doubt and cowardly sloth, he has long everywhere been
endeavoring to reduce to its minimum, and has in fact in most cases
nearly escaped altogether. It is an ungoverned world; a world which we
flatter ourselves will henceforth need no governing. On the dust of our
heroic ancestors we too sit ballot-boxing, saying to one another, It is
well, it is well! By inheritance of their noble struggles, we have
been permitted to sit slothful so long. By noble toil, not by shallow
laughter and vain talk, they made this English Existence from a savage
forest into an arable inhabitable field for us; and we, idly dreaming it
would grow spontaneous crops forever,--find it now in a too questionable
state; peremptorily requiring real labor and agriculture again. Real
"agriculture" is not pleasant; much pleasanter to reap and winnow (with
ballot-box or otherwise) than to plough!

Who would govern that can get along without governing? He that is
fittest for it, is of all men the unwillingest unless constrained.
By multifarious devices we have been endeavoring to dispense with
governing; and by very superficial speculations, of _laissez-faire_,
supply-and-demand, &c. &c. to persuade ourselves that it is best so. The
Real Captain, unless it be some Captain of mechanical Industry hired
by Mammon, where is he in these days? Most likely, in silence, in
sad isolation somewhere, in remote obscurity; trying if, in an evil
ungoverned time, he cannot at least govern himself. The Real Captain
undiscoverable; the Phantasm Captain everywhere very conspicuous:--it is
thought Phantasm Captains, aided by ballot-boxes, are the true method,
after all. They are much the pleasantest for the time being! And so no
_Dux_ or Duke of any sort, in any province of our affairs, now _leads_:
the Duke's Bailiff _leads_, what little leading is required for getting
in the rents; and the Duke merely rides in the state-coach. It is
everywhere so: and now at last we see a world all rushing towards
strange consummations, because it is and has long been so!


I do not suppose any reader of mine, or many persons in England at
all, have much faith in Fraternity, Equality and the Revolutionary
Millenniums preached by the French Prophets in this age: but there are
many movements here too which tend inevitably in the like direction; and
good men, who would stand aghast at Red Republic and its adjuncts, seem
to me travelling at full speed towards that or a similar goal! Certainly
the notion everywhere prevails among us too, and preaches itself abroad
in every dialect, uncontradicted anywhere so far as I can hear, That
the grand panacea for social woes is what we call "enfranchisement,"
"emancipation;" or, translated into practical language, the cutting
asunder of human relations, wherever they are found grievous, as is like
to be pretty universally the case at the rate we have been going for
some generations past. Let us all be "free" of one another; we
shall then be happy. Free, without bond or connection except that of
cash-payment; fair day's wages for the fair day's work; bargained for by
voluntary contract, and law of supply-and-demand: this is thought to be
the true solution of all difficulties and injustices that have occurred
between man and man.

To rectify the relation that exists between two men, is there no method,
then, but that of ending it? The old relation has become unsuitable,
obsolete, perhaps unjust; it imperatively requires to be amended; and
the remedy is, Abolish it, let there henceforth be no relation at all.
From the "Sacrament of Marriage" downwards, human beings used to be
manifoldly related, one to another, and each to all; and there was no
relation among human beings, just or unjust, that had not its grievances
and difficulties, its necessities on both sides to bear and forbear. But
henceforth, be it known, we have changed all that, by favor of Heaven:
"the voluntary principle" has come up, which will itself do the business
for us; and now let a new Sacrament, that of Divorce, which we call
emancipation, and spout of on our platforms, be universally the order of
the day!--Have men considered whither all this is tending, and what it
certainly enough betokens? Cut every human relation which has anywhere
grown uneasy sheer asunder; reduce whatsoever was compulsory to
voluntary, whatsoever was permanent among us to the condition of
nomadic:--in other words, loosen by assiduous wedges in every joint, the
whole fabric of social existence, stone from stone: till at last, all
now being loose enough, it can, as we already see in most countries,
be overset by sudden outburst of revolutionary rage; and, lying as mere
mountains of anarchic rubbish, solicit you to sing Fraternity, &c., over
it, and to rejoice in the new remarkable era of human progress we have
arrived at.

Certainly Emancipation proceeds with rapid strides among us, this good
while; and has got to such a length as might give rise to reflections
in men of a serious turn. West-Indian Blacks are emancipated, and
it appears refuse to work: Irish Whites have long been entirely
emancipated; and nobody asks them to work, or on condition of finding
them potatoes (which, of course, is indispensable), permits them to
work.--Among speculative persons, a question has sometimes risen: In the
progress of Emancipation, are we to look for a time when all the
Horses also are to be emancipated, and brought to the supply-and-demand
principle? Horses too have "motives;" are acted on by hunger, fear,
hope, love of oats, terror of platted leather; nay they have vanity,
ambition, emulation, thankfulness, vindictiveness; some rude outline
of all our human spiritualities,--a rude resemblance to us in mind and
intelligence, even as they have in bodily frame. The Horse, poor dumb
four-footed fellow, he too has his private feelings, his affections,
gratitudes; and deserves good usage; no human master, without crime,
shall treat him unjustly either, or recklessly lay on the whip where
it is not needed:--I am sure if I could make him "happy," I should be
willing to grant a small vote (in addition to the late twenty millions)
for that object!

Him too you occasionally tyrannize over; and with bad result to
yourselves, among others; using the leather in a tyrannous unnecessary
manner; withholding, or scantily furnishing, the oats and ventilated
stabling that are due. Rugged horse-subduers, one fears they are a
little tyrannous at times. "Am I not a horse, and half-brother?"--To
remedy which, so far as remediable, fancy--the horses all "emancipated;"
restored to their primeval right of property in the grass of this Globe:
turned out to graze in an independent supply-and-demand manner! So long
as grass lasts, I dare say they are very happy, or think themselves so.
And Farmer Hodge sallying forth, on a dry spring morning, with a sieve
of oats in his hand, and agony of eager expectation in his heart, is he
happy? Help me to plough this day, Black Dobbin: oats in full measure if
thou wilt. "Hlunh, No--thank!" snorts Black Dobbin; he prefers glorious
liberty and the grass. Bay Darby, wilt not thou perhaps? "Hlunh!"--Gray
Joan, then, my beautiful broad-bottomed mare,--O Heaven, she too answers
Hlunh! Not a quadruped of them will plough a stroke for me. Corn-crops
are _ended_ in this world!--For the sake, if not of Hodge, then of
Hodge's horses, one prays this benevolent practice might now cease, and
a new and better one try to begin. Small kindness to Hodge's horses to
emancipate them! The fate of all emancipated horses is, sooner or later,
inevitable. To have in this habitable Earth no grass to eat,--in Black
Jamaica gradually none, as in White Connemara already none;--to roam
aimless, wasting the seedfields of the world; and be hunted home to
Chaos, by the due watch-dogs and due hell-dogs, with such horrors of
forsaken wretchedness as were never seen before! These things are not
sport; they are terribly true, in this country at this hour.

Between our Black West Indies and our White Ireland, between these two
extremes of lazy refusal to work, and of famishing inability to find any
work, what a world have we made of it, with our fierce Mammon-worships,
and our benevolent philanderings, and idle godless nonsenses of one kind
and another! Supply-and-demand, Leave-it-alone, Voluntary Principle,
Time will mend it:--till British industrial existence seems fast
becoming one huge poison-swamp of reeking pestilence physical and moral;
a hideous _living_ Golgotha of souls and bodies buried alive; such a
Curtius' gulf, communicating with the Nether Deeps, as the Sun never saw
till now. These scenes, which the _Morning Chronicle_ is bringing home
to all minds of men,--thanks to it for a service such as Newspapers have
seldom done,--ought to excite unspeakable reflections in every mind.
Thirty thousand outcast Needlewomen working themselves swiftly to
death; three million Paupers rotting in forced idleness, _helping_ said
Needlewomen to die: these are but items in the sad ledger of despair.

Thirty thousand wretched women, sunk in that putrefying well of
abominations; they have oozed in upon London, from the universal Stygian
quagmire of British industrial life; are accumulated in the _well_ of
the concern, to that extent. British charity is smitten to the heart,
at the laying bare of such a scene; passionately undertakes, by enormous
subscription of money, or by other enormous effort, to redress that
individual horror; as I and all men hope it may. But, alas, what next?
This general well and cesspool once baled clean out to-day, will begin
before night to fill itself anew. The universal Stygian quagmire is
still there; opulent in women ready to be ruined, and in men ready.
Towards the same sad cesspool will these waste currents of human ruin
ooze and gravitate as heretofore; except in draining the universal
quagmire itself there is no remedy. "And for that, what is the method?"
cry many in an angry manner. To whom, for the present, I answer only,
"Not 'emancipation,' it would seem, my friends; not the cutting loose of
human ties, something far the reverse of that!"

Many things have been written about shirtmaking; but here perhaps is
the saddest thing of all, not written anywhere till now, that I know of.
Shirts by the thirty thousand are made at twopence-halfpenny each; and
in the mean while no needlewoman, distressed or other, can be procured
in London by any housewife to give, for fair wages, fair help in sewing.
Ask any thrifty house-mother, high or low, and she will answer. In high
houses and in low, there is the same answer: no _real_ needlewoman,
"distressed" or other, has been found attainable in any of the houses I
frequent. Imaginary needlewomen, who demand considerable wages, and have
a deepish appetite for beer and viands, I hear of everywhere; but their
sewing proves too often a distracted puckering and botching; not sewing,
only the fallacious hope of it, a fond imagination of the mind. Good
sempstresses are to be hired in every village; and in London, with its
famishing thirty thousand, not at all, or hardly,--Is not No-government
beautiful in human business? To such length has the Leave-alone
principle carried it, by way of organizing labor, in this affair of
shirtmaking. Let us hope the Leave-alone principle has now got its
apotheosis; and taken wing towards higher regions than ours, to deal
henceforth with a class of affairs more appropriate for it!

Reader, did you ever hear of "Constituted Anarchy"? Anarchy;
the choking, sweltering, deadly and killing rule of No-rule; the
consecration of cupidity, and braying folly, and dim stupidity and
baseness, in most of the affairs of men? Slop-shirts attainable three
halfpence cheaper, by the ruin of living bodies and immortal souls?
Solemn Bishops and high Dignitaries, _our_ divine "Pillars of Fire by
night," debating meanwhile, with their largest wigs and gravest look,
upon something they call "prevenient grace"? Alas, our noble men of
genius, Heaven's _real_ messengers to us, they also rendered nearly
futile by the wasteful time;--preappointed they everywhere, and
assiduously trained by all their pedagogues and monitors, to "rise in
Parliament," to compose orations, write books, or in short speak words,
for the approval of reviewers; instead of doing real kingly work to be
approved of by the gods! Our "Government," a highly "responsible"
one; responsible to no God that I can hear of, but to the twenty-seven
million _gods_ of the shilling gallery. A Government tumbling and
drifting on the whirlpools and mud-deluges, floating atop in a
conspicuous manner, no-whither,--like the carcass of a drowned ass.
Authentic _Chaos_ come up into this sunny Cosmos again; and all men
singing Gloria in _excelsis_ to it. In spirituals and temporals, in
field and workshop, from Manchester to Dorsetshire, from Lambeth Palace
to the Lanes of Whitechapel, wherever men meet and toil and traffic
together,--Anarchy, Anarchy; and only the street-constable (though with
ever-increasing difficulty) still maintaining himself in the middle of
it; that so, for one thing, this blessed exchange of slop-shirts for
the souls of women may transact itself in a peaceable manner!--I, for my
part, do profess myself in eternal opposition to this, and discern well
that universal Ruin has us in the wind, unless we can get out of this.
My friend Crabbe, in a late number of his _Intermittent Radiator_,
pertinently enough exclaims:--

"When shall we have done with all this of British Liberty, Voluntary
Principle, Dangers of Centralization, and the like? It is really getting
too bad. For British Liberty, it seems, the people cannot be taught
to read. British Liberty, shuddering to interfere with the rights of
capital, takes six or eight millions of money annually to feed the
idle laborer whom it dare not employ. For British Liberty we live over
poisonous cesspools, gully-drains, and detestable abominations; and
omnipotent London cannot sweep the dirt out of itself. British Liberty
produces--what? Floods of Hansard Debates every year, and apparently
little else at present. If these are the results of British Liberty, I,
for one, move we should lay it on the shelf a little, and look out for
something other and farther. We have achieved British Liberty hundreds
of years ago; and are fast growing, on the strength of it, one of the
most absurd populations the Sun, among his great Museum of Absurdities,
looks down upon at present."


Curious enough: the model of the world just now is England and her
Constitution; all Nations striving towards it: poor France swimming
these last sixty years in seas of horrid dissolution and confusion,
resolute to attain this blessedness of free voting, or to die in chase
of it. Prussia too, solid Germany itself, has all broken out into
crackling of musketry, loud pamphleteering and Frankfort parliamenting
and palavering; Germany too will scale the sacred mountains, how steep
soever, and, by talisman of ballot-box, inhabit a political Elysium
henceforth. All the Nations have that one hope. Very notable, and
rather sad to the humane on-looker. For it is sadly conjectured, all the
Nations labor somewhat under a mistake as to England, and the causes of
her freedom and her prosperous cotton-spinning; and have much misread
the nature of her Parliament, and the effect of ballot-boxes and
universal suffrages there.

What if it were because the English Parliament was from the first,
and is only just now ceasing to be, a Council of actual Rulers, real
Governing Persons (called Peers, Mitred Abbots, Lords, Knights of the
Shire, or howsoever called), actually _ruling_ each his section of
the country,--and possessing (it must be said) in the lump, or when
assembled as a Council, uncommon patience, devoutness, probity,
discretion and good fortune,--that the said Parliament ever came to be
good for much? In that case it will not be easy to "imitate" the English
Parliament; and the ballot-box and suffrage will be the mere bow of
Robin Hood, which it is given to very few to bend, or shoot with to
any perfection. And if the Peers become mere big Capitalists, Railway
Directors, gigantic Hucksters, Kings of Scrip, _without_ lordly quality,
or other virtue except cash; and the Mitred Abbots change to mere
Able-Editors, masters of Parliamentary Eloquence, Doctors of
Political Economy, and such like; and all _have_ to be elected by a
universal-suffrage ballot-box,--I do not see how the English Parliament
itself will long continue sea-worthy! Nay, I find England in her own
big dumb heart, wherever you come upon her in a silent meditative hour,
begins to have dreadful misgivings about it.

The model of the world, then, is at once unattainable by the world, and
not much worth attaining? England, as I read the omens, is now called a
second time to "show the Nations how to live;" for by her Parliament,
as chief governing entity, I fear she is not long for this world! Poor
England must herself again, in these new strange times, the old methods
being quite worn out, "learn how to live." That now is the terrible
problem for England, as for all the Nations; and she alone of all, not
_yet_ sunk into open Anarchy, but left with time for repentance and
amendment; she, wealthiest of all in material resource, in spiritual
energy, in ancient loyalty to law, and in the qualities that yield such
loyalty,--she perhaps alone of all may be able, with huge travail, and
the strain of all her faculties, to accomplish some solution. She will
have to try it, she has now to try it; she must accomplish it, or perish
from her place in the world!

England, as I persuade myself, still contains in it many _kings_;
possesses, as old Rome did, many men not needing "election" to command,
but eternally elected for it by the Maker Himself. England's one hope
is in these, just now. They are among the silent, I believe; mostly far
away from platforms and public palaverings; not speaking forth the image
of their nobleness in transitory words, but imprinting it, each on his
own little section of the world, in silent facts, in modest valiant
actions, that will endure forevermore. They must sit silent no longer.
They are summoned to assert themselves; to act forth, and articulately
vindicate, in the teeth of howling multitudes, of a world too justly
_maddened_ into all manner of delirious clamors, what of wisdom they
derive from God. England, and the Eternal Voices, summon them; poor
England never so needed them as now. Up, be doing everywhere: the hour
of crisis has verily come! In all sections of English life, the god-made
_king_ is needed; is pressingly demanded in most; in some, cannot
longer, without peril as of conflagration, be dispensed with. He,
wheresoever he finds himself, can say, "Here too am I wanted; here is
the kingdom I have to subjugate, and introduce God's Laws into,--God's
Laws, instead of Mammon's and M'Croudy's and the Old Anarch's! Here is
my work, here or nowhere."--Are there many such, who will answer to the
call, in England? It turns on that, whether England, rapidly crumbling
in these very years and months, shall go down to the Abyss as her
neighbors have all done, or survive to new grander destinies _without_
solution of continuity! Probably the chief question of the world at
present.

The true "commander" and king; he who knows for himself the divine
Appointments of this Universe, the Eternal Laws ordained by God the
Maker, in conforming to which lies victory and felicity, in departing
from which lies, and forever must lie, sorrow and defeat, for each and
all of the Posterity of Adam in every time and every place; he who has
sworn fealty to these, and dare alone against the world assert these,
and dare not with the whole world at his back deflect from these;--he,
I know too well, is a rare man. Difficult to discover; not quite
discoverable, I apprehend, by manoeuvring of ballot-boxes, and riddling
of the popular clamor according to the most approved methods. He is not
sold at any shop I know of,--though sometimes, as at the sign of the
Ballot-box, he is advertised for sale. Difficult indeed to discover:
and not very much assisted, or encouraged in late times, to discover
_himself_;--which, I think, might be a kind of help? Encouraged rather,
and commanded in all ways, if he be wise, to _hide_ himself, and
give place to the windy Counterfeit of himself; such as the universal
suffrages can recognize, such as loves the most sweet voices of the
universal suffrages!--O Peter, what becomes of such a People; what can
become?

Did you never hear, with the mind's ear as well, that fateful Hebrew
Prophecy, I think the fatefulest of all, which sounds daily through
the streets, "Ou' clo! Ou' clo!"--A certain People, once upon a time,
clamorously voted by overwhelming majority, "Not _he_; Barabbas, not
he! _Him_, and what he is, and what he deserves, we know well enough:
a reviler of the Chief Priests and sacred Chancery wigs; a seditious
Heretic, physical-force Chartist, and enemy of his country and mankind:
To the gallows and the cross with him! Barabbas is our man; Barabbas, we
are for Barabbas!" They got Barabbas:--have you well considered what
a fund of purblind obduracy, of opaque _flunkyism_ grown truculent and
transcendent; what an eye for the phylacteries, and want of eye for the
eternal noblenesses; sordid loyalty to the prosperous Semblances, and
high-treason against the Supreme Fact, such a vote betokens in these
natures? For it was the consummation of a long series of such; they and
their fathers had long kept voting so. A singular People; who could both
produce such divine men, and then could so stone and crucify them; a
People terrible from the beginning!--Well, they got Barabbas; and they
got, of course, such guidance as Barabbas and the like of him could give
them; and, of course, they stumbled ever downwards and devilwards, in
their truculent stiffnecked way; and--and, at this hour, after eighteen
centuries of sad fortune, they prophetically sing "Ou' clo!" in all the
cities of the world. Might the world, at this late hour, but take note
of them, and understand their song a little!

Yes, there are some things the universal suffrage can decide,--and about
these it will be exceedingly useful to consult the universal suffrage:
but in regard to most things of importance, and in regard to the choice
of men especially, there is (astonishing as it may seem) next to no
capability on the part of universal suffrage.--I request all candid
persons, who have never so little originality of mind, and every man has
a little, to consider this. If true, it involves such a change in our
now fashionable modes of procedure as fills me with astonishment and
alarm. _If_ popular suffrage is not the way of ascertaining what the
Laws of the Universe are, and who it is that will best guide us in
the way of these,--then woe is to us if we do not take another method.
Delolme on the British Constitution will not save us; deaf will the
Parcae be to votes of the House, to leading articles, constitutional
philosophies. The other method--alas, it involves a stopping short, or
vital change of direction, in the glorious career which all Europe, with
shouts heaven-high, is now galloping along: and that, happen when it
may, will, to many of us, be probably a rather surprising business!

One thing I do know, and can again assert with great confidence,
supported by the whole Universe, and by some two hundred generations of
men, who have left us some record of themselves there, That the few Wise
will have, by one method or another, to take command of the innumerable
Foolish; that they must be got to take it;--and that, in fact, since
Wisdom, which means also Valor and heroic Nobleness, is alone strong in
this world, and one wise man is stronger than all men unwise, they can
be got. That they must take it; and having taken, must keep it, and do
their God's Message in it, and defend the same, at their life's peril,
against all men and devils. This I do clearly believe to be the backbone
of all Future Society, as it has been of all Past; and that without it,
there is no Society possible in the world. And what a business _this_
will be, before it end in some degree of victory again, and whether the
time for shouts of triumph and tremendous cheers upon it is yet come, or
not yet by a great way, I perceive too well! A business to make us all
very serious indeed. A business not to be accomplished but by noble
manhood, and devout all-daring, all-enduring loyalty to Heaven, such as
fatally _sleeps_ at present,--such as is not _dead_ at present either,
unless the gods have doomed this world of theirs to die! A business
which long centuries of faithful travail and heroic agony, on the part
of all the noble that are born to us, will not end; and which to us, of
this "tremendous cheering" century, it were blessedness very great to
see successfully begun. Begun, tried by all manner of methods, if there
is one wise Statesman or man left among us, it verily must be;--begun,
successfully or unsuccessfully, we do hope to see it!


In all European countries, especially in England, one class of Captains
and commanders of men, recognizable as the beginning of a new real
and not imaginary "Aristocracy," has already in some measure developed
itself: the Captains of Industry;--happily the class who above all, or
at least first of all, are wanted in this time. In the doing of material
work, we have already men among us that can command bodies of men.
And surely, on the other hand, there is no lack of men needing to be
commanded: the sad class of brother-men whom we had to describe as
"Hodge's emancipated horses," reduced to roving famine,--this too has in
all countries developed itself; and, in fatal geometrical progression,
is ever more developing itself, with a rapidity which alarms every one.
On this ground, if not on all manner of other grounds, it may be truly
said, the "Organization of Labor" (_not_ organizable by the mad methods
tried hitherto) is the universal vital Problem of the world.

To bring these hordes of outcast captainless soldiers under due
captaincy? This is really the question of questions; on the answer
to which turns, among other things, the fate of all Governments,
constitutional and other,--the possibility of their continuing to exist,
or the impossibility. Captainless, uncommanded, these wretched outcast
"soldiers," since they cannot starve, must needs become banditti,
street-barricaders,--destroyers of every Government that _cannot_ put
them under captains, and send them upon enterprises, and in short render
life human to them. Our English plan of Poor Laws, which we once piqued
ourselves upon as sovereign, is evidently fast breaking down. Ireland,
now admitted into the Idle Workhouse, is rapidly bursting it in pieces.
That never was a "human" destiny for any honest son of Adam; nowhere but
in England could it have lasted at all; and now, with Ireland sharer
in it, and the fulness of time come, it is as good as ended. Alas, yes.
Here in Connemara, your crazy Ship of the State, otherwise dreadfully
rotten in many of its timbers I believe, has sprung a leak: spite of
all hands at the pump, the water is rising; the Ship, I perceive, will
founder, if you cannot stop this leak!

To bring these Captainless under due captaincy? The anxious thoughts of
all men that do think are turned upon that question; and their efforts,
though as yet blindly and to no purpose, under the multifarious
impediments and obscurations, all point thitherward. Isolated men,
and their vague efforts, cannot do it. Government everywhere is called
upon,--in England as loudly as elsewhere,--to give the initiative. A
new strange task of these new epochs; which no Government, never
so "constitutional," can escape from undertaking. For it is vitally
necessary to the existence of Society itself; it must be undertaken, and
succeeded in too, or worse will follow,--and, as we already see in Irish
Connaught and some other places, will follow soon. To whatever
thing still calls itself by the name of Government, were it never so
constitutional and impeded by official impossibilities, all men will
naturally look for help, and direction what to do, in this extremity.
If help or direction is not given; if the thing called Government merely
drift and tumble to and fro, no-whither, on the popular vortexes, like
some carcass of a drowned ass, constitutionally put "at the top of
affairs," popular indignation will infallibly accumulate upon it; one
day, the popular lightning, descending forked and horrible from the
black air, will annihilate said supreme carcass, and smite it home
to its native ooze again!--Your Lordship, this is too true, though
irreverently spoken: indeed one knows not how to speak of it; and to me
it is infinitely sad and miserable, spoken or not!--Unless perhaps the
Voluntary Principle will still help us through? Perhaps this Irish leak,
in such a rotten distressed condition of the Ship, with all the crew so
anxious about it, will be kind enough to stop of itself?--

Dismiss that hope, your Lordship! Let all real and imaginary Governors
of England, at the pass we have arrived at, dismiss forever that
fallacious fatal solace to their do-nothingism: of itself, too clearly,
the leak will never stop; by human skill and energy it must be stopped,
or there is nothing but the sea-bottom for us all! A Chief Governor of
England really ought to recognize his situation; to discern that, doing
nothing, and merely drifting to and fro, in however constitutional a
manner, he is a squanderer of precious moments, moments that perhaps are
priceless; a truly alarming Chief Governor. Surely, to a Chief Governor
of England, worthy of that high name,--surely to him, as to every
living man, in every conceivable situation short of the Kingdom of the
Dead--there is _something_ possible; some plan of action other than that
of standing mildly, with crossed arms, till he and we--sink? Complex as
his situation is, he, of all Governors now extant among these distracted
Nations, has, as I compute, by far the greatest possibilities. The
Captains, actual or potential, are there, and the million Captainless:
and such resources for bringing them together as no other has. To these
outcast soldiers of his, unregimented roving banditti for the present,
or unworking workhouse prisoners who are almost uglier than banditti;
to these floods of Irish Beggars, Able-bodied Paupers, and nomadic
Lackalls, now stagnating or roaming everywhere, drowning the face of the
world (too truly) into an untenantable swamp and Stygian quagmire, has
the Chief Governor of this country no word whatever to say? Nothing but
"Rate in aid," "Time will mend it," "Necessary business of the Session;"
and "After me the Deluge"? A Chief Governor that can front his Irish
difficulty, and steadily contemplate the horoscope of Irish and British
Pauperism, and whitherward it is leading him and us, in this humor, must
be a--What shall we call such a Chief Governor? Alas, in spite of old
use and wont,--little other than a tolerated Solecism, growing daily
more intolerable! He decidedly ought to have some word to say on this
matter,--to be incessantly occupied in getting something which he could
practically say!--Perhaps to the following, or a much finer effect?


_Speech of the British Prime-Minister to the floods of Irish and other
Beggars, the able-bodied Lackalls, nomadic or stationary, and the
general assembly, outdoor and indoor, of the Pauper Populations of these
Realms_.

"Vagrant Lackalls, foolish most of you, criminal many of you, miserable
all; the sight of you fills me with astonishment and despair. What to
do with you I know not; long have I been meditating, and it is hard to
tell. Here are some three millions of you, as I count: so many of you
fallen sheer over into the abysses of open Beggary; and, fearful to
think, every new unit that falls is _loading_ so much more the chain
that drags the others over. On the edge of the precipice hang uncounted
millions; increasing, I am told, at the rate of 1200 a day. They hang
there on the giddy edge, poor souls, cramping themselves down, holding
on with all their strength; but falling, falling one after another; and
the chain is getting _heavy_, so that ever more fall; and who at last
will stand? What to do with you? The question, What to do with you?
especially since the potato died, is like to break my heart!

"One thing, after much meditating, I have at last discovered, and now
know for some time back: That you cannot be left to roam abroad in this
unguided manner, stumbling over the precipices, and loading ever heavier
the fatal _chain_ upon those who might be able to stand; that this
of locking you up in temporary Idle Workhouses, when you stumble, and
subsisting you on Indian meal, till you can sally forth again on fresh
roamings, and fresh stumblings, and ultimate descent to the devil;--that
this is _not_ the plan; and that it never was, or could out of England
have been supposed to be, much as I have prided myself upon it!

"Vagrant Lackalls, I at last perceive, all this that has been sung and
spoken, for a long while, about enfranchisement, emancipation, freedom,
suffrage, civil and religious liberty over the world, is little other
than sad temporary jargon, brought upon us by a stern necessity,--but
now ordered by a sterner to take itself away again a little. Sad
temporary jargon, I say: made up of sense and nonsense,--sense in small
quantities, and nonsense in very large;--and, if taken for the whole
or permanent truth of human things, it is no better than fatal infinite
nonsense eternally _untrue_. All men, I think, will soon have to quit
this, to consider this as a thing pretty well achieved; and to look out
towards another thing much more needing achievement at the time that now
is.

"All men will have to quit it, I believe. But to you, my indigent
friends, the time for quitting it has palpably arrived! To talk of
glorious self-government, of suffrages and hustings, and the fight
of freedom and such like, is a vain thing in your case. By all human
definitions and conceptions of the said fight of freedom, you for your
part have lost it, and can fight no more. Glorious self-government is
a glory not for you, not for Hodge's emancipated horses, nor you. No; I
say, No. You, for your part, have tried it, and _failed_. Left to walk
your own road, the will-o'-wisps beguiled you, your short sight could
not descry the pitfalls; the deadly tumult and press has whirled you
hither and thither, regardless of your struggles and your shrieks; and
here at last you lie; fallen flat into the ditch, drowning there and
dying, unless the others that are still standing please to pick you
up. The others that still stand have their own difficulties, I can tell
you!--But you, by imperfect energy and redundant appetite, by doing too
little work and drinking too much beer, you (I bid you observe) have
proved that you cannot do it! You lie there plainly in the ditch. And
I am to pick you up again, on these mad terms; help you ever again, as
with our best heart's-blood, to do what, once for all, the gods
have made impossible? To load the fatal _chain_ with your perpetual
staggerings and sprawlings; and ever again load it, till we all lie
sprawling? My indigent incompetent friends, I will not! Know that,
whoever may be 'sons of freedom,' you for your part are not and cannot
be such. Not 'free' you, I think, whoever may be free. You palpably are
fallen captive,--_caitiff_, as they once named it:--you do, silently
but eloquently, demand, in the name of mercy itself, that some genuine
command be taken of you.

"Yes, my indigent incompetent friends; some genuine practical command.
Such,--if I rightly interpret those mad Chartisms, Repeal Agitations,
Red Republics, and other delirious inarticulate howlings and bellowings
which all the populations of the world now utter, evidently cries of
pain on their and your part,--is the demand which you, Captives, make of
all men that are not Captive, but are still Free. Free men,--alas,
had you ever any notion who the free men were, who the not-free, the
incapable of freedom! The free men, if you could have understood it,
they are the wise men; the patient, self-denying, valiant; the Nobles
of the World; who can discern the Law of this Universe, what it is, and
piously _obey_ it; these, in late sad times, having cast you loose, you
are fallen captive to greedy sons of profit-and-loss; to bad and ever to
worse; and at length to Beer and the Devil. Algiers, Brazil or Dahomey
hold nothing in them so authentically _slave_ as you are, my indigent
incompetent friends!

"Good Heavens, and I have to raise some eight or nine millions annually,
six for England itself, and to wreck the morals of my working population
beyond all money's worth, to keep the life from going out of you: a
small service to you, as I many times bitterly repeat! Alas, yes; before
high Heaven I must declare it such. I think the old Spartans, who would
have killed you instead, had shown more 'humanity,' more of manhood,
than I thus do! More humanity, I say, more of manhood, and of sense for
what the dignity of man demands imperatively of you and of me and of us
all. We call it charity, beneficence, and other fine names, this brutish
Workhouse Scheme of ours; and it is but sluggish heartlessness, and
insincerity, and cowardly lowness of soul. Not 'humanity' or manhood,
I think; perhaps _ape_hood rather,--paltry imitancy, from the teeth
outward, of what our heart never felt nor our understanding ever saw;
dim indolent adherence to extraneous and extinct traditions; traditions
now really about extinct; not living now to almost any of us, and still
haunting with their spectralities and gibbering _ghosts_ (in a truly
baleful manner) almost all of us! Making this our struggling 'Twelfth
Hour of the Night' inexpressibly hideous!--

"But as for you, my indigent incompetent friends, I have to repeat with
sorrow, but with perfect clearness, what is plainly undeniable, and is
even clamorous to get itself admitted, that you are of the nature of
slaves,--or if you prefer the word, of _nomadic, and now even vagrant
and vagabond, servants that can find no master on those terms_;
which seems to me a much uglier word. Emancipation? You have been
'emancipated' with a vengeance! Foolish souls, I say the whole world
cannot emancipate you. Fealty to ignorant Unruliness, to gluttonous
sluggish Improvidence, to the Beer-pot and the Devil, who is there that
can emancipate a man in that predicament? Not a whole Reform Bill, a
whole French Revolution executed for his behoof alone: nothing but God
the Maker can emancipate him, by making him anew.

"To forward which glorious consummation, will it not be well, O indigent
friends, that you, fallen flat there, shall henceforth learn to take
advice of others as to the methods of standing? Plainly I let you know,
and all the world and the worlds know, that I for my part mean it so.
Not as glorious unfortunate sons of freedom, but as recognized captives,
as unfortunate fallen brothers requiring that I should command you, and
if need were, control and compel you, can there henceforth be a relation
between us. Ask me not for Indian meal; you shall be compelled to earn
it first; know that on other terms I will not give you any. Before
Heaven and Earth, and God the Maker of us all, I declare it is a scandal
to see _such_ a life kept in you, by the sweat and heart's-blood of your
brothers; and that, if we cannot mend it, death were preferable! Go to,
we must get out of this--unutterable coil of nonsenses, constitutional,
philanthropical, &c., in which (surely without mutual hatred, if with
less of 'love' than is supposed) we are all strangling one another!
Your want of wants, I say, is that you be _commanded_ in this world,
not being able to command yourselves. Know therefore that it shall be
so with you. Nomadism, I give you notice, has ended; needful permanency,
soldier-like obedience, and the opportunity and the necessity of hard
steady labor for your living, have begun. Know that the Idle Workhouse
is shut against you henceforth; you cannot enter there at will, nor
leave at will; you shall enter a quite other Refuge, under conditions
strict as soldiering, and not leave till I have done with you. He that
prefers the glorious (or perhaps even the rebellious _in_glorious)
'career of freedom,' let him prove that he can travel there, and be the
master of himself; and right good speed to him. He who has proved that
he cannot travel there or be the master of himself,--let him, in the
name of all the gods, become a servant, and accept the just rules of
servitude!

"Arise, enlist in my Irish, my Scotch and English 'Regiments of the New
Era,'--which I have been concocting, day and night, during these three
Grouse-seasons (taking earnest incessant counsel, with all manner of
Industrial Notabilities and men of insight, on the matter), and have now
brought to a kind of preparation for incipiency, thank Heaven! Enlist
there, ye poor wandering banditti; obey, work, suffer, abstain, as all
of us have had to do: so shall you be useful in God's creation, so shall
you be helped to gain a manful living for yourselves; not otherwise than
so. Industrial Regiments [_Here numerous persons, with big wigs many
of them, and austere aspect, whom I take to be Professors of the Dismal
Science, start up in an agitated vehement manner: but the Premier
resolutely beckons them down again_]--Regiments not to fight the French
or others, who are peaceable enough towards us; but to fight the Bogs
and Wildernesses at home and abroad, and to chain the Devils of the Pit
which are walking too openly among us.

"Work, for you? Work, surely, is not quite undiscoverable in an Earth
so wide as ours, if we will take the right methods for it! Indigent
friends, we will adopt this new relation (which is _old_ as the world);
this will lead us towards such. Rigorous conditions, not to be violated
on either side, lie in this relation; conditions planted there by God
Himself; which woe will betide us if we do not discover, gradually more
and more discover, and conform to! Industrial Colonels, Workmasters,
Task-masters, Life-commanders, equitable as Rhadamanthus and inflexible
as he: such, I perceive, you do need; and such, you being once put under
law as soldiers are, will be discoverable for you. I perceive, with
boundless alarm, that I shall have to set about discovering such,--I,
since I am at the top of affairs, with all men looking to me. Alas, it
is my new task in this New Era; and God knows, I too, little other than
a red-tape Talking-machine, and unhappy Bag of Parliamentary Eloquence
hitherto, am far behind with it! But street-barricades rise everywhere:
the hour of Fate has come. In Connemara there has sprung a leak, since
the potato died; Connaught, if it were not for Treasury-grants and
rates-in-aid, would have to recur to Cannibalism even now, and Human
Society would cease to pretend that it existed there. Done this thing
must be. Alas, I perceive that if I cannot do it, then surely I shall
die, and perhaps shall not have Christian burial! But I already raise
near upon Ten Millions for feeding you in idleness, my nomadic friends;
work, under due regulations, I really might try to get of--[_Here
arises indescribable uproar, no longer repressible, from all manner
of Economists, Emancipationists, Constitutionalists, and miscellaneous
Professors of the Dismal Science, pretty numerously scattered about;
and cries of "Private enterprise," "Rights of Capital," "Voluntary
Principle," "Doctrines of the British Constitution," swollen by the
general assenting hum of all the world, quite drown the Chief Minister
for a while. He, with invincible resolution, persists; obtains hearing
again_:]

"Respectable Professors of the Dismal Science, soft you a little.
Alas, I know what you would say. For my sins, I have read much in those
inimitable volumes of yours,--really I should think, some barrowfuls of
them in my time,--and, in these last forty years of theory and practice,
have pretty well seized what of Divine Message you were sent with to me.
Perhaps as small a message, give me leave to say, as ever there was
such a noise made about before. Trust me, I have not forgotten it, shall
never forget it. Those Laws of the Shop-till are indisputable to me;
and practically useful in certain departments of the Universe, as the
multiplication-table itself. Once I even tried to sail through the
Immensities with them, and to front the big coming Eternities with them;
but I found it would not do. As the Supreme Rule of Statesmanship, or
Government of Men,--since this Universe is not wholly a Shop,--no. You
rejoice in my improved tariffs, free-trade movements and the like, on
every hand; for which be thankful, and even sing litanies if you choose.
But here at last, in the Idle-Workhouse movement,--unexampled yet on
Earth or in the waters under the Earth,--I am fairly brought to a stand;
and have had to make reflections, of the most alarming, and indeed
awful, and as it were religious nature! Professors of the Dismal
Science, I perceive that the length of your tether is now pretty well
run; and that I must request you to talk a little lower in future. By
the side of the shop-till,--see, your small 'Law of God' is hung up,
along with the multiplication-table itself. But beyond and above the
shop-till, allow me to say, you shall as good as hold your peace.
Respectable Professors, I perceive it is not now the Gigantic Hucksters,
but it is the Immortal Gods, yes they, in their terror and their beauty,
in their wrath and their beneficence, that are coming into play in the
affairs of this world! Soft you a little. Do not you interrupt me, but
try to understand and help me!--

--"Work, was I saying? My indigent unguided friends, I should think some
work might be discoverable for you. Enlist, stand drill; become, from a
nomadic Banditti of Idleness, Soldiers of Industry! I will lead you to
the Irish Bogs, to the vacant desolations of Connaught now falling into
Cannibalism, to mistilled Connaught, to ditto Munster, Leinster, Ulster,
I will lead you: to the English fox-covers, furze-grown Commons, New
Forests, Salisbury Plains: likewise to the Scotch Hill-sides, and bare
rushy slopes, which as yet feed only sheep,--moist uplands, thousands of
square miles in extent, which are destined yet to grow green crops, and
fresh butter and milk and beef without limit (wherein no 'Foreigner can
compete with us'), were the Glasgow sewers once opened on them, and you
with your Colonels carried thither. In the Three Kingdoms, or in the
Forty Colonies, depend upon it, you shall be led to your work!

"To each of you I will then say: Here is work for you; strike into it
with manlike, soldier-like obedience and heartiness, according to the
methods here prescribed,--wages follow for you without difficulty; all
manner of just remuneration, and at length emancipation itself follows.
Refuse to strike into it; shirk the heavy labor, disobey the rules,--I
will admonish and endeavor to incite you; if in vain, I will flog you;
if still in vain, I will at last shoot you,--and make God's Earth, and
the forlorn-hope in God's Battle, free of you. Understand it, I advise
you! The Organization of Labor"--[_Left speaking_, says our reporter.]


"Left speaking:" alas, that he should have to "speak" so much! There are
things that should be done, not spoken; that till the doing of them is
begun, cannot well be spoken. He may have to "speak" seven years yet,
before a spade be struck into the Bog of Allen; and then perhaps it will
be too late!--

You perceive, my friends, we have actually got into the "New Era" there
has been such prophesying of: here we all are, arrived at last;--and
it is by no means the land flowing with milk and honey we were led
to expect! Very much the reverse. A terrible _new_ country this: no
neighbors in it yet, that I can see, but irrational flabby monsters
(philanthropic and other) of the giant species; hyenas, laughing hyenas,
predatory wolves; probably _devils_, blue (or perhaps blue-and-yellow)
devils, as St. Guthlac found in Croyland long ago. A huge untrodden
haggard country, the "chaotic battle-field of Frost and Fire;" a country
of savage glaciers, granite mountains, of foul jungles, unhewed forests,
quaking bogs;--which we shall have our own ados to make arable and
habitable, I think! We must stick by it, however;--of all enterprises
the impossiblest is that of getting out of it, and shifting into
another. To work, then, one and all; hands to work!




No. II. MODEL PRISONS. [March 1, 1850.]

The deranged condition of our affairs is a universal topic among men at
present; and the heavy miseries pressing, in their rudest shape, on the
great dumb inarticulate class, and from this, by a sure law, spreading
upwards, in a less palpable but not less certain and perhaps still more
fatal shape on all classes to the very highest, are admitted everywhere
to be great, increasing and now almost unendurable. How to diminish
them,--this is every man's question. For in fact they do imperatively
need diminution; and unless they can be diminished, there are many other
things that cannot very long continue to exist beside them. A serious
question indeed, How to diminish them!

Among the articulate classes, as they may be called, there are two ways
of proceeding in regard to this. One large body of the intelligent
and influential, busied mainly in personal affairs, accepts the social
iniquities, or whatever you may call them, and the miseries consequent
thereupon; accepts them, admits them to be extremely miserable,
pronounces them entirely inevitable, incurable except by Heaven, and
eats its pudding with as little thought of them as possible. Not a very
noble class of citizens these; not a very hopeful or salutary method of
dealing with social iniquities this of theirs, however it may answer in
respect to themselves and their personal affairs! But now there is the
select small minority, in whom some sentiment of public spirit and human
pity still survives, among whom, or not anywhere, the Good Cause may
expect to find soldiers and servants: their method of proceeding, in
these times, is also very strange. They embark in the "philanthropic
movement;" they calculate that the miseries of the world can be cured by
bringing the philanthropic movement to bear on them. To universal public
misery, and universal neglect of the clearest public duties, let private
charity superadd itself: there will thus be some balance restored, and
maintained again; thus,--or by what conceivable method? On these terms
they, for their part, embark in the sacred cause; resolute to cure a
world's woes by rose-water; desperately bent on trying to the uttermost
that mild method. It seems not to have struck these good men that no
world, or thing here below, ever fell into misery, without having first
fallen into folly, into sin against the Supreme Ruler of it, by adopting
as a law of conduct what was not a law, but the reverse of one; and
that, till its folly, till its sin be cast out of it, there is not the
smallest hope of its misery going,--that not for all the charity and
rose-water in the world will its misery try to go till then!

This is a sad error; all the sadder as it is the error chiefly of the
more humane and noble-minded of our generation; among whom, as we
said, or elsewhere not at all, the cause of real Reform must expect its
servants. At present, and for a long while past, whatsoever young soul
awoke in England with some disposition towards generosity and social
heroism, or at lowest with some intimation of the beauty of such
a disposition,--he, in whom the poor world might have looked for a
Reformer, and valiant mender of its foul ways, was almost sure to become
a Philanthropist, reforming merely by this rose-water method. To admit
that the world's ways are foul, and not the ways of God the Maker, but
of Satan the Destroyer, many of them, and that they must be mended or
we all die; that if huge misery prevails, huge cowardice, falsity,
disloyalty, universal Injustice high and low, have still longer
prevailed, and must straightway try to cease prevailing: this is what
no visible reformer has yet thought of doing: All so-called "reforms"
hitherto are grounded either on openly admitted egoism (cheap bread to
the cotton-spinner, voting to those that have no vote, and the like),
which does not point towards very celestial developments of the
Reform movement; or else upon this of remedying social injustices by
indiscriminate contributions of philanthropy, a method surely still more
unpromising. Such contributions, being indiscriminate, are but a new
injustice; these will never lead to reform, or abolition of injustice,
whatever else they lead to!

Not by that method shall we "get round Cape Horn," by never such
unanimity of voting, under the most approved Phantasm Captains! It is
miserable to see. Having, as it were, quite lost our way round Cape
Horn, and being sorely "admonished" by the Iceberg and other dumb
councillors, the pilots,--instead of taking to their sextants, and
asking with a seriousness unknown for a long while, What the Laws of
wind and water, and of Earth and of Heaven are,--decide that now, in
these new circumstances, they will, to the worthy and unworthy, serve
out a double allowance of grog. In this way they hope to do it,--by
steering on the old wrong tack, and serving out more and more,
copiously what little _aqua vitae_ may be still on board! Philanthropy,
emancipation, and pity for human calamity is very beautiful; but the
deep oblivion of the Law of Right and Wrong; this "indiscriminate
mashing up of Right and Wrong into a patent treacle" of the
Philanthropic movement, is by no means beautiful; this, on the contrary,
is altogether ugly and alarming.

Truly if there be not something inarticulate among us, not yet uttered
but pressing towards utterance, which is much wiser than anything we
have lately articulated or brought into word or action, our outlooks are
rather lamentable. The great majority of the powerful and active-minded,
sunk in egoistic scepticisms, busied in chase of lucre, pleasure, and
mere vulgar objects, looking with indifference on the world's woes, and
passing carelessly by on the other side; and the select minority, of
whom better might have been expected, bending all their strength to cure
them by methods which can only make bad worse, and in the end
render cure hopeless. A blind loquacious pruriency of indiscriminate
Philanthropism substituting itself, with much self-laudation, for the
silent divinely awful sense of Right and Wrong;--testifying too clearly
that here is no longer a divine sense of Right and Wrong; that, in
the smoke of this universal, and alas inevitable and indispensable
revolutionary fire, and burning up of worn-out rags of which the world
is full, our life-atmosphere has (for the time) become one vile London
fog, and the eternal loadstars are gone out for us! Gone out;--yet very
visible if you can get above the fog; still there in their place,
and quite the same as they always were! To whoever does still know of
loadstars, the proceedings, which expand themselves daily, of
these sublime philanthropic associations, and "universal
sluggard-and-scoundrel protection-societies," are a perpetual
affliction. With their emancipations and abolition principles, and
reigns of brotherhood and new methods of love, they have done great
things in the White and in the Black World, during late years; and are
preparing for greater.

In the interest of human reform, if there is ever to be any reform, and
return to prosperity or to the possibility of prospering, it is urgent
that the nonsense of all this (and it is mostly nonsense, but not quite)
should be sent about its business straightway, and forbidden to deceive
the well-meaning souls among us any more. Reform, if we will understand
that divine word, cannot begin till then. One day, I do know, this, as
is the doom of all nonsense, will be drummed out of the world, with due
placard stuck on its back, and the populace flinging dead cats at it:
but whether soon or not, is by no means so certain. I rather guess,
_not_ at present, not quite soon. Fraternity, in other countries, has
gone on, till it found itself unexpectedly manipulating guillotines by
its chosen Robespierres, and become a fraternity like Cain's. Much
to its amazement! For in fact it is not all nonsense; there is an
infinitesimal fraction of sense in it withal; which is so difficult
to disengage;--which must be disengaged, and laid hold of, before
Fraternity can vanish.

But to our subject,--the Model Prison, and the strange theory of life
now in action there. That, for the present, is my share in the wide
adventure of Philanthropism; the world's share, and how and when it is
to be liquidated and ended, rests with the Supreme Destinies.

Several months ago, some friends took me with them to see one of the
London Prisons; a Prison of the exemplary or model kind. An immense
circuit of buildings; cut out, girt with a high ring-wall, from the
lanes and streets of the quarter, which is a dim and crowded one.
Gateway as to a fortified place; then a spacious court, like the square
of a city; broad staircases, passages to interior courts; fronts of
stately architecture all round. It lodges some thousand or twelve
hundred prisoners, besides the officers of the establishment. Surely one
of the most perfect buildings, within the compass of London. We looked
at the apartments, sleeping-cells, dining-rooms, working-rooms, general
courts or special and private: excellent all, the ne-plus-ultra of human
care and ingenuity; in my life I never saw so clean a building; probably
no Duke in England lives in a mansion of such perfect and thorough
cleanness.

The bread, the cocoa, soup, meat, all the various sorts of food, in
their respective cooking-places, we tasted: found them of excellence
superlative. The prisoners sat at work, light work, picking oakum, and
the like, in airy apartments with glass roofs, of agreeable temperature
and perfect ventilation; silent, or at least conversing only by secret
signs: others were out, taking their hour of promenade in clean flagged
courts: methodic composure, cleanliness, peace, substantial wholesome
comfort reigned everywhere supreme. The women in other apartments,
some notable murderesses among them, all in the like state of methodic
composure and substantial wholesome comfort, sat sewing: in long ranges
of wash-houses, drying-houses and whatever pertains to the getting-up
of clean linen, were certain others, with all conceivable mechanical
furtherances, not too arduously working. The notable murderesses were,
though with great precautions of privacy, pointed out to us; and we were
requested not to look openly at them, or seem to notice them at all,
as it was found to "cherish their vanity" when visitors looked at them.
Schools too were there; intelligent teachers of both sexes, studiously
instructing the still ignorant of these thieves.

From an inner upper room or gallery, we looked down into a range of
private courts, where certain Chartist Notabilities were undergoing
their term. Chartist Notability First struck me very much; I had seen
him about a year before, by involuntary accident and much to my disgust,
magnetizing a silly young person; and had noted well the unlovely
voracious look of him, his thick oily skin, his heavy dull-burning eyes,
his greedy mouth, the dusky potent insatiable animalism that looked
out of every feature of him: a fellow adequate to animal-magnetize most
things, I did suppose;--and here was the post I now found him arrived
at. Next neighbor to him was Notability Second, a philosophic or
literary Chartist; walking rapidly to and fro in his private court, a
clean, high-walled place; the world and its cares quite excluded, for
some months to come: master of his own time and spiritual resources to,
as I supposed, a really enviable extent. What "literary man" to an equal
extent! I fancied I, for my own part, so left with paper and ink, and
all taxes and botherations shut out from me, could have written such a
Book as no reader will here ever get of me. Never, O reader, never here
in a mere house with taxes and botherations. Here, alas, one has to
snatch one's poor Book, bit by bit, as from a conflagration; and to
think and live, comparatively, as if the house were not one's own, but
mainly the world's and the devil's. Notability Second might have filled
one with envy.

The Captain of the place, a gentleman of ancient Military or Royal-Navy
habits, was one of the most perfect governors; professionally and by
nature zealous for cleanliness, punctuality, good order of every kind;
a humane heart and yet a strong one; soft of speech and manner, yet with
an inflexible rigor of command, so far as his limits went: "iron hand
in a velvet glove," as Napoleon defined it. A man of real worth,
challenging at once love and respect: the light of those mild bright
eyes seemed to permeate the place as with an all-pervading vigilance,
and kindly yet victorious illumination; in the soft definite voice it
was as if Nature herself were promulgating her orders, gentlest mildest
orders, which however, in the end, there would be no disobeying, which
in the end there would be no living without fulfilment of. A true
"aristos," and commander of men. A man worthy to have commanded and
guided forward, in good ways, twelve hundred of the best common-people
in London or the world: he was here, for many years past, giving all
his care and faculty to command, and guide forward in such ways as there
were, twelve hundred of the worst. I looked with considerable admiration
on this gentleman; and with considerable astonishment, the reverse of
admiration, on the work he had here been set upon.

This excellent Captain was too old a Commander to complain of anything;
indeed he struggled visibly the other way, to find in his own mind that
all here was best; but I could sufficiently discern that, in his natural
instincts, if not mounting up to the region of his thoughts, there was
a continual protest going on against much of it; that nature and all his
inarticulate persuasion (however much forbidden to articulate itself)
taught him the futility and unfeasibility of the system followed here.
The Visiting Magistrates, he gently regretted rather than complained,
had lately taken his tread-wheel from him, men were just now pulling
it down; and how he was henceforth to enforce discipline on these bad
subjects, was much a difficulty with him. "They cared for nothing but
the tread-wheel, and for having their rations cut short:" of the two
sole penalties, hard work and occasional hunger, there remained now only
one, and that by no means the better one, as he thought. The "sympathy"
of visitors, too, their "pity" for his interesting scoundrel-subjects,
though he tried to like it, was evidently no joy to this practical mind.
Pity, yes: but pity for the scoundrel-species? For those who will not
have pity on themselves, and will force the Universe and the Laws
of Nature to have no "pity on" them? Meseems I could discover fitter
objects of pity!

In fact it was too clear, this excellent man had got a field for his
faculties which, in several respects, was by no means the suitable one.
To drill twelve hundred scoundrels by "the method of kindness," and of
abolishing your very tread-wheel,--how could any commander rejoice to
have such a work cut out for him? You had but to look in the faces of
these twelve hundred, and despair, for most part, of ever "commanding"
them at all. Miserable distorted blockheads, the generality; ape-faces,
imp-faces, angry dog-faces, heavy sullen ox-faces; degraded underfoot
perverse creatures, sons of _in_docility, greedy mutinous darkness,
and in one word, of STUPIDITY, which is the general mother of such.
Stupidity intellectual and stupidity moral (for the one always means
the other, as you will, with surprise or not, discover if you look)
had borne this progeny: base-natured beings, on whom in the course of
a maleficent subterranean life of London Scoundrelism, the Genius
of Darkness (called Satan, Devil, and other names) had now visibly
impressed his seal, and had marked them out as soldiers of Chaos and of
him,--appointed to serve in _his_ Regiments, First of the line, Second
ditto, and so on in their order. Him, you could perceive, they would
serve; but not easily another than him. These were the subjects whom our
brave Captain and Prison-Governor was appointed to command, and
reclaim to _other_ service, by "the method of love," with a tread-wheel
abolished.

Hopeless forevermore such a project. These abject, ape, wolf, ox, imp
and other diabolic-animal specimens of humanity, who of the very gods
could ever have commanded them by love? A collar round the neck, and a
cart-whip flourished over the back; these, in a just and steady human
hand, were what the gods would have appointed them; and now when, by
long misconduct and neglect, they had sworn themselves into the Devil's
regiments of the line, and got the seal of Chaos impressed on their
visage, it was very doubtful whether even these would be of avail for
the unfortunate commander of twelve hundred men! By "love," without hope
except of peaceably teasing oakum, or fear except of a temporary loss
of dinner, he was to guide these men, and wisely constrain
them,--whitherward? No-whither: that was his goal, if you will think
well of it; that was a second fundamental falsity in his problem. False
in the warp and false in the woof, thought one of us; about as false
a problem as any I have seen a good man set upon lately! To guide
scoundrels by "love;" that is a false woof, I take it, a method that
will not hold together; hardly for the flower of men will love alone do;
and for the sediment and scoundrelism of men it has not even a chance
to do. And then to guide any class of men, scoundrel or other,
_No-whither_, which was this poor Captain's problem, in this Prison with
oakum for its one element of hope or outlook, how can that prosper by
"love" or by any conceivable method? That is a warp wholly false. Out of
which false warp, or originally false condition to start from, combined
and daily woven into by your false woof, or methods of "love" and such
like, there arises for our poor Captain the falsest of problems, and for
a man of his faculty the unfairest of situations. His problem was, not
to command good men to do something, but bad men to do (with superficial
disguises) nothing.


On the whole, what a beautiful Establishment here fitted up for the
accommodation of the scoundrel-world, male and female! As I said, no
Duke in England is, for all rational purposes which a human being can
or ought to aim at, lodged, fed, tended, taken care of, with such
perfection. Of poor craftsmen that pay rates and taxes from their day's
wages, of the dim millions that toil and moil continually under the
sun, we know what is the lodging and the tending. Of the Johnsons,
Goldsmiths, lodged in their squalid garrets; working often enough amid
famine, darkness, tumult, dust and desolation, what work _they_ have
to do:--of these as of "spiritual backwoodsmen," understood to be
preappointed to such a life, and like the pigs to killing, "quite used
to it," I say nothing. But of Dukes, which Duke, I could ask, has cocoa,
soup, meat, and food in general made ready, so fit for keeping him
in health, in ability to do and to enjoy? Which Duke has a house so
thoroughly clean, pure and airy; lives in an element so wholesome, and
perfectly adapted to the uses of soul and body as this same, which is
provided here for the Devil's regiments of the line? No Duke that I
have ever known. Dukes are waited on by deleterious French cooks,
by perfunctory grooms of the chambers, and expensive crowds of
eye-servants, more imaginary than real: while here, Science, Human
Intellect and Beneficence have searched and sat studious, eager to do
their very best; they have chosen a real Artist in Governing to see
their best, in all details of it, done. Happy regiments of the line,
what soldier to any earthly or celestial Power has such a lodging and
attendance as you here? No soldier or servant direct or indirect of
God or of man, in this England at present. Joy to you, regiments of the
line. Your Master, I am told, has his Elect, and professes to be "Prince
of the Kingdoms of this World;" and truly I see he has power to do a
good turn to those he loves, in England at least. Shall we say, May
_he_, may the Devil give you good of it, ye Elect of Scoundrelism? I
will rather pass by, uttering no prayer at all; musing rather in silence
on the singular "worship of God," or practical "reverence done to
Human Worth" (which is the outcome and essence of all real "worship"
whatsoever) among the Posterity of Adam at this day.

For all round this beautiful Establishment, or Oasis of Purity, intended
for the Devil's regiments of the line, lay continents of dingy poor
and dirty dwellings, where the unfortunate not _yet_ enlisted into
that Force were struggling manifoldly,--in their workshops, in their
marble-yards and timber-yards and tan-yards, in their close cellars,
cobbler-stalls, hungry garrets, and poor dark trade-shops with
red-herrings and tobacco-pipes crossed in the window,--to keep the Devil
out-of-doors, and not enlist with him. And it was by a tax on these
that the Barracks for the regiments of the line were kept up. Visiting
Magistrates, impelled by Exeter Hall, by Able-Editors, and the
Philanthropic Movement of the Age, had given orders to that effect.
Rates on the poor servant of God and of her Majesty, who still serves
both in his way, painfully selling red-herrings; rates on him and his
red-herrings to boil right soup for the Devil's declared Elect! Never
in my travels, in any age or clime, had I fallen in with such Visiting
Magistrates before. Reserved they, I should suppose, for these ultimate
or penultimate ages of the world, rich in all prodigies, political,
spiritual,--ages surely with such a length of ears as was never
paralleled before.

If I had a commonwealth to reform or to govern, certainly it should
not be the Devil's regiments of the line that I would first of all
concentrate my attention on! With them I should be apt so make rather
brief work; to them one would apply the besom, try to sweep _them_, with
some rapidity into the dust-bin, and well out of one's road, I should
rather say. Fill your thrashing-floor with docks, ragweeds, mugworths,
and ply your flail upon them,--that is not the method to obtain sacks
of wheat. Away, you; begone swiftly, _ye_ regiments of the line: in the
name of God and of His poor struggling servants, sore put to it to
live in these bad days, I mean to rid myself of you with some degree of
brevity. To feed you in palaces, to hire captains and schoolmasters
and the choicest spiritual and material artificers to expend their
industries on you, No, by the Eternal! I have quite other work for that
class of artists; Seven-and-twenty Millions of neglected mortals who
have not yet quite declared for the Devil. Mark it, my diabolic friends,
I mean to lay leather on the backs of you, collars round the necks of
you; and will teach you, after the example of the gods, that this world
is _not_ your inheritance, or glad to see you in it. You, ye diabolic
canaille, what has a Governor much to do with you? You, I think, he
will rather swiftly dismiss from his thoughts,--which have the whole
celestial and terrestrial for their scope, and not the subterranean of
scoundreldom alone. You, I consider, he will sweep pretty rapidly into
some Norfolk Island, into some special Convict Colony or remote
domestic Moorland, into some stone-walled Silent-System, under hard
drill-sergeants, just as Rhadamanthus, and inflexible as he, and there
leave you to reap what you have sown; he meanwhile turning his endeavors
to the thousand-fold immeasurable interests of men and gods,--dismissing
the one extremely contemptible interest of scoundrels; sweeping that
into the cesspool, tumbling that over London Bridge, in a very brief
manner, if needful! Who are you, ye thriftless sweepings of Creation,
that we should forever be pestered with you? Have we no work to do but
drilling Devil's regiments of the line?

If I had schoolmasters, my benevolent friend, do you imagine I would set
them on teaching a set of unteachables, who as you perceive have already
made up their mind that black is white,--that the Devil namely is the
advantageous Master to serve in this world? My esteemed Benefactor
of Humanity, it shall be far from me. Minds open to that particular
conviction are not the material I like to work upon. When once my
schoolmasters have gone over all the other classes of society from
top to bottom; and have no other soul to try with teaching, all
being thoroughly taught,--I will then send them to operate on _these_
regiments of the line: then, and, assure yourself, never till then. The
truth is, I am sick of scoundreldom, my esteemed Benefactor; it always
was detestable to me; and here where I find it lodged in palaces and
waited on by the benevolent of the world, it is more detestable, not to
say insufferable to me than ever.

Of Beneficence, Benevolence, and the people that come together to talk
on platforms and subscribe five pounds, I will say nothing here; indeed
there is not room here for the twentieth part of what were to be said of
them. The beneficence, benevolence, and sublime virtue which issues in
eloquent talk reported in the Newspapers, with the subscription of
five pounds, and the feeling that one is a good citizen and ornament to
society,--concerning this, there were a great many unexpected remarks to
be made; but let this one, for the present occasion, suffice:--

My sublime benevolent friends, don't you perceive, for one thing,
that here is a shockingly unfruitful investment for your capital of
Benevolence; precisely the worst, indeed, which human ingenuity could
select for you? "Laws are unjust, temptations great," &c. &c.: alas, I
know it, and mourn for it, and passionately call on all men to help in
altering it. But according to every hypothesis as to the law, and the
temptations and pressures towards vice, here are the individuals who, of
all the society, have yielded to said pressure. These are of the
worst substance for enduring pressure! The others yet stand and
make resistance to temptation, to the law's injustice; under all the
perversities and strangling impediments there are, the rest of the
society still keep their feet, and struggle forward, marching under
the banner of Cosmos, of God and Human Virtue; these select Few, as I
explain to you, are they who have fallen to Chaos, and are sworn
into certain regiments of the line. A superior proclivity to Chaos is
declared in these, by the very fact of their being here! Of all the
generation we live in, these are the worst stuff. These, I say, are the
Elixir of the Infatuated among living mortals: if you want the worst
investment for your Benevolence, here you accurately have it. O my
surprising friends! Nowhere so as here can you be certain that a given
quantity of wise teaching bestowed, of benevolent trouble taken, will
yield zero, or the net _Minimum_ of return. It is sowing of your wheat
upon Irish quagmires; laboriously harrowing it in upon the sand of the
seashore. O my astonishing benevolent friends!

Yonder, in those dingy habitations, and shops of red herring and
tobacco-pipes, where men have not yet quite declared for the Devil;
there, I say, is land: here is mere sea-beach. Thither go with your
benevolence, thither to those dingy caverns of the poor; and there
instruct and drill and manage, there where some fruit may come from it.
And, above all and inclusive of all, cannot you go to those Solemn human
Shams, Phantasm Captains, and Supreme Quacks that ride prosperously in
every thoroughfare; and with severe benevolence, ask them, What they
are doing here? They are the men whom it would behoove you to drill a
little, and tie to the halberts in a benevolent manner, if you could!
"We cannot," say you? Yes, my friends, to a certain extent you can. By
many well-known active methods, and by all manner of passive methods,
you can. Strive thitherward, I advise you; thither, with whatever
social effort there may lie in you! The well-head and "consecrated"
thrice-accursed chief fountain of all those waters of bitterness,--it is
they, those Solemn Shams and Supreme Quacks of yours, little as they or
you imagine it! Them, with severe benevolence, put a stop to; them send
to their Father, far from the sight of the true and just,--if you would
ever see a just world here!

What sort of reformers and workers are you, that work only on the
rotten material? That never think of meddling with the material while
it continues sound; that stress it and strain it with new rates and
assessments, till once it has given way and declared itself rotten;
whereupon you snatch greedily at it, and say, Now let us try to do some
good upon it! You mistake in every way, my friends: the fact is, you
fancy yourselves men of virtue, benevolence, what not; and you are not
even men of sincerity and honest sense. I grieve to say it; but it is
true. Good from you, and your operations, is not to be expected. You may
go down!

Howard is a beautiful Philanthropist, eulogized by Burke, and in
most men's minds a sort of beatified individual. How glorious, having
finished off one's affairs in Bedfordshire, or in fact finding them very
dull, inane, and worthy of being quitted and got away from, to set out
on a cruise, over the Jails first of Britain; then, finding that
answer, over the Jails of the habitable Globe! "A voyage of discovery,
a circum-navigation of charity; to collate distresses, to gauge
wretchedness, to take the dimensions of human misery:" really it is very
fine. Captain Cook's voyage for the Terra Australis, Ross's, Franklin's
for the ditto Borealis: men make various cruises and voyages in
this world,--for want of money, want of work, and one or the other
want,--which are attended with their difficulties too, and do not make
the cruiser a demigod. On the whole, I have myself nothing but
respect, comparatively speaking, for the dull solid Howard, and his
"benevolence," and other impulses that set him cruising; Heaven
had grown weary of Jail-fevers, and other the like unjust penalties
inflicted upon scoundrels,--for scoundrels too, and even the very Devil,
should not have _more_ than their due;--and Heaven, in its opulence,
created a man to make an end of that. Created him; disgusted him with
the grocer business; tried him with Calvinism, rural ennui, and sore
bereavement in his Bedfordshire retreat;--and, in short, at last got
him set to his work, and in a condition to achieve it. For which I am
thankful to Heaven; and do also,--with doffed hat, humbly salute John
Howard. A practical solid man, if a dull and even dreary; "carries
his weighing-scales in his pocket:" when your jailer answers, "The
prisoner's allowance of food is so and so; and we observe it sacredly;
here, for example, is a ration."--"Hey! A ration this?" and solid John
suddenly produces his weighing-scales; weighs it, marks down in his
tablets what the actual quantity of it is. That is the art and manner of
the man. A man full of English accuracy; English veracity, solidity,
 simplicity; by whom this universal Jail-commission, not to be paid for
in money but far otherwise, is set about, with all the slow energy, the
patience, practicality, sedulity and sagacity common to the best English
commissioners paid in money and not expressly otherwise.

For it is the glory of England that she has a turn for fidelity in
practical work; that sham-workers, though very numerous, are rarer than
elsewhere; that a man who undertakes work for you will still, in various
provinces of our affairs, do it, instead of merely seeming to do it.
John Howard, without pay in money, _did_ this of the Jail-fever, as
other Englishmen do work, in a truly workmanlike manner: his distinction
was that he did it without money. He had not 500 pounds or 5,000 pounds
a year of salary for it; but lived merely on his Bedfordshire estates,
and as Snigsby irreverently expresses it, "by chewing his own cud." And,
sure enough, if any man might chew the cud of placid reflections, solid
Howard, a mournful man otherwise, might at intervals indulge a little
in that luxury.--No money-salary had he for his work; he had merely the
income of his properties, and what he could derive from within. Is this
such a sublime distinction, then? Well, let it pass at its value. There
have been benefactors of mankind who had more need of money than he, and
got none too. Milton, it is known, did his _Paradise Lost_ at the
easy rate of five pounds. Kepler worked out the secret of the Heavenly
Motions in a dreadfully painful manner; "going over the calculations
sixty times;" and having not only no public money, but no private
either; and, in fact, writing almanacs for his bread-and-water, while
he did this of the Heavenly Motions; having no Bedfordshire estates;
nothing but a pension of 18 pounds (which they would not pay him), the
valuable faculty of writing almanacs, and at length the invaluable
one of dying, when the Heavenly bodies were vanquished, and battle's
conflagration had collapsed into cold dark ashes, and the starvation
reached too high a pitch for the poor man.

Howard is not the only benefactor that has worked without money for us;
there have been some more,--and will be, I hope! For the Destinies are
opulent; and send here and there a man into the world to do work,
for which they do not mean to pay him in money. And they smite him
beneficently with sore afflictions, and blight his world all into grim
frozen ruins round him,--and can make a wandering Exile of their Dante,
and not a soft-bedded Podesta of Florence, if they wish to get a _Divine
Comedy_ out of him. Nay that rather is their way, when they have worthy
work for such a man; they scourge him manifoldly to the due pitch,
sometimes nearly of despair, that he may search desperately for his
work, and find it; they urge him on still with beneficent stripes when
needful, as is constantly the case between whiles; and, in fact, have
privately decided to reward him with beneficent death by and by, and not
with money at all. O my benevolent friend, I honor Howard very much;
but it is on this side idolatry a long way, not to an infinite, but to
a decidedly finite extent! And you,--put not the modest noble Howard, a
truly modest man, to the blush, by forcing these reflections on us!

Cholera Doctors, hired to dive into black dens of infection and despair,
they, rushing about all day from lane to lane, with their life in their
hand, are found to do their function; which is a much more rugged one
than Howard's. Or what say we, Cholera Doctors? Ragged losels gathered
by beat of drum from the overcrowded streets of cities, and drilled a
little and dressed in red, do not they stand fire in an uncensurable
manner; and handsomely give their life, if needful, at the rate of a
shilling per day? Human virtue, if we went down to the roots of it, is
not so rare. The materials of human virtue are everywhere abundant
as the light of the sun: raw materials,--O woe, and loss, and scandal
thrice and threefold, that they so seldom are elaborated, and built into
a result! that they lie yet unelaborated, and stagnant in the souls of
wide-spread dreary millions, fermenting, festering; and issue at last as
energetic vice instead of strong practical virtue! A Mrs. Manning "dying
game,"--alas, is not that the foiled potentiality of a kind of heroine
too? Not a heroic Judith, not a mother of the Gracchi now, but a
hideous murderess, fit to be the mother of hyenas! To such extent can
potentialities be foiled. Education, kingship, command,--where is it,
whither has it fled? Woe a thousand times, that this, which is the
task of all kings, captains, priests, public speakers, land-owners,
book-writers, mill-owners, and persons possessing or pretending to
possess authority among mankind,--is left neglected among them all;
and instead of it so little done but protocolling, black-or-white
surplicing, partridge-shooting, parliamentary eloquence and popular
twaddle-literature; with such results as we see!--


Howard abated the Jail-fever; but it seems to me he has been the
innocent cause of a far more distressing fever which rages high just
now; what we may call the Benevolent-Platform Fever. Howard is to be
regarded as the unlucky fountain of that tumultuous frothy ocean-tide
of benevolent sentimentality, "abolition of punishment," all-absorbing
"prison-discipline," and general morbid sympathy, instead of hearty
hatred, for scoundrels; which is threatening to drown human society as
in deluges, and leave, instead of an "edifice of society" fit for
the habitation of men, a continent of fetid ooze inhabitable only by
mud-gods and creatures that walk upon their belly. Few things more
distress a thinking soul at this time.

Most sick am I, O friends, of this sugary disastrous jargon of
philanthropy, the reign of love, new era of universal brotherhood, and
not Paradise to the Well-deserving but Paradise to All-and-sundry, which
possesses the benighted minds of men and women in our day. My friends, I
think you are much mistaken about Paradise! "No Paradise for anybody:
he that cannot do without Paradise, go his ways:" suppose you tried that
for a while! I reckon that the safer version. Unhappy sugary brethren,
this is all untrue, this other; contrary to the fact; not a tatter of it
will hang together in the wind and weather of fact. In brotherhood with
the base and foolish I, for one, do not mean to live. Not in brotherhood
with them was life hitherto worth much to me; in pity, in hope not yet
quite swallowed of disgust,--otherwise in enmity that must last through
eternity, in unappeasable aversion shall I have to live with
these! Brotherhood? No, be the thought far from me. They are Adam's
children,--alas yes, I well remember that, and never shall forget it;
hence this rage and sorrow. But they have gone over to the dragons; they
have quitted the Father's house, and set up with the Old Serpent: till
they return, how can they be brothers? They are enemies, deadly to
themselves and to me and to you, till then; till then, while hope yet
lasts, I will treat them as brothers fallen insane;--when hope has
ended, with tears grown sacred and wrath grown sacred, I will cut them
off in the name of God! It is at my peril if I do not. With the servant
of Satan I dare not continue in partnership. Him I must put away,
resolutely and forever; "lest," as it is written, "I become partaker of
his plagues."

Beautiful Black Peasantry, who have fallen idle and have got the Devil
at your elbow; interesting White Felonry, who are not idle, but
have enlisted into the Devil's regiments of the line,--know that my
benevolence for you is comparatively trifling! What I have of
that divine feeling is due to others, not to you. A "universal
Sluggard-and-Scoundrel Protection Society" is not the one I mean to
institute in these times, where so much wants protection, and is sinking
to sad issues for want of it! The scoundrel needs no protection. The
scoundrel that will hasten to the gallows, why not rather clear the
way for him! Better he reach _his_ goal and outgate by the natural
proclivity, than be so expensively dammed up and detained, poisoning
everything as he stagnates and meanders along, to arrive at last a
hundred times fouler, and swollen a hundred times bigger! Benevolent men
should reflect on this.--And you Quashee, my pumpkin,--(not a bad fellow
either, this poor Quashee, when tolerably guided!)--idle Quashee, I say
you must get the Devil _sent away_ from your elbow, my poor dark friend!
In this world there will be no existence for you otherwise. No, not as
the brother of your folly will I live beside you. Please to withdraw out
of my way, if I am not to contradict your folly, and amend it, and put
it in the stocks if it will not amend. By the Eternal Maker, it is on
that footing alone that you and I can live together! And if you had
respectable traditions dated from beyond Magna Charta, or from beyond
the Deluge, to the contrary, and written sheepskins that would thatch
the face of the world,--behold I, for one individual, do not believe
said respectable traditions, nor regard said written sheepskins except
as things which _you_, till you grow wiser, will believe. Adieu,
Quashee; I will wish you better guidance than you have had of late.

On the whole, what a reflection is it that we cannot bestow on an
unworthy man any particle of our benevolence, our patronage, or whatever
resource is ours,--without withdrawing it, it and all that will grow
of it, from one worthy, to whom it of right belongs! We cannot, I
say; impossible; it is the eternal law of things. Incompetent Duncan
M'Pastehorn, the hapless incompetent mortal to whom I give the cobbling
of my boots,--and cannot find in my heart to refuse it, the poor drunken
wretch having a wife and ten children; he _withdraws_ the job from
sober, plainly competent, and meritorious Mr. Sparrowbill, generally
short of work too; discourages Sparrowbill; teaches him that he too may
as well drink and loiter and bungle; that this is not a scene for
merit and demerit at all, but for dupery, and whining flattery, and
incompetent cobbling of every description;--clearly tending to the ruin
of poor Sparrowbill! What harm had Sparrowbill done me that I should
so help to ruin him? And I couldn't save the insalvable M'Pastehorn;
I merely yielded him, for insufficient work, here and there a
half-crown,--which he oftenest drank. And now Sparrowbill also is
drinking!

Justice, Justice: woe betides us everywhere when, for this reason or
for that, we fail to do justice! No beneficence, benevolence, or other
virtuous contribution will make good the want. And in what a rate of
terrible geometrical progression, far beyond our poor computation,
any act of Injustice once done by us grows; rooting itself ever anew,
spreading ever anew, like a banyan-tree,--blasting all life under it,
for it is a poison-tree! There is but one thing needed for the world;
but that one is indispensable. Justice, Justice, in the name of Heaven;
give us Justice, and we live; give us only counterfeits of it, or
succedanea for it, and we die!


Oh, this universal syllabub of philanthropic twaddle! My friend, it is
very sad, now when Christianity is as good as extinct in all hearts, to
meet this ghastly-Phantasm of Christianity parading through almost all.
"I will clean your foul thoroughfares, and make your Devil's-cloaca of
a world into a garden of Heaven," jabbers this Phantasm, itself a
phosphorescence and unclean! The worst, it is written, comes from
corruption of the best:--Semitic forms now lying putrescent, dead and
still unburied, this phosphorescence rises. I say sometimes, such a
blockhead Idol, and miserable _White_ Mumbo-jumbo, fashioned out of
deciduous sticks and cast clothes, out of extinct cants and modern
sentimentalisms, as that which they sing litanies to at Exeter Hall and
extensively elsewhere, was perhaps never set up by human folly before.
Unhappy creatures, that is not the Maker of the Universe, not that,
look one moment at the Universe, and see! That is a paltry Phantasm,
engendered in your own sick brain; whoever follows that as a Reality
will fall into the ditch.

Reform, reform, all men see and feel, is imperatively needed. Reform
must either be got, and speedily, or else we die: and nearly all the men
that speak, instruct us, saying, "Have you quite done your interesting
Negroes in the Sugar Islands? Rush to the Jails, then, O ye reformers;
snatch up the interesting scoundrel-population there, to them be
nursing-fathers and nursing-mothers. And oh, wash, and dress, and teach,
and recover to the service of Heaven these poor lost souls: so, we
assure you, will society attain the needful reform, and life be still
possible in this world." Thus sing the oracles everywhere; nearly all
the men that speak, though we doubt not, there are, as usual, immense
majorities consciously or unconsciously wiser who hold their tongue. But
except this of whitewashing the scoundrel-population, one sees little
"reform" going on. There is perhaps some endeavor to do a little
scavengering; and, as the all-including point, to cheapen the terrible
cost of Government: but neither of these enterprises makes progress,
owing to impediments.

"Whitewash your scoundrel-population; sweep out your abominable gutters
(if not in the name of God, ye brutish slatterns, then in the name of
Cholera and the Royal College of Surgeons): do these two things;--and
observe, much cheaper if you please!"--Well, here surely is an Evangel
of Freedom, and real Program of a new Era. What surliest misanthrope
would not find this world lovely, were these things done: scoundrels
whitewashed; some degree of scavengering upon the gutters; and at a
cheap rate, thirdly? That surely is an occasion on which, if ever
on any, the Genius of Reform may pipe all hands!--Poor old Genius of
Reform; bedrid this good while; with little but broken ballot-boxes, and
tattered stripes of Benthamee Constitutions lying round him; and on the
walls mere shadows of clothing-colonels, rates-in-aid, poor-law unions,
defunct potato and the Irish difficulty,--he does not seem long for this
world, piping to that effect?


Not the least disgusting feature of this Gospel according to the
Platform is its reference to religion, and even to the Christian
Religion, as an authority and mandate for what it does. Christian
Religion? Does the Christian or any religion prescribe love
of scoundrels, then? I hope it prescribes a healthy hatred of
scoundrels;--otherwise what am I, in Heaven's name, to make of it? Me,
for one, it will not serve as a religion on those strange terms. Just
hatred of scoundrels, I say; fixed, irreconcilable, inexorable enmity
to the enemies of God: this, and not love for them, and incessant
whitewashing, and dressing and cockering of them, must, if you look
into it, be the backbone of any human religion whatsoever. Christian
Religion! In what words can I address you, ye unfortunates, sunk in the
slushy ooze till the worship of mud-serpents, and unutterable Pythons
and poisonous slimy monstrosities, seems to you the worship of God? This
is the rotten carcass of Christianity; this mal-odorous phosphorescence
of post-mortem sentimentalism. O Heavens, from the Christianity of
Oliver Cromwell, wrestling in grim fight with Satan and his incarnate
Blackguardisms, Hypocrisies, Injustices, and legion of human and
infernal angels, to that of eloquent Mr. Hesperus Fiddlestring
denouncing capital punishments, and inculcating the benevolence on
platforms, what a road have we travelled!

A foolish stump-orator, perorating on his platform mere benevolences,
seems a pleasant object to many persons; a harmless or insignificant
one to almost all. Look at him, however; scan him till you discern the
nature of him, he is not pleasant, but ugly and perilous. That
beautiful speech of his takes captive every long ear, and kindles into
quasi-sacred enthusiasm the minds of not a few; but it is quite in the
teeth of the everlasting facts of this Universe, and will come only
to mischief for every party concerned. Consider that little spouting
wretch. Within the paltry skin of him, it is too probable, he holds few
human virtues, beyond those essential for digesting victual: envious,
cowardly, vain, splenetic hungry soul; what heroism, in word or thought
or action, will you ever get from the like of him? He, in his necessity,
has taken into the benevolent line; warms the cold vacuity of his inner
man to some extent, in a comfortable manner, not by silently doing some
virtue of his own, but by fiercely recommending hearsay pseudo-virtues
and respectable benevolences to other people. Do you call that a good
trade? Long-eared fellow-creatures, more or less resembling himself,
answer, "Hear, hear! Live Fiddlestring forever!" Wherefrom follow
Abolition Congresses, Odes to the Gallows;--perhaps some dirty little
Bill, getting itself debated next Session in Parliament, to waste
certain nights of our legislative Year, and cause skipping in our
Morning Newspaper, till the abortion can be emptied out again and sent
fairly floating down the gutters.

Not with entire approbation do I, for one, look on that eloquent
individual. Wise benevolence, if it had authority, would order that
individual, I believe, to find some other trade: "Eloquent individual,
pleading here against the Laws of Nature,--for many reasons, I bid thee
close that mouth of thine. Enough of balderdash these long-eared have
now drunk. Depart thou; _do_ some benevolent work; at lowest, be silent.
Disappear, I say; away, and jargon no more in that manner, lest a worst
thing befall thee." _Exeat_ Fiddlestring!--Beneficent men are not they
who appear on platforms, pleading against the Almighty Maker's Laws;
these are the maleficent men, whose lips it is pity that some authority
cannot straightway shut. Pandora's Box is not more baleful than the
gifts these eloquent benefactors are pressing on us. Close your pedler's
pack, my friend; swift, away with it! Pernicious, fraught with mere woe
and sugary poison is that kind of benevolence and beneficence.

Truly, one of the saddest sights in these times is that of poor
creatures, on platforms, in parliaments and other situations, making and
unmaking "Laws;" in whose soul, full of mere vacant hearsay and windy
babble, is and was no image of Heaven's Law; whom it never struck that
Heaven had a Law, or that the Earth--could not have what kind of Law you
pleased! Human Statute-books, accordingly, are growing horrible to think
of. An impiety and poisonous futility every Law of them that is so
made; all Nature is against it; it will and can do nothing but mischief
wheresoever it shows itself in Nature: and such Laws lie now like an
incubus over this Earth, so innumerable are they. How long, O Lord, how
long!--O ye Eternities, Divine Silences, do you dwell no more, then, in
the hearts of the noble and the true; and is there no inspiration of
the Almighty any more vouchsafed us? The inspiration of the Morning
Newspapers--alas, we have had enough of that, and are arrived at the
gates of death by means of that!


"Really, one of the most difficult questions this we have in these
times, What to do with our criminals?" blandly observed a certain
Law-dignitary, in my hearing once, taking the cigar from his mouth, and
pensively smiling over a group of us under the summer beech-tree, as
Favonius carried off the tobacco-smoke; and the group said nothing, only
smiled and nodded, answering by new tobacco-clouds. "What to do with our
criminals?" asked the official Law-dignitary again, as if entirely at a
loss.--"I suppose," said one ancient figure not engaged in smoking, "the
plan would be to treat them according to the real law of the case; to
make the Law of England, in respect of them, correspond to the Law of
the Universe. Criminals, I suppose, would prove manageable in that way:
if we could do approximately as God Almighty does towards them; in a
word, if we could try to do Justice towards them."--"I'll thank you
for a definition of Justice?" sneered the official person in a cheerily
scornful and triumphant manner, backed by a slight laugh from the
honorable company; which irritated the other speaker.--"Well, I have no
pocket definition of Justice," said he, "to give your Lordship. It has
not quite been my trade to look for such a definition; I could rather
fancy it had been your Lordship's trade, sitting on your high place this
long while. But one thing I can tell you: Justice always is, whether we
define it or not. Everything done, suffered or proposed, in Parliament
or out of it, is either just or else unjust; either is accepted by the
gods and eternal facts, or is rejected by them. Your Lordship and I,
with or without definition, do a little know Justice, I will hope; if
we don't both know it and do it, we are hourly travelling down
towards--Heavens, must I name such a place! That is the place we are
bound to, with all our trading-pack, and the small or extensive budgets
of human business laid on us; and there, if we _don't know_ Justice, we,
and all our budgets and Acts of Parliament, shall find lodging when the
day is done!"--The official person, a polite man otherwise, grinned as
he best could some semblance of a laugh, mirthful as that of the ass
eating thistles, and ended in "Hah, oh, ah!"--

Indeed, it is wonderful to hear what account we at present give
ourselves of the punishment of criminals. No "revenge"--O Heavens, no;
all preachers on Sunday strictly forbid that; and even (at least
on Sundays) prescribe the contrary of that. It is for the sake of
"example," that you punish; to "protect society" and its purse and skin;
to deter the innocent from falling into crime; and especially withal,
for the purpose of improving the poor criminal himself,--or at lowest,
of hanging and ending him, that he may not grow worse. For the poor
criminal is, to be "improved" if possible: against him no "revenge" even
on week-days; nothing but love for him, and pity and help; poor fellow,
is he not miserable enough? Very miserable,--though much less so than
the Master of him, called Satan, is understood (on Sundays) to have long
deservedly been!

My friends, will you permit me to say that all this, to one poor
judgment among your number, is the mournfulest twaddle that human
tongues could shake from them; that it has no solid foundation in the
nature of things; and to a healthy human heart no credibility whatever.
Permit me to say, only to hearts long drowned in dead Tradition, and for
themselves neither believing nor disbelieving, could this seem credible.
Think, and ask yourselves, in spite of all this preaching and perorating
from the teeth outward! Hearts that are quite strangers to eternal Fact,
and acquainted only at all hours with temporary Semblances parading
about in a prosperous and persuasive condition; hearts that from
their first appearance in this world have breathed since birth, in
all spiritual matters, which means in all matters not pecuniary, the
poisonous atmosphere of universal Cant, could believe such a thing. Cant
moral, Cant religious, Cant political; an atmosphere which envelops all
things for us unfortunates, and has long done; which goes beyond
the Zenith and below the Nadir for us, and has as good as choked the
spiritual life out of all of us,--God pity such wretches, with little
or nothing _real_ about them but their purse and their abdominal
department! Hearts, alas, which everywhere except in the metallurgic
and cotton-spinning provinces, have communed with no Reality, or awful
Presence of a Fact, godlike or diabolic, in this Universe or this
unfathomable Life at all. Hunger-stricken asphyxied hearts, which have
nourished themselves on what they call religions, Christian religions.
Good Heaven, once more fancy the Christian religion of Oliver Cromwell;
or of some noble Christian man, whom you yourself may have been blessed
enough, once, long since, in your life, to know! These are not _untrue_
religions; they are the putrescences and foul residues of religions that
are extinct, that have plainly to every honest nostril been dead some
time, and the remains of which--O ye eternal Heavens, will the
nostril never be delivered from them!--Such hearts, when they get upon
platforms, and into questions not involving money, can "believe" many
things!--

I take the liberty of asserting that there is one valid reason, and
only one, for either punishing a man or rewarding him in this world; one
reason, which ancient piety could well define: That you may do the will
and commandment of God with regard to him; that you may do justice to
him. This is your one true aim in respect of him; aim thitherward, with
all your heart and all your strength and all your soul, thitherward,
and not elsewhither at all! This aim is true, and will carry you to
all earthly heights and benefits, and beyond the stars and Heavens. All
other aims are purblind, illegitimate, untrue; and will never carry you
beyond the shop-counter, nay very soon will prove themselves incapable
of maintaining you even there. Find out what the Law of God is with
regard to a man; make that your human law, or I say it will be ill with
you, and not well! If you love your thief or murderer, if Nature and
eternal Fact love him, then do as you are now doing. But if Nature and
Fact do _not_ love him? If they have set inexorable penalties upon
him, and planted natural wrath against him in every god-created human
heart,--then I advise you, cease, and change your hand.

Reward and punishment? Alas, alas, I must say you reward and punish
pretty much alike! Your dignities, peerages, promotions, your kingships,
your brazen statues erected in capital and county towns to our select
demigods of your selecting, testify loudly enough what kind of
heroes and hero-worshippers you are. Woe to the People that no longer
venerates, as the emblem of God himself, the aspect of Human Worth; that
no longer knows what human worth and unworth is! Sure as the Decrees of
the Eternal, that People cannot come to good. By a course too clear,
by a necessity too evident, that People will come into the hands of the
unworthy; and either turn on its bad career, or stagger downwards to
ruin and abolition. Does the Hebrew People prophetically sing "Ou'
clo'!" in all thoroughfares, these eighteen hundred years in vain?

To reward men according to their worth: alas, the perfection of this,
we know, amounts to the millennium! Neither is perfect punishment,
according to the like rule, to be attained,--nor even, by a legislator
of these chaotic days, to be too zealously attempted. But when he does
attempt it,--yes, when he summons out the Society to sit deliberative on
this matter, and consult the oracles upon it, and solemnly settle it in
the name of God; then, if never before, he should try to be a little
in the right in settling it!--In regard to reward of merit, I do not
bethink me of any attempt whatever, worth calling an attempt, on the
part of modern Governments; which surely is an immense oversight on
their part, and will one day be seen to have been an altogether fatal
one. But as to the punishment of crime, happily this cannot be quite
neglected. When men have a purse and a skin, they seek salvation at
least for these; and the Four Pleas of the Crown are a thing that
must and will be attended to. By punishment, capital or other, by
treadmilling and blind rigor, or by whitewashing and blind laxity, the
extremely disagreeable offences of theft and murder must be kept down
within limits.

And so you take criminal caitiffs, murderers, and the like, and hang
them on gibbets "for an example to deter others." Whereupon arise
friends of humanity, and object. With very great reason, as I consider,
if your hypothesis be correct. What right have you to hang any poor
creature "for an example"? He can turn round upon you and say, "Why make
an 'example' of me, a merely ill-situated, pitiable man? Have you no
more respect for misfortune? Misfortune, I have been told, is sacred.
And yet you hang me, now I am fallen into your hands; choke the life out
of me, for an example! Again I ask, Why make an example of me, for your
own convenience alone?"--All "revenge" being out of the question, it
seems to me the caitiff is unanswerable; and he and the philanthropic
platforms have the logic all on their side.

The one answer to him is: "Caitiff, we hate thee; and discern for some
six thousand years now, that we are called upon by the whole Universe
to do it. Not with a diabolic but with a divine hatred. God himself, we
have always understood, 'hates sin,' with a most authentic, celestial,
and eternal hatred. A hatred, a hostility inexorable, unappeasable,
which blasts the scoundrel, and all scoundrels ultimately, into black
annihilation and disappearance from the sum of things. The path of it
as the path of a flaming sword: he that has eyes may see it, walking
inexorable, divinely beautiful and divinely terrible, through the
chaotic gulf of Human History, and everywhere burning, as with
unquenchable fire, the false and death-worthy from the true and
life-worthy; making all Human History, and the Biography of every man, a
God's Cosmos in place of a Devil's Chaos. So is it, in the end; even
so, to every man who is a man, and not a mutinous beast, and has eyes to
see. To thee, caitiff, these things were and are, quite incredible;
to us they are too awfully certain,--the Eternal Law of this Universe,
whether thou and others will believe it or disbelieve. We, not to
be partakers in thy destructive adventure of defying God and all the
Universe, dare not allow thee to continue longer among us. As a palpable
deserter from the ranks where all men, at their eternal peril, are bound
to be: palpable deserter, taken with the red hand fighting thus against
the whole Universe and its Laws, we--send thee back into the whole
Universe, solemnly expel thee from our community; and will, in the name
of God, not with joy and exultation, but with sorrow stern as thy own,
hang thee on Wednesday next, and so end."

Other ground on which to deliberately slay a disarmed fellow-man I can
see none. Example, effects upon the public mind, effects upon this and
upon that: all this is mere appendage and accident; of all this I make
no attempt to keep account,--sensible that no arithmetic will or can
keep account of it; that its "effects," on this hand and on that,
transcend all calculation. One thing, if I can calculate it, will
include all, and produce beneficial effects beyond calculation, and
no ill effect at all, anywhere or at any time: What the Law of the
Universe, or Law of God, is with regard to this caitiff? That, by all
sacred research and consideration, I will try to find out; to that I
will come as near as human means admit; that shall be my exemplar and
"example;" all men shall through me see that, and be profited _beyond_
calculation by seeing it.

What this Law of the Universe, or Law made by God, is? Men at one time
read it in their Bible. In many Bibles, Books, and authentic symbols
and monitions of Nature and the World (of Fact, that is, and of
Human Speech, or Wise Interpretation of Fact), there are still clear
indications towards it. Most important it is, for this and for some
other reasons, that men do, in some way, get to see it a little! And if
no man could now see it by any Bible, there is written in the heart of
every man an authentic copy of it direct from Heaven itself: there, if
he have learnt to decipher Heaven's writing, and can read the sacred
oracles (a sad case for him if he altogether cannot), every born man may
still find some copy of it.

"Revenge," my friends! revenge, and the natural hatred of scoundrels,
and the ineradicable tendency to _revancher_ oneself upon them, and
pay them what they have merited: this is forevermore intrinsically a
correct, and even a divine feeling in the mind of every man. Only
the excess of it is diabolic; the essence I say is manlike, and even
godlike,--a monition sent to poor man by the Maker himself. Thou, poor
reader, in spite of all this melancholy twaddle, and blotting out of
Heaven's sunlight by mountains of horsehair and officiality, hast still
a human heart. If, in returning to thy poor peaceable dwelling-place,
after an honest hard day's work, thou wert to find, for example, a
brutal scoundrel who for lucre or other object of his, had slaughtered
the life that was dearest to thee; thy true wife, for example, thy true
old mother, swimming in her blood; the human scoundrel, or two-legged
wolf, standing over such a tragedy: I hope a man would have so much
divine rage in his heart as to snatch the nearest weapon, and put a
conclusion upon said human wolf, for one! A palpable messenger of Satan,
that one; accredited by all the Devils, to be put an end to by all the
children of God. The soul of every god-created man flames wholly into
one divine blaze of sacred wrath at sight of such a Devil's-messenger;
authentic firsthand monition from the Eternal Maker himself as to what
is next to be done. Do it, or be thyself an ally of Devil's-messengers;
a sheep for two-legged human wolves, well deserving to be eaten, as thou
soon wilt be!

My humane friends, I perceive this same sacred glow of divine wrath, or
authentic monition at first hand from God himself, to be the foundation
for all Criminal Law, and Official horsehair-and-bombazine procedure
against Scoundrels in this world. This first-hand gospel from the
Eternities, imparted to every mortal, this is still, and will forever
be, your sanction and commission for the punishment of human scoundrels.
See well how you will translate this message from Heaven and the
Eternities into a form suitable to this World and its Times. Let not
violence, haste, blind impetuous impulse, preside in executing it; the
injured man, invincibly liable to fall into these, shall not himself
execute it: the whole world, in person of a Minister appointed for that
end, and surrounded with the due solemnities and caveats, with bailiffs,
apparitors, advocates, and the hushed expectation of all men, shall do
it, as under the eye of God who made all men. How it shall be done? this
is ever a vast question, involving immense considerations. Thus Edmund
Burke saw, in the Two Houses of Parliament, with King, Constitution, and
all manner of Civil-Lists, and Chancellors' wigs and Exchequer budgets,
only the "method of getting twelve just men put into a jury-box:" that,
in Burke's view, was the summary of what they were all meant for. How
the judge will do it? Yes, indeed:--but let him see well that he does
do it: for it is a thing that must by no means be left undone! A
sacred gospel from the Highest: not to be smothered under horsehair
and bombazine, or drowned in platform froth, or in any wise omitted or
neglected, without the most alarming penalties to all concerned!

Neglect to treat the hero as hero, the penalties--which are inevitable
too, and terrible to think of, as your Hebrew friends can tell you--may
be some time in coming; they will only gradually come. Not all at once
will your thirty thousand Needlewomen, your three million Paupers, your
Connaught fallen into potential Cannibalism, and other fine consequences
of the practice, come to light;--though come to light they will; and
"Ou' clo'!" itself may be in store for you, if you persist steadily
enough. But neglect to treat even your declared scoundrel as scoundrel,
this is the last consummation of the process, the drop by which the cup
runs over; the penalties of this, most alarming, extensive, and such as
you little dream of, will straightway very rapidly come. Dim oblivion of
Right and Wrong, among the masses of your population, will come; doubts
as to Right and Wrong, indistinct notion that Right and Wrong are not
eternal, but accidental, and settled by uncertain votings and talkings,
will come. Prurient influenza of Platform Benevolence, and "Paradise
to All-and-sundry," will come. In the general putrescence of your
"religions," as you call them, a strange new religion, named of
Universal Love, with Sacraments mainly of--_Divorce_, with Balzac, Sue
and Company for Evangelists, and Madame Sand for Virgin, will come,--and
results fast following therefrom which will astonish you very much!

"The terrible anarchies of these years," says Crabbe, in his _Radiator_,
"are brought upon us by a necessity too visible. By the crime of
Kings,--alas, yes; but by that of Peoples too. Not by the crime of one
class, but by the fatal obscuration, and all but obliteration of the
sense of Right and Wrong in the minds and practices of every class. What
a scene in the drama of Universal History, this of ours! A world-wide
loud bellow and bray of universal Misery; _lowing_, with crushed
maddened heart, its inarticulate prayer to Heaven:--very pardonable to
me, and in some of its transcendent developments, as in the grand French
Revolution, most respectable and ever-memorable. For Injustice reigns
everywhere; and this murderous struggle for what they call 'Fraternity,'
and so forth has a spice of eternal sense in it, though so terribly
disfigured! Amalgam of sense and nonsense; eternal sense by the grain,
and temporary nonsense by the square mile: as is the habit with poor
sons of men. Which pardonable amalgam, however, if it be taken as the
pure final sense, I must warn you and all creatures, is unpardonable,
criminal, and fatal nonsense;--with which I, for one, will take care not
to concern myself!

"_Dogs should not be taught to eat leather_, says the old adage:
no;--and where, by general fault and error, and the inevitable nemesis
of things, the universal kennel is set to diet upon _leather_; and from
its keepers, its 'Liberal Premiers,' or whatever their title is, will
accept or expect nothing else, and calls it by the pleasant name of
progress, reform, emancipation, abolition-principles, and the like,--I
consider the fate of said kennel and of said keepers to be a thing
settled. Red republic in Phrygian nightcap, organization of labor _a la_
Louis Blanc; street-barricades, and then murderous cannon-volleys _a la_
Cavaignac and Windischgratz, follow out of one another, as grapes, must,
new wine, and sour all-splitting vinegar do: vinegar is but _vin-aigre_,
or the self-same 'wine' grown _sharp_! If, moreover, I find the Worship
of Human Nobleness abolished in any country, and a _new_ astonishing
Phallus-Worship, with universal Balzac-Sand melodies and litanies in
treble and in bass, established in its stead, what can I compute
but that Nature, in horrible throes, will repugn against such
substitution,--that, in short, the astonishing new Phallus-Worship, with
its finer sensibilities of the heart, and 'great satisfying loves,'
with its sacred kiss of peace for scoundrel and hero alike, with its
all-embracing Brotherhood, and universal Sacrament of Divorce, will have
to take itself away again!"


The Ancient Germans, it appears, had no scruple about public executions;
on the contrary, they thought the just gods themselves might fitly
preside over these; that these were a solemn and highest act of worship,
if justly done. When a German man had done a crime deserving death,
they, in solemn general assembly of the tribe, doomed him, and
considered that Fate and all Nature had from the beginning doomed him,
to die with ignominy. Certain crimes there were of a supreme nature;
him that had perpetrated one of these, they believed to have declared
himself a prince of scoundrels. Him once convicted they laid hold of,
nothing doubting; bore him, after judgment, to the deepest convenient
Peat-bog; plunged him in there, drove an oaken frame down over him,
solemnly in the name of gods and men: "There, prince of scoundrels, that
is what we have had to think of thee, on clear acquaintance; our grim
good-night to thee is that! In the name of all the gods lie there, and
be our partnership with thee dissolved henceforth. It will be better for
us, we imagine!"

My friends, after all this beautiful whitewash and humanity and
prison-discipline; and such blubbering and whimpering, and soft Litany
to divine and also to quite other sorts of Pity, as we have had for a
century now,--give me leave to admonish you that that of the Ancient
Germans too was a thing inexpressibly necessary to keep in mind. If that
is not kept in mind, the universal Litany to Pity is a mere universal
nuisance, and torpid blasphemy against the gods. I do not much respect
it, that purblind blubbering and litanying, as it is seen at present;
and the litanying over scoundrels I go the length of disrespecting,
and in some cases even of detesting. Yes, my friends, scoundrel is
scoundrel: that remains forever a fact; and there exists not in the
earth whitewash that can make the scoundrel a friend of this Universe;
he remains an enemy if you spent your life in whitewashing him. He won't
whitewash; this one won't. The one method clearly is, That, after fair
trial, you dissolve partnership with him; send him, in the name of
Heaven, whither _he_ is striving all this while and have done with him.
And, in a time like this, I would advise you, see likewise that you be
speedy about it! For there is immense work, and of a far hopefuler sort,
to be done _elsewhere_.


Alas, alas, to see once the "prince of scoundrels," the Supreme
Scoundrel, him whom of all men the gods liked worst, solemnly laid hold
of, and hung upon the gallows in sight of the people; what a lesson to
all the people! Sermons might be preached; the Son of Thunder and the
Mouth of Gold might turn their periods now with some hope; for here, in
the most impressive way, is a divine sermon acted. Didactic as no
spoken sermon could be. Didactic, devotional too;--in awed solemnity,
a recognition that Eternal Justice rules the world; that at the call of
this, human pity shall fall silent, and man be stern as his Master and
Mandatory is!--Understand too that except upon a basis of even such
rigor, sorrowful, silent, inexorable as that of Destiny and Doom, there
is no true pity possible. The pity that proves so possible and plentiful
without that basis, is mere _ignavia_ and cowardly effeminacy; maudlin
laxity of heart, grounded on blinkard dimness of head--contemptible as a
drunkard's tears.

To see our Supreme Scoundrel hung upon the gallows, alas, that is far
from us just now! There is a worst man in England, too,--curious to
think of,--whom it would be inexpressibly advantageous to lay hold
of, and hang, the first of all. But we do not know him with the least
certainty, the least approach even to a guess,--such buzzards and
dullards and poor children of the Dusk are we, in spite of our
Statistics, Unshackled Presses, and Torches of Knowledge;--not eagles
soaring sunward, not brothers of the lightnings and the radiances we;
a dim horn-eyed, owl-population, intent mainly on the catching of mice!
Alas, the supreme scoundrel, alike with the supreme hero, is very far
from being known. Nor have we the smallest apparatus for dealing
with either of them, if he were known. Our supreme scoundrel sits, I
conjecture, well-cushioned, in high places, at this time; rolls softly
through the world, and lives a prosperous gentleman; instead of sinking
him in peat-bogs, we mount the brazen image of him on high columns: such
is the world's temporary judgment about its supreme scoundrels; a mad
world, my masters. To get the supreme scoundrel always accurately the
first hanged, this, which presupposes that the supreme hero were always
the first promoted, this were precisely the millennium itself, clear
evidence that the millennium had come: alas, we must forbear hope of
this. Much water will run by before we see this.

And yet to quit all aim towards it; to go blindly floundering along,
wrapt up in clouds of horsehair, bombazine, and sheepskin officiality,
oblivious that there exists such an aim; this is indeed fatal. In every
human law there must either exist such an aim, or else the law is not a
human but a diabolic one. Diabolic, I say: no quantity of bombazine, or
lawyers' wigs, three-readings, and solemn trumpeting and bow-wowing
in high places or in low, can hide from me its frightful infernal
tendency;--bound, and sinking at all moments gradually to Gehenna,
this "law;" and dragging down much with it! "To decree _injustice_ by
a _law_:" inspired Prophets have long since seen, what every clear soul
may still see, that of all Anarchies and Devil-worships there is none
like this; that this is the "Throne of Iniquity" set up in the name of
the Highest, the human Apotheosis of Anarchy itself. "_Quiet_ Anarchy,"
you exultingly say? Yes; quiet Anarchy, which the longer it sits "quiet"
will have the frightfuler account to settle at last. For every doit of
the account, as I often say, will have to be settled one day, as sure as
God lives. Principal, and compound interest rigorously computed; and the
interest is at a terrible rate per cent in these cases! Alas, the aspect
of certain beatified Anarchies, sitting "quiet;" and of others in a
state of infernal explosion for sixty years back: this, the one view our
Europe offers at present, makes these days very sad.--

My unfortunate philanthropic friends, it is this long-continued oblivion
of the soul of law that has reduced the Criminal Question to such a pass
among us. Many other things have come, and are coming, for the same sad
reason, to a pass! Not the supreme scoundrel have our laws aimed at;
but, in an uncertain fitful manner, at the inferior or lowest scoundrel,
who robs shop-tills and puts the skin of mankind in danger. How can
Parliament get through the Criminal Question? Parliament, oblivious of
Heavenly Law, will find itself in hopeless _reductio ad absurdum_ in
regard to innumerable other questions,--in regard to all questions
whatsoever by and by. There will be no existence possible for Parliament
on these current terms. Parliament, in its law-makings, must really try
to attain some vision again of what Heaven's Laws are. A thing not
easy to do; a thing requiring sad sincerity of heart, reverence, pious
earnestness, valiant manful wisdom;--qualities not overabundant in
Parliament just now, nor out of it, I fear.

Adieu, my friends. My anger against you is gone; my sad reflections
on you, and on the depths to which you and I and all of us are sunk in
these strange times, are not to be uttered at present. You would have
saved the Sarawak Pirates, then? The Almighty Maker is wroth that the
Sarawak cut-throats, with their poisoned spears, are away? What must his
wrath be that the thirty thousand Needlewomen are still here, and the
question of "prevenient grace" not yet settled! O my friends, in sad
earnest, sad and deadly earnest, there much needs that God would mend
all this, and that we should help him to mend it!--And don't you think,
for one thing, "Farmer Hodge's horses" in the Sugar Islands are pretty
well "emancipated" now? My clear opinion farther is, we had better quit
the Scoundrel-province of Reform; better close that under hatches, in
some rapid summary manner, and go elsewhither with our Reform efforts. A
whole world, for want of Reform, is drowning and sinking; threatening to
swamp itself into a Stygian quagmire, uninhabitable by any noble-minded
man. Let us to the well-heads, I say; to the chief fountains of these
waters of bitterness; and there strike home and dig! To puddle in the
embouchures and drowned outskirts, and ulterior and ultimate issues and
cloacas of the affair: what profit can there be in that? Nothing to be
saved there; nothing to be fished up there, except, with endless peril
and spread of pestilence, a miscellany of broken waifs and dead dogs! In
the name of Heaven, quit that!




No. III. DOWNING STREET. [April 1, 1850.]

From all corners of the wide British Dominion there rises one complaint
against the ineffectuality of what are nicknamed our "red-tape"
establishments, our Government Offices, Colonial Office, Foreign
Office and the others, in Downing Street and the neighborhood. To me
individually these branches of human business are little known; but
every British citizen and reflective passer-by has occasion to wonder
much, and inquire earnestly, concerning them. To all men it is evident
that the social interests of one hundred and fifty Millions of us depend
on the mysterious industry there carried on; and likewise that the
dissatisfaction with it is great, universal, and continually increasing
in intensity,--in fact, mounting, we might say, to the pitch of settled
despair.

Every colony, every agent for a matter colonial, has his tragic tale
to tell you of his sad experiences in the Colonial Office; what blind
obstructions, fatal indolences, pedantries, stupidities, on the right
and on the left, he had to do battle with; what a world-wide jungle of
red-tape, inhabited by doleful creatures, deaf or nearly so to human
reason or entreaty, he had entered on; and how he paused in amazement,
almost in despair; passionately appealed now to this doleful creature,
now to that, and to the dead red-tape jungle, and to the living Universe
itself, and to the Voices and to the Silences;--and, on the whole, found
that it was an adventure, in sorrowful fact, equal to the fabulous
ones by old knights-errant against dragons and wizards in enchanted
wildernesses and waste howling solitudes; not achievable except by
nearly superhuman exercise of all the four cardinal virtues, and
unexpected favor of the special blessing of Heaven. His adventure
achieved or found unachievable, he has returned with experiences new
to him in the affairs of men. What this Colonial Office, inhabiting
the head of Downing Street, really was, and had to do, or try doing, in
God's practical Earth, he could not by any means precisely get to know;
believes that it does not itself in the least precisely know. Believes
that nobody knows;--that it is a mystery, a kind of Heathen myth;
and stranger than any piece of the old mythological Pantheon; for it
practically presides over the destinies of many millions of living men.

Such is his report of the Colonial Office: and if we oftener hear such
a report of that than we do of the Home Office, Foreign Office or the
rest,--the reason probably is, that Colonies excite more attention at
present than any of our other interests. The Forty Colonies, it appears,
are all pretty like rebelling just now; and are to be pacified with
constitutions; luckier Constitutions, let us hope, than some late ones
have been. Loyal Canada, for instance, had to quench a rebellion the
other year; and this year, in virtue of its constitution, it is
called upon to pay the rebels their damages; which surely is a rather
surprising result, however constitutional!--Men have rents and moneys
dependent in the Colonies; Emigration schemes, Black Emancipations,
New-Zealand and other schemes; and feel and publish more emphatically
what their Downing-Street woes in these respects have been.

Were the state of poor sallow English ploughers and weavers, what we may
call the Sallow or Yellow Emancipation interest, as much in object with
Exeter-Hall Philanthropists as that of the Black blockheads now all
emancipated, and going at large without work, or need of working, in
West-India clover (and fattening very much in it, one delights to hear),
then perhaps the Home Office, its huge virtual task better understood,
and its small actual performance better seen into, might be found still
more deficient, and behind the wants of the age, than the Colonial
itself is.

How it stands with the Foreign Office, again, one still less knows.
Seizures of Sapienza, and the like sudden appearances of Britain in the
character of Hercules-Harlequin, waving, with big bully-voice, her huge
sword-of-sharpness over field-mice, and in the air making horrid circles
(horrid catherine-wheels and death-disks of metallic terror from
said huge sword), to see how they will like it,--do from time to time
astonish the world, in a not pleasant manner. Hercules-Harlequin, the
Attorney Triumphant, the World's Busybody: none of these are parts this
Nation has a turn for; she, if you consulted her, would rather not play
these parts, but another! Seizures of Sapienza, correspondences with
Sotomayor, remonstrances to Otho King of Athens, fleets hanging by their
anchor in behalf of the Majesty of Portugal; and in short the whole,
or at present very nearly the whole, of that industry of protocolling,
diplomatizing, remonstrating, admonishing, and "having the honor to
be,"--has sunk justly in public estimation to a very low figure.

For in fact, it is reasonably asked, What vital interest has England
in any cause now deciding itself in foreign parts? Once there was a
Papistry and Protestantism, important as life eternal and death eternal;
more lately there was an interest of Civil Order and Horrors of the
French Revolution, important at least as rent-roll and preservation of
the game; but now what is there? No cause in which any god or man of
this British Nation can be thought to be concerned. Sham-kingship, now
recognized and even self-recognized everywhere to be sham, wrestles
and struggles with mere ballot-box Anarchy: not a pleasant spectacle to
British minds. Both parties in the wrestle professing earnest wishes of
peace to us, what have we to do with it except answer earnestly, "Peace,
yes certainly," and mind our affairs elsewhere. The British Nation has
no concern with that indispensable sorrowful and shameful wrestle now
going on everywhere in foreign parts. The British Nation already, by
self-experience centuries old, understands all that; was lucky enough
to transact the greater part of that, in noble ancient ages, while the
wrestle had not yet become a shameful one, but on both sides of it there
was wisdom, virtue, heroic nobleness fruitful to all time,--thrice-lucky
British Nation! The British Nation, I say, has nothing to learn there;
has now quite another set of lessons to learn, far ahead of what
is going on there. Sad example there, of what the issue is, and how
inevitable and how imminent, might admonish the British Nation to
be speedy with its new lessons; to bestir itself, as men in peril of
conflagration do, with the neighboring houses all on fire! To obtain,
for its own very pressing behoof, if by possibility it could, some real
Captaincy instead of an imaginary one: to remove resolutely, and replace
by a better sort, its own peculiar species of teaching and guiding
histrios of various name, who here too are numerous exceedingly, and
much in need of gentle removal, while the play is still good, and the
comedy has not yet become _tragic_; and to be a little swift about it
withal; and so to escape the otherwise inevitable evil day! This Britain
might learn: but she does not need a protocolling establishment, with
much "having the honor to be," to teach it her.

No:--she has in fact certain cottons, hardwares and such like to sell in
foreign parts, and certain wines, Portugal oranges, Baltic tar and
other products to buy; and does need, I suppose, some kind of Consul, or
accredited agent, accessible to British voyagers, here and there, in the
chief cities of the Continent: through which functionary, or through the
penny-post, if she had any specific message to foreign courts, it would
be easy and proper to transmit the same. Special message-carriers, to be
still called Ambassadors, if the name gratified them, could be sent when
occasion great enough demanded; not sent when it did not. But for all
purposes of a resident ambassador, I hear persons extensively and well
acquainted among our foreign embassies at this date declare, That a
well-selected _Times_ reporter or "own correspondent" ordered to reside
in foreign capitals, and keep his eyes open, and (though sparingly) his
pen going, would in reality be much more effective;--and surely we see
well, he would come a good deal cheaper! Considerably cheaper in expense
of money; and in expense of falsity and grimacing hypocrisy (of which no
human arithmetic can count the ultimate cost) incalculably cheaper!
If this is the fact, why not treat it as such? If this is so in any
measure, we had better in that measure admit it to be so! The time, I
believe, has come for asking with considerable severity, How far is it
so? Nay there are men now current in political society, men of weight
though also of wit, who have been heard to say, "That there was but one
reform for the Foreign Office,--to set a live coal under it," and with,
of course, a fire-brigade which could prevent the undue spread of the
devouring element into neighboring houses, let that reform it! In
such odor is the Foreign Office too, if it were not that the Public,
oppressed and nearly stifled with a mere infinitude of bad odors,
neglects this one,--in fact, being able nearly always to avoid the
street where it is, _escapes_ this one, and (except a passing curse,
once in the quarter or so) as good as forgets the existence of it.

Such, from sad personal experience and credited prevailing rumor, is the
exoteric public conviction about these sublime establishments in Downing
Street and the neighborhood, the esoteric mysteries of which are indeed
still held sacred by the initiated, but believed by the world to be mere
Dalai-Lama pills, manufactured let not refined lips hint how, and quite
_un_salvatory to mankind. Every one may remark what a hope animates the
eyes of any circle, when it is reported or even confidently asserted,
that Sir Robert Peel has in his mind privately resolved to go, one day,
into that stable of King Augeas, which appalls human hearts, so rich
is it, high-piled with the droppings of two hundred years; and
Hercules-like to load a thousand night-wagons from it, and turn running
water into it, and swash and shovel at it, and never leave it till the
antique pavement, and real basis of the matter, show itself clean again!
In any intelligent circle such a rumor, like the first break of day
to men in darkness, enlightens all eyes; and each says devoutly,
"_Faxitis_, O ye righteous Powers that have pity on us! All England
grateful, with kindling looks, will rise in the rear of him, and from
its deepest heart bid him good speed!"

For it is universally felt that some _esoteric_ man, well acquainted
with the mysteries and properties good and evil of the administrative
stable, is the fittest to reform it, nay can alone reform it otherwise
than by sheer violence and destruction, which is a way we would avoid;
that in fact Sir Robert Peel is, at present, the one likely or possible
man to reform it. And secondly it is felt that "reform" in that
Downing-Street department of affairs is precisely the reform which were
worth all others; that those administrative establishments in Downing
Street are really the Government of this huge ungoverned Empire; that
to clean out the dead pedantries, unveracities, indolent somnolent
impotences, and accumulated dung-mountains there, is the beginning of
all practical good whatsoever. Yes, get down once again to the actual
_pavement_ of that; ascertain what the thing is, and was before dung
accumulated in it; and what it should and may, and must, for the life's
sake of this Empire, henceforth become: here clearly lies the heart of
the whole matter. Political reform, if this be not reformed, is naught
and a mere mockery.

What England wants, and will require to have, or sink in nameless
anarchies, is not a Reformed Parliament, meaning thereby a Parliament
elected according to the six or the four or any other number of "points"
and cunningly devised improvements in hustings mechanism, but a Reformed
Executive or Sovereign Body of Rulers and Administrators,--some improved
method, innumerable improvements in our poor blind methods, of getting
hold of these. Not a better Talking-Apparatus, the best conceivable
Talking-Apparatus would do very little for us at present;--but an
infinitely better Acting-Apparatus, the benefits of which would be
invaluable now and henceforth. The practical question puts itself with
ever-increasing stringency to all English minds: Can we, by no industry,
energy, utmost expenditure of human ingenuity, and passionate invocation
of the Heavens and Earth, get to attain some twelve or ten or six men to
manage the affairs of this nation in Downing Street and the chief posts
elsewhere, who are abler for the work than those we have been used to,
this long while? For it is really a heroic work, and cannot be done by
histrios, and dexterous talkers having the honor to be: it is a heavy
and appalling work; and, at the starting of it especially, will
require Herculean men; such mountains of pedant exuviae and obscene
owl-droppings have accumulated in those regions, long the habitation
of doleful creatures; the old _pavements_, the natural facts and real
essential functions of those establishments, have not been seen by eyes
for these two hundred years last past! Herculean men acquainted with the
virtues of running water, and with the divine necessity of getting down
to the clear pavements and old veracities; who tremble before no amount
of pedant exuviae, no loudest shrieking of doleful creatures; who
tremble only to live, themselves, like inane phantasms, and to leave
their life as a paltry _contribution_ to the guano mountains, and not as
a divine eternal protest against them!

These are the kind of men we want; these, the nearest possible
approximation to these, are the men we must find and have, or go
bankrupt altogether; for the concern as it is will evidently not hold
long together. How true is this of Crabbe: "Men sit in Parliament
eighty-three hours per week, debating about many things. Men sit in
Downing Street, doing protocols, Syrian treaties, Greek questions,
Portuguese, Spanish, French, Egyptian and AEthiopian questions;
dexterously writing despatches, and having the honor to be. Not a
question of them is at all pressing in comparison with the English
question. Pacifico the miraculous Gibraltar Jew has been hustled by some
populace in Greece:--upon him let the British Lion drop, very rapidly
indeed, a constitutional tear. Radetzky is said to be advancing upon
Milan;--I am sorry to hear it, and perhaps it does deserve a despatch,
or friendly letter, once and away: but the Irish Giant, named of
Despair, is advancing upon London itself, laying waste all English
cities, towns and villages; that is the interesting Government despatch
of the day! I notice him in Piccadilly, blue-visaged, thatched in rags,
a blue child on each arm; hunger-driven, wide-mouthed, seeking whom he
may devour: he, missioned by the just Heavens, too truly and too sadly
their 'divine missionary' come at last in this authoritative manner,
will throw us all into Doubting Castle, I perceive! That is the
phenomenon worth protocolling about, and writing despatches upon, and
thinking of with all one's faculty day and night, if one wishes to have
the honor to be--anything but a Phantasm Governor of England just now!
I entreat your Lordship's all but undivided attention to that Domestic
Irish Giant, named of Despair, for a great many years to come. Prophecy
of him there has long been; but now by the rot of the potato (blessed be
the just gods, who send us either swift death or some beginning of
cure at last!), he is here in person, and there is no denying him, or
disregarding him any more; and woe to the public watchman that ignores
him, and sees Pacifico the Gibraltar Jew instead!"


What these strange Entities in Downing Street intrinsically are; who
made them, why they were made; how they do their function; and what
their function, so huge in appearance, may in net-result amount to,--is
probably known to no mortal. The unofficial mind passes by in dark
wonder; not pretending to know. The official mind must not blab;--the
official mind, restricted to its own square foot of territory in the
vast labyrinth, is probably itself dark, and unable to blab. We see the
outcome; the mechanism we do not see. How the tailors clip and sew, in
that sublime sweating establishment of theirs, we know not: that the
coat they bring us out is the sorrowfulest fantastic mockery of a coat,
a mere intricate artistic network of traditions and formalities, an
embroiled reticulation made of web-listings and superannuated thrums and
tatters, endurable to no grown Nation as a coat, is mournfully clear!--

Two kinds of fundamental error are supposable in such a set of Offices;
these two, acting and reacting, are the vice of all inefficient Offices
whatever.--_First_, that the work, such as it may be, is ill done in
these establishments. That it is delayed, neglected, slurred over,
committed to hands that cannot do it well; that, in a word, the
questions sent thither are not wisely handled, but unwisely; not decided
truly and rapidly, but with delays and wrong at last: which is the
principal character, and the infallible result, of an insufficient
Intellect being set to decide them. Or _second_, what is still fataler,
the work done there may itself be quite the wrong kind of work. Not
the kind of supervision and direction which Colonies, and other such
interests, Home or Foreign, do by the nature of them require from the
Central Government; not that, but a quite other kind! The Sotomayor
correspondence, for example, is considered by many persons not to
be mismanaged merely, but to be a thing which should never have been
managed at all; a quite superfluous concern, which and the like of which
the British Government has almost no call to get into, at this new epoch
of time. And not Sotomayor only, nor Sapienza only, in regard to that
Foreign Office, but innumerable other things, if our witty friend of the
"live coal" have reason in him! Of the Colonial Office, too, it is urged
that the questions they decide and operate upon are, in very great part,
questions which they never should have meddled with, but almost all
of which should have been decided in the Colonies themselves,--Mother
Country or Colonial Office reserving its energy for a quite other class
of objects, which are terribly neglected just now.

These are the two vices that beset Government Offices; both of them
originating in insufficient Intellect,--that sad insufficiency from
which, directly or indirectly, all evil whatsoever springs! And these
two vices act and react, so that where the one is, the other is sure to
be; and each encouraging the growth of the other, both (if some cleaning
of the Augeas stable have not intervened for a long while) will be found
in frightful development. You cannot have your work well done, if the
work be not of a right kind, if it be not work prescribed by the law of
Nature as well as by the rules of the office. Laziness, which lies in
wait round all human labor-offices, will in that case infallibly leak
in, and vitiate the doing of the work. The work is but idle; if the
doing of it will but pass, what need of more? The essential problem,
as the rules of office prescribe it for you, if Nature and Fact say
nothing, is that your work be got to pass; if the work itself is worth
nothing, or little or an uncertain quantity, what more can gods or men
require of it, or, above all, can I who am the doer of it require, but
that it be got to pass?

And now enters another fatal effect, the mother of ever-new mischiefs,
which renders well-doing or improvement impossible, and drives bad
everywhere continually into worse. The work being what we see, a stupid
subaltern will do as well as a gifted one; the essential point is, that
he be a quiet one, and do not bother me who have the driving of him.
Nay, for this latter object, is not a certain height of intelligence
even dangerous? I want no mettled Arab horse, with his flashing glances,
arched, neck and elastic step, to draw my wretched sand-cart through the
streets; a broken, grass-fed galloway, Irish garron, or painful ass with
nothing in the belly of him but patience and furze, will do it safelier
for me, if more slowly. Nay I myself, am I the worse for being of a
feeble order of intelligence; what the irreverent speculative, world
calls barren, red-tapish, limited, and even intrinsically dark and
small, and if it must be said, stupid?--To such a climax does it come
in all Government and other Offices, where Human Stupidity has once
introduced itself (as it will everywhere do), and no Scavenger God
intervenes. The work, at first of some worth, is ill done, and becomes
of less worth and of ever less, and finally of none: the worthless
work can now _afford_ to be ill done; and Human Stupidity, at a
double geometrical ratio, with frightful expansion grows and
accumulates,--towards the unendurable.

The reforming Hercules, Sir Robert Peel or whoever he is to be, that
enters Downing Street, will ask himself this question first of all, What
work is now necessary, not in form and by traditionary use and wont, but
in very fact, for the vital interests of the British Nation, to be done
here? The second question, How to get it well done, and to keep the
best hands doing it well, will be greatly simplified by a good answer to
that. Oh for an eye that could see in those hideous mazes, and a heart
that could dare and do! Strenuous faithful scrutiny, not of what is
_thought_ to be what in the red-tape regions, but of what really is
what in the realms of Fact and Nature herself; deep-seeing, wise and
courageous eyes, that could look through innumerable cobweb veils,
and detect what fact or no-fact lies at heart of them,--how invaluable
these! For, alas, it is long since such eyes were much in the habit
of looking steadfastly at any department of our affairs; and poor
commonplace creatures, helping themselves along, in the way of
makeshift, from year to year, in such an element, do wonderful works
indeed. Such creatures, like moles, are safe only underground, and their
engineerings there become very daedalean. In fact, such unfortunate
persons have no resource but to become what we call Pedants; to ensconce
themselves in a safe world of habitudes, of applicable or inapplicable
traditions; not coveting, rather avoiding the general daylight of
common-sense, as very extraneous to them and their procedure; by long
persistence in which course they become Completed Pedants, hidebound,
impenetrable, able to _defy_ the hostile extraneous element; an alarming
kind of men, Such men, left to themselves for a century or two, in any
Colonial, Foreign, or other Office, will make a terrible affair of it!

For the one enemy we have in this Universe is Stupidity, Darkness of
Mind; of which darkness, again, there are many sources, every _sin_ a
source, and probably self-conceit the chief source. Darkness of mind,
in every kind and variety, does to a really tragic extent abound: but of
all the kinds of darkness, surely the Pedant darkness, which asserts
and believes itself to be light, is the most formidable to mankind! For
empires or for individuals there is but one class of men to be trembled
at; and that is the Stupid Class, the class that cannot see, who alas
are they mainly that will not see. A class of mortals under which as
administrators, kings, priests, diplomatists, &c., the interests
of mankind in every European country have sunk overloaded, as under
universal nightmare, near to extinction; and indeed are at this moment
convulsively writhing, decided either to throw off the unblessed
superincumbent nightmare, or roll themselves and it to the Abyss. Vain
to reform Parliament, to invent ballot-boxes, to reform this or that;
the real Administration, practical Management of the Commonwealth,
goes all awry; choked up with long-accumulated pedantries, so that your
appointed workers have been reduced to work as moles; and it is one vast
boring and counter-boring, on the part of eyeless persons irreverently
called stupid; and a daedalean bewilderment, writing "impossible" on all
efforts or proposals, supervenes.


The State itself, not in Downing Street alone but in every department of
it, has altered much from what it was in past times; and it will again
have to alter very much, to alter I think from top to bottom, if it
means to continue existing in the times that are now coming and come!

The State, left to shape itself by dim pedantries and traditions,
without distinctness of conviction, or purpose beyond that of helping
itself over the difficulty of the hour, has become, instead of a
luminous vitality permeating with its light all provinces of our
affairs, a most monstrous agglomerate of inanities, as little adapted
for the actual wants of a modern community as the worst citizen need
wish. The thing it is doing is by no means the thing we want to have
done. What we want! Let the dullest British man endeavor to raise in his
mind this question, and ask himself in sincerity what the British Nation
wants at this time. Is it to have, with endless jargoning, debating,
motioning and counter-motioning, a settlement effected between the
Honorable Mr. This and the Honorable Mr. That, as to their respective
pretensions to ride the high horse? Really it is unimportant which of
them ride it. Going upon past experience long continued now, I should
say with brevity, "Either of them--Neither of them." If our Government
is to be a No-Government, what is the matter who administers it? Fling
an orange-skin into St. James's Street; let the man it hits be your man.
He, if you breed him a little to it, and tie the due official bladders
to his ankles, will do as well as another this sublime problem of
balancing himself upon the vortexes, with the long loaded-pole in his
hands; and will, with straddling painful gestures, float hither and
thither, walking the waters in that singular manner for a little while,
as well as his foregoers did, till he also capsize, and be left floating
feet uppermost; after which you choose another.

What an immense pother, by parliamenting and palavering in all corners
of your empire, to decide such a question as that! I say, if that is the
function, almost any human creature can learn to discharge it: fling out
your orange-skin again; and save an incalculable labor, and an emission
of nonsense and falsity, and electioneering beer and bribery and
balderdash, which is terrible to think of, in deciding. Your National
Parliament, in so far as it has only that question to decide, may be
considered as an enormous National Palaver existing mainly for imaginary
purposes; and certain, in these days of abbreviated labor, to get itself
sent home again to its partridge-shootings, fox-huntings, and above all,
to its rat-catchings, if it could but understand the time of day, and
know (as our indignant Crabbe remarks) that "the real Nimrod of this
era, who alone does any good to the era, is the rat-catcher!"

The notion that any Government is or can be a No-Government, without
the deadliest peril to all noble interests of the Commonwealth, and
by degrees slower or swifter to all ignoble ones also, and to the
very gully-drains, and thief lodging-houses, and Mosaic sweating
establishments, and at last without destruction to such No-Government
itself,--was never my notion; and I hope it will soon cease altogether
to be the world's or to be anybody's. But if it be the correct
notion, as the world seems at present to flatter itself, I point out
improvements and abbreviations. Dismiss your National Palaver; make the
_Times_ Newspaper your National Palaver, which needs no beer-barrels or
hustings, and is _cheaper_ in expense of money and of falsity a thousand
and a million fold; have an economical red-tape drilling establishment
(it were easier to devise such a thing than a right _Modern
University_);--and fling out your orange-skin among the graduates, when
you want a new Premier.

A mighty question indeed! Who shall be Premier, and take in hand the
"rudder of government," otherwise called the "spigot of taxation;" shall
it be the Honorable Felix Parvulus, or the Right Honorable Felicissimus
Zero? By our electioneerings and Hansard Debatings, and ever-enduring
tempest of jargon that goes on everywhere, we manage to settle that; to
have it declared, with no bloodshed except insignificant blood from
the nose in hustings-time, but with immense beershed and inkshed
and explosion of nonsense, which darkens all the air, that the Right
Honorable Zero is to be the man. That we firmly settle; Zero, all
shivering with rapture and with terror, mounts into the high saddle;
cramps himself on, with knees, heels, hands and feet; and the horse
gallops--whither it lists. That the Right Honorable Zero should attempt
controlling the horse--Alas, alas, he, sticking on with beak and claws,
is too happy if the horse will only gallop any-whither, and not throw
him. Measure, polity, plan or scheme of public good or evil, is not
in the head of Felicissimus; except, if he could but devise it, some
measure that would please his horse for the moment, and encourage him
to go with softer paces, godward or devilward as it might be, and save
Felicissimus's leather, which is fast wearing. This is what we call a
Government in England, for nearly two centuries now.

I wish Felicissimus were saddle-sick forever and a day! He is a dreadful
object, however much we are used to him. If the horse had not been bred
and broken in, for a thousand years, by real riders and horse-subduers,
perhaps the best and bravest the world ever saw, what would have become
of Felicissimus and him long since? This horse, by second-nature,
religiously respects all fences; gallops, if never so madly, on the
highways alone;--seems to me, of late, like a desperate Sleswick
thunder-horse who had lost his way, galloping in the labyrinthic lanes
of a woody flat country; passionate to reach his goal; unable to reach
it, because in the flat leafy lanes there is no outlook whatever, and
in the bridle there is no guidance whatever. So he gallops stormfully
along, thinking it is forward and forward; and alas, it is only round
and round, out of one old lane into the other;--nay (according to
some) "he mistakes _his own footprints_, which of course grow ever more
numerous, for the sign of a more and more frequented road;" and his
despair is hourly increasing. My impression is, he is certain soon, such
is the growth of his necessity and his despair, to--plunge _across_ the
fence, into an opener survey of the country; and to sweep Felicissimus
off his back, and comb him away very tragically in the process! Poor
Sleswicker, I wish you were better ridden. I perceive it lies in the
Fates you must now either be better ridden, or else not long at all.
This plunging in the heavy labyrinth of over-shaded lanes, with one's
stomach getting empty, one's Ireland falling into cannibalism, and no
vestige of a goal either visible or possible, cannot last.


Colonial Offices, Foreign, Home and other Offices, got together under
these strange circumstances, cannot well be expected to be the best that
human ingenuity could devise; the wonder rather is to see them so good
as they are. Who made them, ask me not. Made they clearly were; for we
see them here in a concrete condition, writing despatches, and drawing
salary with a view to buy pudding. But how those Offices in Downing
Street were made; who made them, or for what kind of objects they were
made, would be hard to say at present. Dim visions and phantasmagories
gathered from the Books of Horace Walpole, Memoirs of Bubb Doddington,
Memoirs of my Lady Sundon, Lord Fanny Hervey, and innumerable others,
rise on us, beckoning fantastically towards, not an answer, but some
conceivable intimations of an answer, and proclaiming very legibly the
old text, "_Quam parva sapientia_," in respect of this hard-working
much-subduing British Nation; giving rise to endless reflections in a
thinking Englishman of this day. Alas, it is ever so: each generation
has its task, and does it better or worse; greatly neglecting what is
not immediately its task. Our poor grandfathers, so busy conquering
Indias, founding Colonies, inventing spinning-jennies, kindling
Lancashires and Bromwichams, took no thought about the government of
all that; left it all to be governed by Lord Fanny and the Hanover
Succession, or how the gods pleased. And now we the poor grandchildren
find that it will not stick together on these terms any longer; that our
sad, dangerous and sore task is to discover some government for this
big world which has been conquered to us; that the red-tape Offices
in Downing Street are near the end of their rope; that if we can get
nothing better, in the way of government, it is all over with our world
and us. How the Downing-Street Offices originated, and what the meaning
of them was or is, let Dryasdust, when in some lucid moment the whim
takes him, instruct us. Enough for us to know and see clearly, with
urgent practical inference derived from such insight, That they were not
made for us or for our objects at all; that the devouring Irish Giant
is here, and that he cannot be fed with red-tape, and will eat us if we
cannot feed him.

On the whole, let us say Felicissimus made them;--or rather it was
the predecessors of Felicissimus, who were not so dreadfully hunted,
sticking to the wild and ever more desperate Sleswicker in the leafy
labyrinth of lanes, as he now is. He, I think, will never make anything;
but be combed off by the elm-boughs, and left sprawling in the ditch.
But in past time, this and the other heavy-laden red-tape soul had
withal a glow of patriotism in him; now and then, in his whirling
element, a gleam of human ingenuity, some eye towards business that must
be done. At all events, for him and every one, Parliament needed to
be persuaded that business was done. By the contributions of many such
heavy-laden souls, driven on by necessity outward and inward, these
singular Establishments are here. Contributions--who knows how far back
they go, far beyond the reign of George the Second, or perhaps the reign
of William Conqueror. Noble and genuine some of them were, many of them
were, I need not doubt: for there is no human edifice that stands long
but has got itself planted, here and there, upon the basis of fact;
and being built, in many respects, according to the laws of statics: no
standing edifice, especially no edifice of State, but has had the
wise and brave at work in it, contributing their lives to it; and is
"cemented," whether it know the fact or not, "by the blood of heroes!"
None; not even the Foreign Office, Home Office, still less the National
Palaver itself. William Conqueror, I find, must have had a first-rate
Home Office, for his share. The _Domesday Book_, done in four years,
and done as it is, with such an admirable brevity, explicitness and
completeness, testifies emphatically what kind of under-secretaries and
officials William had. Silent officials and secretaries, I suppose;
not wasting themselves in parliamentary talk; reserving all their
intelligence for silent survey of the huge dumb fact, silent
consideration how they might compass the mastery of that. Happy
secretaries, happy William!

But indeed nobody knows what inarticulate traditions, remnants of old
wisdom, priceless though quite anonymous, survive in many modern things
that still have life in them. Ben Brace, with his taciturnities, and
rugged stoical ways, with his tarry breeches, stiff as plank-breeches,
I perceive is still a kind of _Lod-brog_ (Loaded-breeks) in more senses
than one; and derives, little conscious of it, many of his excellences
from the old Sea-kings and Saxon Pirates themselves; and how many Blakes
and Nelsons since have contributed to Ben! "Things are not so false
always as they seem," said a certain Professor to me once: "of this
you will find instances in every country, and in your England more than
any--and I hope will draw lessons from them. An English Seventy-four, if
you look merely at the articulate law and methods of it, is one of the
impossiblest entities. The captain is appointed not by preeminent merit
in sailorship, but by parliamentary connection; the men [this was spoken
some years ago] are got by impressment; a press-gang goes out, knocks
men down on the streets of sea-towns, and drags them on board,--if the
ship were to be stranded, I have heard they would nearly all run ashore
and desert. Can anything be more unreasonable than a Seventy-four?
Articulately almost nothing. But it has inarticulate traditions, ancient
methods and habitudes in it, stoicisms, noblenesses, _true_ rules
both of sailing and of conduct; enough to keep it afloat on Nature's
veridical bosom, after all. See; if you bid it sail to the end of the
world, it will lift anchor, go, and arrive. The raging oceans do not
beat it back; it too, as well as the raging oceans, has a relationship
to Nature, and it does not sink, but under the due conditions is borne
along. If it meet with hurricanes, it rides them out; if it meet an
Enemy's ship, it shivers it to powder; and in short, it holds on its
way, and to a wonderful extent _does_ what it means and pretends to do.
Assure yourself, my friend, there is an immense fund of truth somewhere
or other stowed in that Seventy-four."


More important than the past history of these Offices in Downing Street,
is the question of their future history; the question, How they are
to be got mended! Truly an immense problem, inclusive of all others
whatsoever; which demands to be attacked, and incessantly persisted in,
by all good citizens, as the grand problem of Society, and the one thing
needful for the Commonwealth! A problem in which all men, with all their
wisdoms and all their virtues, faithfully and continually co-operating
at it, will never have done _enough_, and will still only be struggling
_towards_ perfection in it. In which some men can do much;--in which
every man can do something. Every man, and thou my present Reader canst
do this: _Be_ thyself a man abler to be governed; more reverencing the
divine faculty of governing, more sacredly detesting the diabolical
semblance of said faculty in self and others; so shalt thou, if not
govern, yet actually according to thy strength assist in real governing.
And know always, and even lay to heart with a quite unusual solemnity,
with a seriousness altogether of a religious nature, that as "Human
Stupidity" is verily the accursed parent of all this mischief, so
Human Intelligence alone, to which and to which only is victory and
blessedness appointed here below, will or can cure it. If we knew
this as devoutly as we ought to do, the evil, and all other evils were
curable;--alas, if we had from of old known this, as all men made in
God's image ought to do, the evil never would have been! Perhaps few
Nations have ever known it less than we, for a good while back, have
done. Hence these sorrows.

What a People are the poor Thibet idolaters, compared with us and
our "religions," which issue in the worship of King Hudson as our
Dalai-Lama! They, across such hulls of abject ignorance, have seen into
the heart of the matter; we, with our torches of knowledge everywhere
brandishing themselves, and such a human enlightenment as never was
before, have quite missed it. Reverence for Human Worth, earnest devout
search for it and encouragement of it, loyal furtherance and obedience
to it: this, I say, is the outcome and essence of all true "religions,"
and was and ever will be. We have not known this. No; loud as our
tongues sometimes go in that direction, we have no true reverence
for Human Intelligence, for Human Worth and Wisdom: none, or too
little,--and I pray for a restoration of such reverence, as for the
change from Stygian darkness to Heavenly light, as for the return
of life to poor sick moribund Society and all its interests. Human
Intelligence means little for most of us but Beaver Contrivance, which
produces spinning-mules, cheap cotton, and large fortunes. Wisdom,
unless it give us railway scrip, is not wise.

True nevertheless it forever remains that Intellect is the real object
of reverence, and of devout prayer, and zealous wish and pursuit, among
the sons of men; and even, well understood, the one object. It is the
Inspiration of the Almighty that giveth men understanding. For it must
be repeated, and ever again repeated till poor mortals get to discern
it, and awake from their baleful paralysis, and degradation under foul
enchantments, That a man of Intellect, of real and not sham Intellect,
is by the nature of him likewise inevitably a man of nobleness, a man
of courage, rectitude, pious strength; who, even _because_ he is and has
been loyal to the Laws of this Universe, is initiated into _discernment_
of the same; to this hour a Missioned of Heaven; whom if men follow, it
will be well with them; whom if men do not follow, it will not be well.
Human Intellect, if you consider it well, is the exact summary of Human
_Worth_; and the essence of all worth-ships and worships is reverence
for that same. This much surprises you, friend Peter; but I assure you
it is the fact;--and I would advise you to consider it, and to try
if you too do not gradually find it so. With me it has long been an
article, not of "faith" only, but of settled insight, of conviction as
to what the ordainments of the Maker in this Universe are. Ah, could you
and the rest of us but get to know it, and everywhere religiously
act upon it,--as our _Fortieth_ Article, which includes all the other
Thirty-nine, and without which the Thirty-nine are good for almost
nothing,--there might then be some hope for us! In this world there
is but one appalling creature: the Stupid man _considered_ to be the
Missioned of Heaven, and followed by men. He is our King, men say,
he;--and they follow him, through straight or winding courses, I for one
know well whitherward.

Abler men in Downing Street, abler men to govern us: yes, that, sure
enough, would gradually remove the dung-mountains, however high they
are; that would be the way, nor is there any other way, to remedy
whatsoever has gone wrong in Downing Street and in the wide regions,
spiritual and temporal, which Downing Street presides over! For the Able
Man, meet him where you may, is definable as the born enemy of Falsity
and Anarchy, and the born soldier of Truth and Order: into what
absurdest element soever you put him, he is there to make it a little
less absurd, to fight continually with it till it become a little sane
and human again. Peace on other terms he, for his part, cannot make with
it; not he, while he continues _able_, or possessed of real intellect
and not imaginary. There is but one man fraught with blessings for this
world, fated to diminish and successively abolish the curses of the
world; and it is he. For him make search, him reverence and follow; know
that to find him or miss him, means victory or defeat for you, in all
Downing Streets, and establishments and enterprises here below.--I leave
your Lordship to judge whether this has been our practice hitherto;
and would humbly inquire what your Lordship thinks is likely to be the
consequence of continuing to neglect this. It ought to have been our
practice; ought, in all places and all times, to be the practice in this
world; so says the fixed law of things forevermore:--and it must cease
to be _not_ the practice, your Lordship; and cannot too speedily do so I
think!--

Much has been done in the way of reforming Parliament in late years; but
that of itself seems to avail nothing, or almost less. The men that sit
in Downing Street, governing us, are not abler men since the Reform
Bill than were those before it. Precisely the same kind of men; obedient
formerly to Tory traditions, obedient now to Whig ditto and popular
clamors. Respectable men of office: respectably commonplace in
facility,--while the situation is becoming terribly original! Rendering
their outlooks, and ours, more ominous every day.

Indisputably enough the meaning of all reform-movement, electing and
electioneering, of popular agitation, parliamentary eloquence, and all
political effort whatsoever, is that you may get the ten Ablest Men in
England put to preside over your ten principal departments of affairs.
To sift and riddle the Nation, so that you might extricate and sift
out the true ten gold grains, or ablest men, and of these make your
Governors or Public Officers; leaving the dross and common sandy or
silty material safely aside, as the thing to be governed, not to govern;
certainly all ballot-boxes, caucuses, Kennington-Common meetings,
Parliamentary debatings, Red Republics, Russian Despotisms, and
constitutional or unconstitutional methods of society among mankind, are
intended to achieve this one end; and some of them, it will be owned,
achieve it very ill!--If you have got your gold grains, if the men
you have got are actually the ablest, then rejoice; with whatever
astonishment, accept your Ten, and thank the gods; under this Ten your
destruction will at least be milder than under another. But if you have
_not_ got them, if you are very far from having got them, then do not
rejoice at all, then _lament_ very much; then admit that your sublime
political constitutions and contrivances do not prove themselves
sublime, but ridiculous and contemptible; that your world's wonder of a
political mill, the envy of surrounding nations, does not yield you real
meal; yields you only powder of millstones (called Hansard Debatings),
and a detestable brown substance not unlike the grindings of dried
horse-dung or prepared street-mud, which though sold under royal
patent, and much recommended by the trade, is quite unfit for culinary
purposes!--


But the disease at least is not mysterious, whatever the remedy be. Our
disease,--alas, is it not clear as the sun, that we suffer under what is
the disease of all the miserable in this world, _want of wisdom_; that
in the Head there is no vision, and that thereby all the members are
dark and in bonds? No vision in the head; heroism, faith, devout insight
to discern what is needful, noble courage to do it, greatly defective
there: not seeing eyes there, but spectacles constitutionally ground,
which, to the unwary, _seem_ to see. A quite fatal circumstance, had
you never so many Parliaments! How is your ship to be steered by a Pilot
with no _eyes_ but a pair of glass ones got from the constitutional
optician? He must steer by the _ear_, I think, rather than by the eye;
by the shoutings he catches from the shore, or from the Parliamentary
benches nearer hand:--one of the frightfulest objects to see steering
in a difficult sea! Reformed Parliaments in that case, reform-leagues,
outer agitations and excitements in never such abundance, cannot profit:
all this is but the writhing, and painful blind convulsion of the
limbs that are in bonds, that are all in dark misery till the head be
delivered, till the pressure on the brain be removed.

Or perhaps there is now no heroic wisdom left in England; England, once
the land of heroes, is itself sunk now to a dim owlery, and habitation
of doleful creatures, intent only on money-making and other forms of
catching mice, for whom the proper gospel is the gospel of M'Croudy, and
all nobler impulses and insights are forbidden henceforth? Perhaps these
present agreeable Occupants of Downing Street, such as the parliamentary
mill has yielded them, are the _best_ the miserable soil had grown?
The most Herculean Ten Men that could be found among the English
Twenty-seven Millions, are these? There _are_ not, in any place, under
any figure, ten diviner men among us? Well; in that case, the riddling
and searching of the twenty-seven millions has been _successful_. Here
are our ten divinest men; with these, unhappily not divine enough, we
must even content ourselves and die in peace; what help is there? No
help, no hope, in that case.

But, again, if these are _not_ our divinest men, then evidently there
always is hope, there always is possibility of help; and ruin never is
quite inevitable, till we _have_ sifted out our actually divinest
ten, and set these to try their hand at governing!--That this has been
achieved; that these ten men are the most Herculean souls the English
population held within it, is a proposition credible to no mortal. No,
thank God; low as we are sunk in many ways, this is not yet credible!
Evidently the reverse of this proposition is the fact. Ten much diviner
men do certainly exist. By some conceivable, not forever impossible,
method and methods, ten very much diviner men could be sifted
out!--Courage; let us fix our eyes on that important fact, and strive
all thitherward as towards a door of hope!


Parliaments, I think, have proved too well, in late years, that they are
not the remedy. It is not Parliaments, reformed or other, that will ever
send Herculean men to Downing Street, to reform Downing Street for us;
to diffuse therefrom a light of Heavenly Order, instead of the murk of
Stygian Anarchy, over this sad world of ours. That function does not lie
in the capacities of Parliment. That is the function of a _King_,--if
we could get such a priceless entity, which we cannot just now! Failing
which, Statesmen, or Temporary Kings, and at the very lowest one real
Statesman, to shape the dim tendencies of Parliament, and guide them
wisely to the goal: he, I perceive, will be a primary condition,
indispensable for any progress whatsoever.

One such, perhaps, might be attained; one such might prove discoverable
among our Parliamentary populations? That one, in such an enterprise as
this of Downing Street, might be invaluable! One noble man, at once
of natural wisdom and practical experience; one Intellect still really
human, and not red-tapish, owlish and pedantical, appearing there in
that dim chaos, with word of command; to brandish Hercules-like the
divine broom and shovel, and turn running water in upon the place, and
say as with a fiat, "Here shall be truth, and real work, and talent
to do it henceforth; I will seek for able men to work here, as for the
elixir of life to this poor place and me:"--what might not one such man
effect there!

Nay one such is not to be dispensed with anywhere in the affairs of
men. In every ship, I say, there must be a _seeing_ pilot, not a mere
hearing one! It is evident you can never get your ship steered through
the difficult straits by persons standing ashore, on this bank and that,
and shouting _their_ confused directions to you: "'Ware that Colonial
Sandbank!--Starboard now, the Nigger Question!--Larboard, _larboard_,
the Suffrage Movement! Financial Reform, your Clothing-Colonels
overboard! The Qualification Movement, 'Ware-re-re!--Helm-a-lee! Bear a
hand there, will you! Hr-r-r, lubbers, imbeciles, fitter for a tailor's
shopboard than a helm of Government, Hr-r-r!"--And so the ship wriggles
and tumbles, and, on the whole, goes as wind and current drive. No ship
was ever steered except to destruction in that manner. I deliberately
say so: no ship of a State either. If you cannot get a real pilot on
board, and put the helm into his hands, your ship is as good as a wreck.
One real pilot on board may save you; all the bellowing from the banks
that ever was, will not, and by the nature of things cannot. Nay your
pilot will have to succeed, if he do succeed, very much in spite of said
bellowing; he will hear all that, and regard very little of it,--in a
patient mild-spoken wise manner, will regard all of it as what it is.
And I never doubt but there is in Parliament itself, in spite of its
vague palaverings which fill us with despair in these times, a dumb
instinct of inarticulate sense and stubborn practical English insight
and veracity, that would manfully support a Statesman who could take
command with really manful notions of Reform, and as one deserving to
be obeyed. Oh for one such; even one! More precious to us than all the
bullion in the Bank, or perhaps that ever was in it, just now!

For it is Wisdom alone that can recognize wisdom: Folly or Imbecility
never can; and that is the fatalest ban it labors under, dooming it to
perpetual failure in all things. Failure which, in Downing Street and
places of _command_ is especially accursed; cursing not one but hundreds
of millions! Who is there that can recognize real intellect, and do
reverence to it; and discriminate it well from sham intellect, which is
so much more abundant, and deserves the reverse of reverence? He that
himself has it!--One really human Intellect, invested with command, and
charged to reform Downing Street for us, would continually attract real
intellect to those regions, and with a divine magnetism search it out
from the modest corners where it lies hid. And every new accession of
intellect to Downing Street would bring to it benefit only, and would
increase such divine attraction in it, the parent of all benefit there
and elsewhere!


"What method, then; by what method?" ask many. Method, alas! To secure
an increased supply of Human Intellect to Downing Street, there will
evidently be no quite effectual "method" but that of increasing the
supply of Human Intellect, otherwise definable as Human Worth, in
Society generally; increasing the supply of sacred reverence for it, of
loyalty to it, and of life-and-death desire and pursuit of it, among
all classes,--if we but knew such a "method"! Alas, that were simply the
method of making all classes Servants of Heaven; and except it be devout
prayer to Heaven, I have never heard of any method! To increase the
reverence for Human Intellect or God's Light, and the detestation
of Human Stupidity or the Devil's Darkness, what method is there? No
method,--except even this, that we should each of us "pray" for it,
instead of praying for mere scrip and the like; that Heaven would please
to vouchsafe us each a little of it, one by one! As perhaps Heaven, in
its infinite bounty, by stern methods, gradually will? Perhaps Heaven
has mercy too in these sore plagues that are oppressing us; and means
to teach us reverence for Heroism and Human Intellect, by such baleful
experience of what issue Imbecility and Parliamentary Eloquence lead to?
Such reverence, I do hope, and even discover and observe, is silently
yet extensively going on among us even in these sad years. In which
small salutary fact there burns for us, in this black coil of universal
baseness fast becoming universal wretchedness, an inextinguishable
hope; far-off but sure, a divine "pillar of fire by night." Courage,
courage!--

Meanwhile, that our one reforming Statesman may have free command
of what Intellect there is among us, and room to try all means for
awakening and inviting ever more of it, there has one small Project
of Improvement been suggested; which finds a certain degree of favor
wherever I hear it talked of, and which seems to merit much more
consideration than it has yet received. Practical men themselves approve
of it hitherto, so far as it goes; the one objection being that the
world is not yet prepared to insist on it,--which of course the world
can never be, till once the world consider it, and in the first place
hear tell of it! I have, for my own part, a good opinion of this
project. The old unreformed Parliament of rotten boroughs _had_ one
advantage; but that is hereby, in a far more fruitful and effectual
manner, secured to the new.

The Proposal is, That Secretaries under and upper, that all manner of
changeable or permanent servants in the Government Offices shall
be selected without reference to their power of getting into
Parliament;--that, in short, the Queen shall have power of nominating
the half-dozen or half-score Officers of the Administration, whose
presence is thought necessary in Parliament, to official seats there,
without reference to any constituency but her own only, which of course
will mean her Prime Minister's. A very small encroachment on the present
constitution of Parliament; offering the minimum of change in present
methods, and I almost think a maximum in results to be derived
therefrom.--The Queen nominates John Thomas (the fittest man she, much
inquiring, can hear tell of in her three kingdoms) President of the
Poor-Law Board, Under Secretary of the Colonies, Under, or perhaps
even Upper Secretary of what she and her Premier find suitablest for a
working head so eminent, a talent so precious; and grants him, by her
direct authority, seat and vote in Parliament so long as he holds that
office. Upper Secretaries, having more to do in Parliament, and being
so bound to be in favor there, would, I suppose, at least till new times
and habits come, be expected to be chosen from among the _People's_
Members as at present. But whether the Prime Minister himself is, in all
times, bound to be first a People's Member; and which, or how many,
of his Secretaries and subordinates he might be allowed to take as
_Queen's_ Members, my authority does not say,--perhaps has not himself
settled; the project being yet in mere outline or foreshadow, the
practical embodiment in all details to be fixed by authorities much more
competent than he. The soul of his project is, That the Crown also have
power to elect a few members to Parliament.

From which project, however wisely it were embodied, there could
probably, at first or all at once, no great "accession of intellect" to
the Government Offices ensue; though a little might, even at first, and
a little is always precious: but in its ulterior operation, were that
faithfully developed, and wisely presided over, I fancy an immense
accession of intellect might ensue;--nay a natural ingress might thereby
be opened to all manner of accessions, and the actual flower of whatever
intellect the British Nation had might be attracted towards Downing
Street, and continue flowing steadily thither! For, let us see a little
what effects this simple change carries in it the possibilities of. Here
are beneficent germs, which the presence of one truly wise man as Chief
Minister, steadily fostering them for even a few years, with the sacred
fidelity and vigilance that would beseem him, might ripen into living
practices and habitual facts, invaluable to us all.

What it is that Secretaries of State, Managers of Colonial
Establishments, of Home and Foreign Government interests, have really
and truly to do in Parliament, might admit of various estimate in these
times. An apt debater in Parliament is by no means certain to be an able
administrator of Colonies, of Home or Foreign Affairs; nay, rather
quite the contrary is to be presumed of him; for in order to become a
"brilliant speaker," if that is his character, considerable portions of
his natural internal endowment must have gone to the surface, in order
to make a shining figure there, and precisely so much the less (few men
in these days know how much less!) must remain available in the internal
silent state, or as faculty for thinking, for devising and acting,
which latter and which alone is the function essential for him in his
Secretaryship. Not to tell a good story for himself "in Parliament and
to the twenty-seven millions, many of them fools;" not that, but to do
good administration, to know with sure eye, and decide with just and
resolute heart, what is what in the _things_ committed to his charge:
this and not that is the service which poor England, whatever it may
think and maunder, does require and want of the Official Man in Downing
Street. Given a good Official Man or Secretary, he really ought, as far
as it is possible, to be left working in the silent state. No mortal can
both work, and do good talking in Parliament, or out of it: the feat is
impossible as that of serving two hostile masters.

Nor would I, if it could be helped, much trouble my good Secretary with
addressing Parliament: needful explanations; yes, in a free country,
surely;--but not to every frivolous and vexatious person, in or out of
Parliament, who chooses to apply for them. There should be demands
for explanation too which were reckoned frivolous and vexatious, and
censured as such. These, I should say, are the not needful explanations:
and if my poor Secretary is to be called out from his workshop to answer
every one of these,--his workshop will become (what we at present see
it, deservedly or not) little other than a pillory; the poor Secretary
a kind of talking-machine, exposed to dead cats and rotten eggs; and
the "work" got out of him or of it will, as heretofore, be very
inconsiderable indeed!--Alas, on this side also, important improvements
are conceivable; and will even, I imagine, get them whence we may, be
found indispensable one day. The honorable gentleman whom you interrupt
here, he, in his official capacity, is not an individual now, but the
embodiment of a Nation; he is the "People of England" engaged in the
work of Secretaryship, this one; and cannot forever afford to let the
three Tailors of Tooley Street break in upon him at all hours!--

But leaving this, let us remark one thing which is very plain: That
whatever be the uses and duties, real or supposed, of a Secretary
in Parliament, his faculty to accomplish these is a point entirely
unconnected with his ability to get elected into Parliament, and has
no relation or proportion to it, and no concern with it whatever.
Lord Tommy and the Honorable John are not a whit better qualified for
Parliamentary duties, to say nothing of Secretary duties, than plain
Tom and Jack; they are merely better qualified, as matters stand,
for getting admitted to try them. Which state of matters a reforming
Premier, much in want of abler men to help him, now proposes altering.
Tom and Jack, once admitted by the Queen's writ, there is every reason
to suppose will do quite as well there as Lord Tommy and the Honorable
John. In Parliament quite as well: and elsewhere, in the other
infinitely more important duties of a Government Office, which indeed
are and remain the essential, vital and intrinsic duties of such a
personage, is there the faintest reason to surmise that Tom and Jack,
if well chosen, will fall short of Lord Tommy and the Honorable John? No
shadow of a reason. Were the intrinsic genius of the men exactly equal,
there is no shadow of a reason: but rather there is quite the reverse;
for Tom and Jack have been at least workers all their days, not idlers,
game-preservers and mere human clothes-horses, at any period of their
lives; and have gained a schooling _thereby_, of which Lord Tommy and
the Honorable John, unhappily strangers to it for most part, can form no
conception! Tom and Jack have already, on this most narrow hypothesis,
a decided _superiority_ of likelihood over Lord Tommy and the Honorable
John.

But the hypothesis is very narrow, and the fact is very wide; the
hypothesis counts by units, the fact by millions. Consider how many Toms
and Jacks there are to choose from, well or ill! The aristocratic class
from whom Members of Parliament can be elected extends only to certain
thousands; from these you are to choose your Secretary, if a seat in
Parliament is the primary condition. But the general population is of
Twenty-seven Millions; from all sections of which you can choose, if
the seat in Parliament is not to be primary. Make it ultimate instead of
primary, a last investiture instead of a first indispensable condition,
and the whole British Nation, learned, unlearned, professional,
practical, speculative and miscellaneous, is at your disposal! In the
lowest broad strata of the population, equally as in the highest and
narrowest, are produced men of every kind of genius; man for man, your
chance of genius is as good among the millions as among the units;--and
class for class, what must it be! From all classes, not from certain
hundreds now but from several millions, whatsoever man the gods had
gifted with intellect and nobleness, and power to help his country,
could be chosen: O Heavens, could,--if not by Tenpound Constituencies
and the force of beer, then by a Reforming Premier with eyes in his
head, who I think might do it quite infinitely better. Infinitely
better. For ignobleness cannot, by the nature of it, choose the noble:
no, there needs a seeing man who is himself noble, cognizant by internal
experience of the symptoms of nobleness. Shall we never think of this;
shall we never more remember this, then? It is forever true; and Nature
and Fact, however we may rattle our ballot-boxes, do at no time forget
it.

From the lowest and broadest stratum of Society, where the births are by
the million, there was born, almost in our own memory, a Robert Burns;
son of one who "had not capital for his poor moor-farm of Twenty
Pounds a year." Robert Burns never had the smallest chance to got into
Parliament, much as Robert Burns deserved, for all our sakes, to have
been found there. For the man--it was not known to men purblind, sunk
in their poor dim vulgar element, but might have been known to men of
insight who had any loyalty or any royalty of their own--was a born king
of men: full of valor, of intelligence and heroic nobleness; fit for
far other work than to break his heart among poor mean mortals, gauging
beer! Him no Tenpound Constituency chose, nor did any Reforming Premier:
in the deep-sunk British Nation, overwhelmed in foggy stupor, with the
loadstars all gone out for it, there was no whisper of a notion that it
could be desirable to choose him,--except to come and dine with you, and
in the interim to gauge. And yet heaven-born Mr. Pitt, at that period,
was by no means without need of Heroic Intellect, for other purposes
than gauging! But sorrowful strangulation by red-tape, much _tighter_
then than it now is when so many revolutionary earthquakes have tussled
it, quite tied up the meagre Pitt; and he said, on hearing of this Burns
and his sad hampered case, "Literature will take care of itself."--"Yes,
and of you too, if you don't mind it!" answers one.

And so, like Apollo taken for a Neat-herd, and perhaps for none of the
best on the Admetus establishment, this new Norse Thor had to put
up with what was going; to gauge ale, and be thankful; pouring his
celestial sunlight through Scottish Song-writing,--the narrowest chink
ever offered to a Thunder-god before! And the meagre Pitt, and his
Dundasses and red-tape Phantasms (growing very ghastly now to think of),
did not in the least know or understand, the impious, god-forgetting
mortals, that Heroic Intellects, if Heaven were pleased to send such,
were the one salvation for the world and for them and all of us. No;
they "had done very well without" such; did not see the use of such;
went along "very well" without such; well presided over by a singular
Heroic Intellect called George the Third: and the Thunder-god, as was
rather fit of him, departed early, still in the noon of life, somewhat
weary of gauging ale!--O Peter, what a scandalous torpid element of
yellow London fog, favorable to owls only and their mousing operations,
has blotted out the stars of Heaven for us these several generations
back,--which, I rejoice to see, is now visibly about to take itself away
again, or perhaps to be _dispelled_ in a very tremendous manner!


For the sake of my Democratic friends, one other observation. Is
not this Proposal the very essence of whatever truth there is in
"Democracy;" this, that the able man be chosen, in whatever rank be
is found? That he be searched for as hidden treasure is; be trained,
supervised, set to the work which he alone is fit for. All Democracy
lies in this; this, I think, is worth all the ballot-boxes and
suffrage-movements now going. Not that the noble soul, born poor, should
be set to spout in Parliament, but that he should be set to assist in
governing men: this is our grand Democratic interest. With this we
can be saved; without this, were there a Parliament spouting in
every parish, and Hansard Debates to stem the Thames, we perish,--die
constitutionally drowned, in mere oceans of palaver.

All reformers, constitutional persons, and men capable of reflection,
are invited to reflect on these things. Let us brush the cobwebs from
our eyes; let us bid the inane traditions be silent for a moment; and
ask ourselves, like men dreadfully intent on having it _done_, "By what
method or methods can the able men from every rank of life be gathered,
as diamond-grains from the general mass of sand: the able men, not
the sham-able;--and set to do the work of governing, contriving,
administering and guiding for us!" It is the question of questions.
All that Democracy ever meant lies there: the attainment of a truer and
truer Aristocracy, or Government again by the _Best_.

Reformed Parliaments have lamentably failed to attain it for us; and I
believe will and must forever fail. One true Reforming Statesman, one
noble worshipper and knower of human intellect, with the quality of an
experienced Politician too; he, backed by such a Parliament as England,
once recognizing him, would loyally send, and at liberty to choose his
working subalterns from all the Englishmen alive; he surely might do
something? Something, by one means or another, is becoming fearfully
necessary to be done! He, I think, might accomplish more for us in
ten years, than the best conceivable Reformed Parliament, and utmost
extension of the suffrage, in twice or ten times ten.

What is extremely important too, you could try this method with safety;
extension of the suffrage you cannot so try. With even an approximately
heroic Prime Minister, you could get nothing but good from prescribing
to him thus, to choose the fittest man, under penalties; to choose, not
the fittest of the four or the three men that were in Parliament, but
the fittest from the whole Twenty-seven Millions that he could hear
of,--at his peril. Nothing but good from this. From extension of
the suffrage, some think, you might get quite other than good. From
extension of the suffrage, till it became a universal counting of heads,
one sees not in the least what wisdom could be extracted. A Parliament
of the Paris pattern, such as we see just now, might be extracted: and
from that? Solution into universal slush; drownage of all interests
divine and human, in a Noah's-Deluge of Parliamentary eloquence,--such
as we hope our sins, heavy and manifold though they are, have not yet
quite deserved!


Who, then, is to be the Reforming Statesman, and begin the noble work
for us? He is the preliminary; one such; with him we may prosecute the
enterprise to length after length; without him we cannot stir in it at
all. A true _king_, temporary king, that dare undertake the government
of Britain, on condition of beginning in sacred earnest to "reform" it,
not at this or that extremity, but at the heart and centre. That will
expurgate Downing Street, and the practical Administration of our
Affairs; clear out its accumulated mountains of pendantries and cobwebs;
bid the Pedants and the Dullards depart, bid the Gifted and the Seeing
enter and inhabit. So that henceforth there be Heavenly light there,
instead of Stygian dusk; that God's vivifying light instead of Satan's
deadening and killing dusk, may radiate therefrom, and visit with
healing all regions of this British Empire,--which now writhes through
every limb of it, in dire agony as if of death! The enterprise is great,
the enterprise may be called formidable and even awful; but there is
none nobler among the sublunary affairs of mankind just now. Nay tacitly
it is the enterprise of every man who undertakes to be British Premier
in these times;--and I cannot esteem him an enviable Premier who,
because the engagement is _tacit_, flatters himself that it does not
exist! "Show it me in the bond," he says. Your Lordship, it actually
exists: and I think you will see it yet, in another kind of "bond" than
that sheepskin one!


But truly, in any time, what a strange feeling, enough to alarm a very
big Lordship, this: that he, of the size he is, has got to the apex of
English affairs! Smallest wrens, we know, by training and the aid
of machinery, are capable of many things. For this world abounds in
miraculous combinations, far transcending anything they do at Drury Lane
in the melodramatic way. A world which, as solid as it looks, is made
all of aerial and even of spiritual stuff; permeated all by incalculable
sleeping forces and electricities; and liable to go off, at any
time, into the hugest developments, upon a scratch thoughtfully or
thoughtlessly given on the right point:--Nay, for every one of us, could
not the sputter of a poor pistol-shot shrivel the Immensities together
like a burnt scroll, and make the Heavens and the Earth pass away with a
great noise? Smallest wrens, and canary-birds of some dexterity, can be
trained to handle lucifer-matches; and have, before now, fired off
whole powder-magazines and parks of artillery. Perhaps without much
astonishment to the canary-bird. The canary-bird can hold only its own
quantity of astonishment; and may possibly enough retain its presence of
mind, were even Doomsday to come. It is on this principle that I explain
to myself the equanimity of some men and Premiers whom we have known.

This and the other Premier seems to take it with perfect coolness. And
yet, I say, what a strange feeling, to find himself Chief Governor
of England; girding on, upon his moderately sized new soul, the old
battle-harness of an Oliver Cromwell, an Edward Longshanks, a William
Conqueror. "I, then, am the Ablest of English attainable Men? This
English People, which has spread itself over all lands and seas, and
achieved such works in the ages,--which has done America, India, the
Lancashire Cotton-trade, Bromwicham Iron-trade, Newton's Principia,
Shakspeare's Dramas, and the British Constitution,--the apex of all its
intelligences and mighty instincts and dumb longings: it is I? William
Conqueror's big gifts, and Edward's and Elizabeth's; Oliver's lightning
soul, noble as Sinai and the thunders of the Lord: these are mine, I
begin to perceive,--to a certain extent. These heroisms have I,--though
rather shy of exhibiting them. These; and something withal of the
huge beaver-faculty of our Arkwrights, Brindleys; touches too of
the phoenix-melodies and _sunny_ heroisms of our Shakspeares, of
our Singers, Sages and inspired Thinkers all this is in me, I will
hope,--though rather shy of exhibiting it on common occasions. The
Pattern Englishman, raised by solemn acclamation upon the bucklers of
the English People, and saluted with universal 'God save THEE!'--has
now the honor to announce himself. After fifteen hundred years of
constitutional study as to methods of raising on the bucklers, which
is the operation of operations, the English People, surely pretty well
skilled in it by this time, has raised--the remarkable individual now
addressing you. The best-combined sample of whatsoever divine qualities
are in this big People, the consummate flower of all that they have done
and been, the ultimate product of the Destinies, and English man of men,
arrived at last in the fulness of time, is--who think you? Ye worlds,
the Ithuriel javelin by which, with all these heroisms and accumulated
energies old and new, the English People means to smite and pierce, is
this poor tailor's-bodkin, hardly adequate to bore an eylet-hole, who
now has the honor to"--Good Heavens, if it were not that men generally
are very much of the canary-bird, here, are reflections sufficient to
annihilate any man, almost before starting!

But to us also it ought to be a very strange reflection! This, then,
is the length we have brought it to, with our constitutioning, and
ballot-boxing, and incessant talk and effort in every kind for so
many centuries back; this? The golden flower of our grand alchemical
projection, which has set the world in astonishment so long, and been
the envy of surrounding nations, is--what we here see. To be governed by
his Lordship, and guided through the undiscovered paths of Time by this
respectable degree of human faculty. With our utmost soul's travail we
could discover, by the sublimest methods eulogized by all the world, no
abler Englishman than this?

Really it should make us pause upon the said sublime methods, and ask
ourselves very seriously, whether, notwithstanding the eulogy of all
the world, they can be other than extremely astonishing methods, that
require revisal and reconsideration very much indeed! For the kind of
"man" we get to govern us, all conclusions whatsoever centre there, and
likewise all manner of issues flow infallibly therefrom. "Ask well, who
is your Chief Governor," says one: "for around him men like to him will
infallibly gather, and by degrees all the world will be made in his
image." "He who is himself a noble man, has a chance to know the
nobleness of men; he who is not, has none. And as for the poor
Public,--alas, is not the kind of 'man' you set upon it the liveliest
symbol of its and your veracity and victory and blessedness, or
unveracity and misery and cursedness; the general summation and
practical outcome of all else whatsoever in the Public and in you?"

Time was when an incompetent Governor could not be permitted among men.
He was, and had to be, by one method or the other, clutched up from his
place at the helm of affairs, and hurled down into the hold, perhaps
even overboard, if he could not really steer. And we call those ages
barbarous, because they shuddered to see a Phantasm at the helm of their
affairs; an eyeless Pilot with constitutional spectacles, steering by
the ear mainly? And we have changed all that; no-government is now the
best; and a tailor's foreman, who gives no trouble, is preferable to any
other for governing? My friends, such truly is the current idea; but you
dreadfully mistake yourselves, and the fact is not such. The fact, now
beginning to disclose itself again in distressed Needlewomen, famishing
Connaughts, revolting Colonies, and a general rapid advance towards
Social Ruin, remains really what it always was, and will so remain!

Men have very much forgotten it at present; and only here a man and
there a man begins again to bethink himself of it: but all men will
gradually get reminded of it, perhaps terribly to their cost; and the
sooner they all lay it to heart again, I think it will be the better.
For in spite of our oblivion of it, the thing remains forever true; nor
is there any Constitution or body of Constitutions, were they clothed
with never such venerabilities and general acceptabilities, that avails
to deliver a Nation from the consequences of forgetting it. Nature,
I assure you, does forevermore remember it; and a hundred British
Constitutions are but as a hundred cobwebs between her and the penalty
she levies for forgetting it. Tell me what kind of man governs a People,
you tell me, with much exactness, what the net sum-total of social worth
in that People has for some time been. Whether _they_ have loved
the phylacteries or the eternal noblenesses; whether they have been
struggling heavenward like eagles, brothers of the radiances, or groping
owl-like with horn-eyed diligence, catching mice and balances at their
banker's,--poor devils, you will see it all in that one fact. A fact
long prepared beforehand; which, if it is a peaceably received one, must
have been acquiesced in, judged to be "best," by the poor mousing owls,
intent only to have a large balance at their banker's and keep a whole
skin.

Such sordid populations, which were long blind to Heaven's light,
are getting themselves burnt up rapidly, in these days, by
street-insurrection and Hell-fire;--as is indeed inevitable, my esteemed
M'Croudy! Light, accept the blessed light, if you will have it when
Heaven vouchsafes. You refuse? You prefer Delolme on the British
Constitution, the Gospel according to M'Croudy, and a good balance at
your banker's? Very well: the "light" is more and more withdrawn; and
for some time you have a general dusk, very favorable for catching
mice; and the opulent owlery is very "happy," and well-off at its
banker's;--and furthermore, by due sequence, infallible as the
foundations of the Universe and Nature's oldest law, the light _returns_
on you, condensed, this time, into _lightning_, which there is not any
skin whatever too thick for taking in!




No. IV. THE NEW DOWNING STREET. [April 15, 1850.]

In looking at this wreck of Governments in all European countries, there
is one consideration that suggests itself, sadly elucidative of our
modern epoch. These Governments, we may be well assured, have gone to
anarchy for this one reason inclusive of every other whatsoever, That
they were not wise enough; that the spiritual talent embarked in
them, the virtue, heroism, intellect, or by whatever other synonyms we
designate it, was not adequate,--probably had long been inadequate, and
so in its dim helplessness had suffered, or perhaps invited falsity
to introduce itself; had suffered injustices, and solecisms, and
contradictions of the Divine Fact, to accumulate in more than tolerable
measure; whereupon said Governments were overset, and declared before
all creatures to be too false.

This is a reflection sad but important to the modern Governments now
fallen anarchic, That they had not spiritual talent enough. And if this
is so, then surely the question, How these Governments came to sink for
_want_ of intellect? is a rather interesting one. Intellect, in some
measure, is born into every Century; and the Nineteenth flatters itself
that it is rather distinguished that way! What had become of this
celebrated Nineteenth Century's intellect? Surely some of it existed,
and was "developed" withal;--nay in the "undeveloped," unconscious, or
inarticulate state, it is not dead; but alive and at work, if mutely
not less beneficently, some think even more so! And yet Governments, it
would appear, could by no means get enough of it; almost none of it came
their way: what had become of it? Truly there must be something very
questionable, either in the intellect of this celebrated Century, or in
the methods Governments now have of supplying their wants from the
same. One or other of two grand fundamental shortcomings, in regard to
intellect or human enlightenment, is very visible in this enlightened
Century of ours; for it has now become the most anarchic of Centuries;
that is to say, has fallen practically into such Egyptian darkness that
it cannot grope its way at all!

Nay I rather think both of these shortcomings, fatal deficits both, are
chargeable upon us; and it is the joint harvest of both that we are now
reaping with such havoc to our affairs. I rather guess, the intellect of
the Nineteenth Century, so full of miracle to Heavyside and others,
is itself a mechanical or _beaver_ intellect rather than a high or
eminently human one. A dim and mean though authentic kind of intellect,
this; venerable only in defect of better. This kind will avail but
little in the higher enterprises of human intellect, especially in that
highest enterprise of guiding men Heavenward, which, after all, is the
one real "governing" of them on this God's-Earth:--an enterprise not to
be achieved by beaver intellect, but by other higher and highest kinds.
This is deficit _first_. And then _secondly_, Governments have, really
to a fatal and extraordinary extent, neglected in late ages to supply
themselves with what intellect was going; having, as was too natural
in the dim time, taken up a notion that human intellect, or even beaver
intellect, was not necessary to them at all, but that a little of
the _vulpine_ sort (if attainable), supported by routine, red-tape
traditions, and tolerable parliamentary eloquence on occasion, would
very well suffice. A most false and impious notion; leading to fatal
lethargy on the part of Governments, while Nature and Fact were
preparing strange phenomena in contradiction to it.

These are two very fatal deficits;--the remedy of either of which would
be the remedy of both, could we but find it! For indeed they are vitally
connected: one of them is sure to produce the other; and both once in
action together, the advent of darkness, certain enough to issue in
anarchy by and by, goes on with frightful acceleration. If Governments
neglect to invite what noble intellect there is, then too surely all
intellect, not omnipotent to resist bad influences, will tend to become
beaverish ignoble intellect; and quitting high aims, which seem shut up
from it, will help itself forward in the way of making money and such
like; or will even sink to be sham intellect, helping itself by methods
which are not only beaverish but vulpine, and so "ignoble" as not
to have common honesty. The Government, taking no thought to choose
intellect for itself, will gradually find that there is less and less
of a good quality to choose from: thus, as in all impieties it does,
bad grows worse at a frightful _double_ rate of progression; and your
impiety is twice cursed. If you are impious enough to tolerate darkness,
you will get ever more darkness to tolerate; and at that inevitable
stage of the account (inevitable in all such accounts) when actual light
or else destruction is the alternative, you will call to the Heavens and
the Earth for light, and none will come!

Certainly this evil, for one, has _not_ "wrought its own cure;" but
has wrought precisely the reverse, and has been hourly eating away what
possibilities of cure there were. And so, I fear, in spite of rumors to
the contrary, it always is with evils, with solecisms against Nature,
and contradictions to the divine fact of things: not an evil of them has
ever wrought its own cure in my experience;--but has continually grown
worse and wider and uglier, till some _good_ (generally a good _man_)
not able to endure the abomination longer, rose upon it and cured or
else extinguished it. Evil Governments, divested of God's light because
they have loved darkness rather, are not likelier than other evils to
work their own cure out of that bad plight.

It is urgent upon all Governments to pause in this fatal course;
persisted in, the goal is fearfully evident; every hour's persistence in
it is making return more difficult. Intellect exists in all countries;
and the function appointed it by Heaven,--Governments had better not
attempt to contradict that, for they cannot! Intellect _has_ to
govern in this world and will do it, if not in alliance with so-called
"Governments" of red-tape and routine, then in divine hostility to such,
and sometimes alas in diabolic hostility to such; and in the end, as
sure as Heaven is higher than Downing Street, and the Laws of Nature are
tougher than red-tape, with entire victory over them and entire ruin to
them. If there is one thinking man among the Politicians of England, I
consider these things extremely well worth his attention just now.


Who are available to your Offices in Downing Street? All the gifted
souls, of every rank, who are born to you in this generation. These are
appointed, by the true eternal "divine right" which will never become
obsolete, to be your governors and administrators; and precisely as you
employ them, or neglect to employ them, will your State be favored of
Heaven or disfavored. This noble young soul, you can have him on either
of two conditions; and on one of them, since he is here in the world,
you must have him. As your ally and coadjutor; or failing that, as
your natural enemy: which shall it be? I consider that every Government
convicts itself of infatuation and futility, or absolves and justifies
itself before God and man, according as it answers this question. With
all sublunary entities, this is the question of questions. What talent
is born to you? How do you employ that? The crop of spiritual talent
that is born to you, of human nobleness and intellect and heroic
faculty, this is infinitely more important than your crops of cotton or
corn, or wine or herrings or whale-oil, which the Newspapers record
with such anxiety every season. This is not quite counted by seasons,
therefore the Newspapers are silent: but by generations and centuries, I
assure you it becomes amazingly sensible; and surpasses, as Heaven does
Earth, all the corn and wine, and whale-oil and California bullion, or
any other crop you grow. If that crop cease, the other crops--please to
take them also, if you are anxious about them. That once ceasing, we may
shut shop; for no other crop whatever will stay with us, nor is worth
having if it would.

To promote men of talent, to search and sift the whole society in every
class for men of talent, and joyfully promote them, has not always been
found impossible. In many forms of polity they have done it, and still
do it, to a certain degree. The degree to which they succeed in doing it
marks, as I have said, with very great accuracy the degree of divine
and human worth that is in them, the degree of success or real ultimate
victory they can expect to have in this world.--Think, for example,
of the old Catholic Church, in its merely terrestrial relations to the
State; and see if your reflections, and contrasts with what now is, are
of an exulting character. Progress of the species has gone on as with
seven-league boots, and in various directions has shot ahead amazingly,
with three cheers from all the world; but in this direction, the most
vital and indispensable, it has lagged terribly, and has even
moved backward, till now it is quite gone out of sight in clouds of
cotton-fuzz and railway-scrip, and has fallen fairly over the horizon to
rearward!

In those most benighted Feudal societies, full of mere tyrannous steel
Barons, and totally destitute of Tenpound Franchises and Ballot-boxes,
there did nevertheless authentically preach itself everywhere this
grandest of gospels, without which no other gospel can avail us much,
to all souls of men, "Awake ye noble souls; here is a noble career for
you!" I say, everywhere a road towards promotion, for human nobleness,
lay wide open to all men. The pious soul,--which, if you reflect,
will mean the ingenuous and ingenious, the gifted, intelligent and
nobly-aspiring soul,--such a soul, in whatever rank of life it were
born, had one path inviting it; a generous career, whereon, by human
worth and valor, all earthly heights and Heaven itself were attainable.
In the lowest stratum of social thraldom, nowhere was the noble soul
doomed quite to choke, and die ignobly. The Church, poor old benighted
creature, had at least taken care of that: the noble aspiring soul, not
doomed to choke ignobly in its penuries, could at least run into the
neighboring Convent, and there take refuge. Education awaited it there;
strict training not only to whatever useful knowledge could be had
from writing and reading, but to obedience, to pious reverence,
self-restraint, annihilation of self,--really to human nobleness in many
most essential respects. No questions asked about your birth, genealogy,
quantity of money-capital or the like; the one question was, "Is there
some human nobleness in you, or is there not?" The poor neat-herd's
son, if he were a Noble of Nature, might rise to Priesthood, to
High-priesthood, to the top of this world,--and best of all, he had
still high Heaven lying high enough above him, to keep his head steady,
on whatever height or in whatever depth his way might lie!

A thrice-glorious arrangement, when I reflect on it; most salutary to
all high and low interests; a truly human arrangement. You made the born
noble yours, welcoming him as what he was, the Sent of Heaven: you did
not force him either to die or become your enemy; idly neglecting or
suppressing him as what he was not, a thing of no worth. You accepted
the blessed _light_; and in the shape of infernal _lightning_ it needed
not to visit you. How, like an immense mine-shaft through the dim
oppressed strata of society, this Institution of the Priesthood ran;
opening, from the lowest depths towards all heights and towards Heaven
itself, a free road of egress and emergence towards virtuous nobleness,
heroism and well-doing, for every born man. This we may call the living
lungs and blood-circulation of those old Feudalisms. When I think of
that immeasurable all-pervading lungs; present in every corner of human
society, every meanest hut a _cell_ of said lungs; inviting whatsoever
noble pious soul was born there to the path that was noble for him;
and leading thereby sometimes, if he were worthy, to be the Papa
of Christendom, and Commander of all Kings,--I perceive how the old
Christian society continued healthy, vital, and was strong and heroic.
When I contrast this with the noble aims now held out to noble souls
born in remote huts, or beyond the verge of Palace-Yard; and think of
what your Lordship has done in the way of making priests and papas,--I
see a society without lungs, fast wheezing itself to death, in horrid
convulsions; and deserving to die.

Over Europe generally in these years, I consider that the State has
died, has fairly coughed its last in street musketry, and fallen down
dead, incapable of any but _galvanic_ life henceforth,--owing to this
same fatal want of _lungs_, which includes all other wants for a State.
And furthermore that it will never come alive again, till it contrive
to get such indispensable vital apparatus; the outlook toward which
consummation is very distant in most communities of Europe. If you let
it come to death or suspended animation in States, the case is very
bad! Vain to call in universal-suffrage parliaments at that stage:
the universal-suffrage parliaments cannot give you any breath of life,
cannot find any _wisdom_ for you; by long impiety, you have let the
supply of noble human wisdom die out; and the wisdom that now courts
your universal suffrages is beggarly human _attorneyism_ or sham-wisdom,
which is _not_ an insight into the Laws of God's Universe, but into the
laws of hungry Egoism and the Devil's Chicane, and can in the end profit
no community or man.

No; the kind of heroes that come mounted on the shoulders of the
universal suffrage, and install themselves as Prime Ministers and
healing Statesmen by force of able editorship, do not bid very fair
to bring Nations back to the ways of God. Eloquent high-lacquered
_pinchbeck_ specimens these, expert in the arts of Belial
mainly;--fitter to be markers at some exceedingly expensive
billiard-table than sacred chief-priests of men! "Greeks of the Lower
Empire;" with a varnish of parliamentary rhetoric; and, I suppose,
this other great gift, toughness of character,--proof that they have
_persevered_ in their Master's service. Poor wretches, their industry
is mob-worship, place-worship, parliamentary intrigue, and the multiplex
art of tongue-fence: flung into that bad element, there they swim for
decades long, throttling and wrestling one another according to their
strength,--and the toughest or luckiest gets to land, and becomes
Premier. A more entirely unbeautiful class of Premiers was never raked
out of the ooze, and set on high places, by any ingenuity of man. Dame
Dubarry's petticoat was a better seine-net for fishing out Premiers than
that. Let all Nations whom necessity is driving towards that method,
take warning in time!

Alas, there is, in a manner, but one Nation that can still take warning!
In England alone of European Countries the State yet survives; and might
help itself by better methods. In England heroic wisdom is not yet dead,
and quite replaced by attorneyism: the honest beaver faculty yet abounds
with us, the heroic manful faculty shows itself also to the observant
eye, not dead but dangerously sleeping. I said there were many _kings_
in England: if these can yet be rallied into strenuous activity, and set
to govern England in Downing Street and elsewhere, which their function
always is,--then England can be saved from anarchies and universal
suffrages; and that Apotheosis of Attorneyism, blackest of terrestrial
curses, may be spared us. If these cannot, the other issue, in such
forms as may be appropriate to us, is inevitable. What escape is there?
England must conform to the eternal laws of life, or England too must
die!

England with the largest mass of real living interests ever intrusted to
a Nation; and with a mass of extinct imaginary and quite dead interests
piled upon it to the very Heavens, and encumbering it from shore to
shore,--does reel and stagger ominously in these years; urged by the
Divine Silences and the Eternal Laws to take practical hold of its
living interests and manage them: and clutching blindly into its
venerable extinct and imaginary interests, as if that were still the way
to do it. England must contrive to manage its living interests, and quit
its dead ones and their methods, or else depart from its place in this
world. Surely England is called as no Nation ever was, to summon out its
_kings_, and set them to that high work!--Huge inorganic England, nigh
choked under the exuviae of a thousand years, and blindly sprawling amid
chartisms, ballot-boxes, prevenient graces, and bishops' nightmares,
must, as the preliminary and commencement of organization, learn to
_breathe_ again,--get "lungs" for herself again, as we defined it. That
is imperative upon her: she too will die, otherwise, and cough her last
upon the streets some day;--how can she continue living? To enfranchise
whatsoever of Wisdom is born in England, and set that to the sacred
task of coercing and amending what of Folly is born in England: Heaven's
blessing is purchasable by that; by not that, only Heaven's curse is
purchasable. The reform contemplated, my liberal friends perceive, is
a truly radical one; no ballot-box ever went so deep into the roots: a
radical, most painful, slow and difficult, but most indispensable reform
of reforms!

How short and feeble an approximation to these high ulterior results,
the best Reform of Downing Street, presided over by the fittest
Statesman one can imagine to exist at present, would be, is too apparent
to me. A long time yet till we get our living interests put under due
administration, till we get our dead interests handsomely dismissed. A
long time yet till, by extensive change of habit and ways of thinking
and acting, _we_ get living "lungs" for ourselves! Nevertheless, by
Reform of Downing Street, we do begin to breathe: we do start in the way
towards that and all high results. Nor is there visible to me any other
way. Blessed enough were the way once entered on; could we, in our evil
days, but see the noble enterprise begun, and fairly in progress!


What the "_New_ Downing Street" can grow to, and will and must if
England is to have a Downing Street beyond a few years longer, it is
far from me, in my remote watch-tower, to say with precision. A Downing
Street inhabited by the gifted of the intellects of England; directing
all its energies upon the real and living interests of England, and
silently but incessantly, in the alembics of the place, burning up the
extinct imaginary interests of England, that we may see God's sky a
little plainer overhead, and have all of us a great accession of "heroic
wisdom" to dispose of: such a Downing Street--to draw the plan of it,
will require architects; many successive architects and builders will
be needed there. Let not editors, and remote unprofessional persons,
interfere too much!--Change in the present edifice, however, radical
change, all men can discern to be inevitable; and even, if there shall
not worse swiftly follow, to be imminent. Outlines of the future edifice
paint themselves against the sky (to men that still have a sky, and
are above the miserable London fogs of the hour); noble elements of new
State Architecture, foreshadows of a new Downing Street for the New Era
that is come. These with pious hope all men can see; and it is good
that all men, with whatever faculty they have, were earnestly looking
thitherward;--trying to get above the fogs, that they might look
thitherward!


Among practical men the idea prevails that Government can do nothing
but "keep the peace." They say all higher tasks are unsafe for it,
impossible for it,--and in fine not necessary for it or for us. On this
footing a very feeble Downing Street might serve the turn!--I am well
aware that Government, for a long time past, has taken in hand no other
public task, and has professed to have no other, but that of keeping
the peace. This public task, and the private one of ascertaining
whether Dick or Jack was to do it, have amply filled the capabilities
of Government for several generations now. Hard tasks both, it would
appear. In accomplishing the first, for example, have not heaven-born
Chancellors of the Exchequer had to shear us very bare; and to leave an
overplus of Debt, or of fleeces shorn _before_ they are grown, justly
esteemed among the wonders of the world? Not a first-rate keeping of the
peace, this, we begin to surmise! At least it seems strange to us.

For we, and the overwhelming majority of all our acquaintances, in this
Parish and Nation and the adjacent Parishes and Nations, are profoundly
conscious to ourselves of being by nature peaceable persons; following
our necessary industries; without wish, interest or faintest intention
to cut the skin of any mortal, to break feloniously into his industrial
premises, or do any injustice to him at all. Because indeed, independent
of Government, there is a thing called conscience, and we dare not.
So that it cannot but appear to us, "the peace," under dexterous
management, might be very much more easily kept, your Lordship; nay,
we almost think, if well let alone, it would in a measure keep _itself_
among such a set of persons! And how it happens that when a poor
hardworking creature of us has laboriously earned sixpence, the
Government comes in, and (as some compute) says, "I will thank you for
threepence of that, as per account, for getting you peace to spend the
other threepence," our amazement begins to be considerable,--and I think
results will follow from it by and by. Not the most dexterous keeping
of the peace, your Lordship, unless it be more difficult to do than
appears!

Our domestic peace, we cannot but perceive, as good as keeps itself.
Here and there a select Equitable Person, appointed by the Public
for that end, clad in ermine, and backed by certain companies of
blue Police, is amply adequate, without immoderate outlay in money or
otherwise, to keep down the few exceptional individuals of the scoundrel
kind; who, we observe, by the nature of them, are always weak and
inconsiderable. And as to foreign peace, really all Europe, now
especially with so many railroads, public journals, printed books,
penny-post, bills of exchange, and continual intercourse and mutual
dependence, is more and more becoming (so to speak) one Parish; the
Parishioners of which being, as we ourselves are, in immense majority
peaceable hard-working people, could, if they were moderately well
guided, have almost no disposition to quarrel. Their economic interests
are one, "To buy in the cheapest market, and sell in the dearest;" their
faith, any _religious_ faith they have, is one, "To annihilate shams--by
all methods, street-barricades included." Why should they quarrel?
The Czar of Russia, in the Eastern parts of the Parish, may have other
notions; but he knows too well he must keep them to himself. He, if
he meddled with the Western parts, and attempted anywhere to crush or
disturb that sacred Democratic Faith of theirs, is aware there would
rise from a hundred and fifty million human throats such a _Hymn of the
Marseillaise_ as was never heard before; and England, France, Germany,
Poland, Hungary, and the Nine Kingdoms, hurling themselves upon him in
never-imagined fire of vengeance, would swiftly reduce his Russia and
him to a strange situation! Wherefore he forbears,--and being a person
of some sense, will long forbear. In spite of editorial prophecy, the
Czar of Russia does not disturb our night's rest. And with the other
parts of the Parish our dreams and our thoughts are of anything but of
fighting, or of the smallest need to fight.

For keeping of the peace, a thing highly desirable to us, we strive to
be grateful to your Lordship. Intelligible to us, also, your Lordship's
reluctance to get out of the old routine. But we beg to say farther,
that peace by itself has no feet to stand upon, and would not suit us
even if it had. Keeping of the peace is the function of a policeman, and
but a small fraction of that of any Government, King or Chief of men.
Are not all men bound, and the Chief of men in the name of all, to do
properly this: To see, so far as human effort under pain of eternal
reprobation can, God's Kingdom incessantly advancing here below, and His
will done on Earth as it is in Heaven? On Sundays your Lordship knows
this well; forgot it not on week-days. I assure you it is forevermore a
fact. That is the immense divine and never-ending task which is laid on
every man, and with unspeakable increase of emphasis on every Government
or Commonwealth of men. Your Lordship, that is the basis upon which
peace and all else depends! That basis once well lost, there is no peace
capable of being kept,--the only peace that could then be kept is that
of the churchyard. Your Lordship may depend on it, whatever thing takes
upon it the name of Sovereign or Government in an English Nation such
as this will have to get out of that old routine; and set about keeping
something very different from the peace, in these days!


Truly it is high time that same beautiful notion of No-Government should
take itself away. The world is daily rushing towards wreck, while that
lasts. If your Government is to be a Constituted Anarchy, what issue can
it have? Our one interest in such Government is, that it would be kind
enough to cease and go its ways, _before_ the inevitable arrive. The
question, Who is to float atop no-whither upon the popular vertexes,
and act that sorry character, "carcass of the drowned ass upon the
mud-deluge"? is by no means an important one for almost anybody,--hardly
even for the drowned ass himself. Such drowned ass ought to ask himself,
If the function is a sublime one? For him too, though he looks sublime
to the vulgar and floats atop, a private situation, down out of sight in
his natural ooze, would be a luckier one.

Crabbe, speaking of constitutional philosophies, faith in the ballot-box
and such like, has this indignant passage: "If any voice of deliverance
or resuscitation reach us, in this our low and all but lost estate, sunk
almost beyond plummet's sounding in the mud of Lethe, and oblivious of
all noble objects, it will be an intimation that we must put away all
this abominable nonsense, and understand, once more, that Constituted
Anarchy, with however many ballot-boxes, caucuses, and hustings
beer-barrels, is a continual offence to gods and men. That to be
governed by small men is not only a misfortune, but it is a curse and
a sin; the effect, and alas the cause also, of all manner of curses and
sins. That to profess subjection to phantasms, and pretend to accept
guidance from fractional parts of tailors, is what Smelfungus in his
rude dialect calls it, 'a damned _lie_,' and nothing other. A lie which,
by long use and wont, we have grown accustomed to, and do not the least
feel to be a lie, having spoken and done it continually everywhere for
such a long time past;--but has Nature grown to accept it as a veracity,
think you, my friend? Have the Parcae fallen asleep, because you wanted
to make money in the City? Nature at all moments knows well that it is
a lie; and that, like all lies, it is cursed and damned from the
beginning.

"Even so, ye indigent millionnaires, and miserable bankrupt populations
rolling in gold,--whose note-of-hand will go to any length in
Threadneedle Street, and to whom in Heaven's Bank the stern answer is,
'No effects!' Bankrupt, I say; and Californias and Eldorados will not
save us. And every time we speak such lie, or do it or look it, as we
have been incessantly doing, and many of us with clear consciousness,
for about a hundred and fifty years now, Nature marks down the exact
penalty against us. 'Debtor to so much lying: forfeiture of existing
stock of worth to such extent;--approach to general damnation by so
much.' Till now, as we look round us over a convulsed anarchic Europe,
and at home over an anarchy not yet convulsed, but only heaving towards
convulsion, and to judge by the Mosaic sweating-establishments, cannibal
Connaughts and other symptoms, not far from convulsion now, we seem to
have pretty much _exhausted_ our accumulated stock of worth; and unless
money's 'worth' and bullion at the Bank will save us, to be rubbing very
close upon that ulterior bourn which I do not like to name again!

"On behalf of nearly twenty-seven millions of my fellow-countrymen, sunk
deep in Lethean sleep, with mere owl-dreams of Political Economy and
mice-catching, in this pacific thrice-infernal slush-element; and
also of certain select thousands, and hundreds and units, awakened or
beginning to awaken from it, and with horror in their hearts perceiving
where they are, I beg to protest, and in the name of God to say, with
poor human ink, desirous much that I had divine thunder to say it with,
Awake, arise,--before you sink to death eternal! Unnamable destruction,
and banishment to Houndsditch and Gehenna, lies in store for all Nations
that, in angry perversity or brutal torpor and owlish blindness, neglect
the eternal message of the gods, and vote for the Worse while the Better
is there. Like owls they say, 'Barabbas will do; any orthodox Hebrew
of the Hebrews, and peaceable believer in M'Croudy and the Faith of
Leave-alone will do: the Right Honorable Minimus is well enough; he
shall be our Maximus, under him it will be handy to catch mice, and
Owldom shall continue a flourishing empire.'"


One thing is undeniable, and must be continually repeated till it get
to be understood again: Of all constitutions, forms of government, and
political methods among men, the question to be asked is even this, What
kind of man do you set over us? All questions are answered in the answer
to this. Another thing is worth attending to: No people or populace,
with never such ballot-boxes, can select such man for you; only the man
of worth can recognize worth in men;--to the commonplace man of no or
of little worth, you, unless you wish to be _mis_led, need not apply on
such an occasion. Those poor Tenpound Franchisers of yours, they are not
even in earnest; the poor sniffing sniggering Honorable Gentlemen they
send to Parliament are as little so. Tenpound Franchisers full of mere
beer and balderdash; Honorable Gentlemen come to Parliament as to an
Almack's series of evening parties, or big cockmain (battle of all the
cocks) very amusing to witness and bet upon: what can or could men in
that predicament ever do for you? Nay, if they were in life-and-death
earnest, what could it avail you in such a case? I tell you, a million
blockheads looking authoritatively into one man of what you call genius,
or noble sense, will make nothing but nonsense out of him and his
qualities, and his virtues and defects, if they look till the end of
time. He understands them, sees what they are; but that they should
understand him, and see with rounded outline what his limits are,--this,
which would mean that they are bigger than he, is forever denied them.
Their one good understanding of him is that they at last should loyally
say, "We do not quite understand thee; we perceive thee to be nobler and
wiser and bigger than we, and will loyally follow thee."

The question therefore arises, Whether, since reform of parliament and
such like have done so little in that respect, the problem might not
be with some hope attacked in the direct manner? Suppose all our
Institutions, and Public Methods of Procedure, to continue for the
present as they are; and suppose farther a Reform Premier, and the
English Nation once awakening under him to a due sense of the infinite
importance, nay the vital necessity there is of getting able and abler
men:--might not some heroic wisdom, and actual "ability" to do what must
be done, prove discoverable to said Premier; and so the indispensable
Heaven's-blessing descend to us from _above_, since none has yet
sprung from below? From above we shall have to try it; the other
is exhausted,--a hopeless method that! The utmost passion of the
house-inmates, ignorant of masonry and architecture, cannot avail to
cure the house of smoke: not if _they_ vote and agitate forever, and
bestir themselves to the length even of street-barricades, will the
_smoke_ in the least abate: how can it? Their passion exercised in such
ways, till Doomsday, will avail them nothing. Let their passion rage
steadily against the existing major-domos to this effect, "_Find_ us
men skilled in house-building, acquainted with the laws of atmospheric
suction, and capable to cure smoke;" something might come of it! In the
lucky circumstance of having one man of real intellect and courage to
put at the head of the movement, much would come of it;--a New Downing
Street, fit for the British Nation and its bitter necessities in this
Now Era, would come; and from that, in answer to continuous sacred
fidelity and valiant toil, all good whatsoever would gradually come.

Of the Continental nuisance called "Bureaucracy,"--if this should alarm
any reader,--I can see no risk or possibility in England. Democracy
is hot enough here, fierce enough; it is perennial, universal, clearly
invincible among us henceforth. No danger it should let itself be flung
in chains by sham secretaries of the Pedant species, and accept their
vile Age of Pinchbeck for its Golden Age! Democracy clamors, with its
Newspapers, its Parliaments, and all its twenty-seven million throats,
continually in this Nation forevermore. I remark, too, that, the
unconscious purport of all its clamors is even this, "Find us men
skilled,"--_make_ a New Downing Street, fit for the New Era!


Of the Foreign Office, in its reformed state, we have not much to say.
Abolition of imaginary work, and replacement of it by real, is on all
hands understood to be very urgent there. Large needless expenditures
of money, immeasurable ditto of hypocrisy and grimace; embassies,
protocols, worlds of extinct traditions, empty pedantries, foul
cobwebs:--but we will by no means apply the "live coal" of our witty
friend; the Foreign Office will repent, and not be driven to suicide! A
truer time will come for the Continental Nations too: Authorities based
on truth, and on the silent or spoken Worship of Human Nobleness,
will again get themselves established there; all Sham-Authorities, and
consequent Real-Anarchies based on universal suffrage and the Gospel
according to George Sand, being put away; and noble action, heroic
new-developments of human faculty and industry, and blessed fruit as
of Paradise getting itself conquered from the waste battle-field of
the chaotic elements, will once more, there as here, begin to show
themselves.

When the Continental Nations have once got to the bottom of _their_
Augean Stable, and begun to have real enterprises based on the eternal
facts again, our Foreign Office may again have extensive concerns with
them. And at all times, and even now, there will remain the question to
be sincerely put and wisely answered, What essential concern _has_ the
British Nation with them and their enterprises? Any concern at all,
except that of handsomely keeping apart from them? If so, what are
the methods of best managing it?--At present, as was said, while Red
Republic but clashes with foul Bureaucracy; and Nations, sunk in
blind ignavia, demand a universal-suffrage Parliament to heal their
wretchedness; and wild Anarchy and Phallus-Worship struggle with
Sham-Kingship and extinct or galvanized Catholicism; and in the Cave of
the Winds all manner of rotten waifs and wrecks are hurled against
each other,--our English interest in the controversy, however huge said
controversy grow, is quite trifling; we have only in a handsome manner
to say to it: "Tumble and rage along, ye rotten waifs and wrecks;
clash and collide as seems fittest to you; and smite each other into
annihilation at your own good pleasure. In that huge conflict, dismal
but unavoidable, we, thanks to our heroic ancestors, having got so far
ahead of you, have now no interest at all. Our decided notion is, the
dead ought to bury their dead in such a case: and so we have the
honor to be, with distinguished consideration, your entirely
devoted,--FLIMNAP, SEC. FOREIGN DEPARTMENT."--I really think Flimnap,
till truer times come, ought to treat much of his work in this way:
cautious to give offence to his neighbors; resolute not to concern
himself in any of their self-annihilating operations whatsoever.


Foreign wars are sometimes unavoidable. We ourselves, in the course of
natural merchandising and laudable business, have now and then got into
ambiguous situations; into quarrels which needed to be settled, and
without fighting would not settle. Sugar Islands, Spice Islands, Indias,
Canadas, these, by the real decree of Heaven, were ours; and nobody
would or could believe it, till it was tried by cannon law, and so
proved. Such cases happen. In former times especially, owing very much
to want of intercourse and to the consequent mutual ignorance, there did
occur misunderstandings: and therefrom many foreign wars, some of
them by no means unnecessary. With China, or some distant country, too
unintelligent of us and too unintelligible to us, there still sometimes
rises necessary occasion for a war. Nevertheless wars--misunderstandings
that get to the length of arguing themselves out by sword and
cannon--have, in these late generations of improved intercourse, been
palpably becoming less and less necessary; have in a manner become
superfluous, if we had a little wisdom, and our Foreign Office on a good
footing.

Of European wars I really hardly remember any, since Oliver Cromwell's
last Protestant or Liberation war with Popish antichristian Spain some
two hundred years ago, to which I for my own part could have contributed
my life with any heartiness, or in fact would have subscribed money
itself to any considerable amount. Dutch William, a man of some heroism,
did indeed get into troubles with Louis Fourteenth; and there rested
still some shadow of Protestant Interest, and question of National and
individual Independence, over those wide controversies; a little money
and human enthusiasm was still due to Dutch William. Illustrious Chatham
also, not to speak of his Manilla ransoms and the like, did one thing:
assisted Fritz of Prussia, a brave man and king (almost the only
sovereign King I have known since Cromwell's time) like to be borne down
by ignoble men and sham-kings; for this let illustrious Chatham too have
a little money and human enthusiasm,--a little, by no means much. But
what am I to say of heaven-born Pitt the son of Chatham? England sent
forth her fleets and armies; her money into every country; money as
if the heaven-born Chancellor had got a Fortunatus' purse; as if this
Island had become a volcanic fountain of gold, or new terrestrial sun
capable of radiating mere guineas. The result of all which, what was
it? Elderly men can remember the tar-barrels burnt for success and
thrice-immortal victory in the business; and yet what result had we? The
French Revolution, a Fact decreed in the Eternal Councils, could not
be put down: the result was, that heaven-born Pitt had actually been
fighting (as the old Hebrews would have said) against the Lord,--that
the Laws of Nature were stronger than Pitt. Of whom therefore there
remains chiefly his unaccountable radiation of guineas, for the
gratitude of posterity. Thank you for nothing,--for eight hundred
millions _less_ than nothing!


Our War Offices, Admiralties, and other Fighting Establishments, are
forcing themselves on everybody's attention at this time. Bull grumbles
audibly: "The money you have cost me these five-and-thirty years, during
which you have stood elaborately ready to fight at any moment, without
at any moment being called to fight, is surely an astonishing sum. The
National Debt itself might have been half paid by that money, which has
all gone in pipe-clay and blank cartridges! "Yes, Mr. Bull, the
money can be counted in hundreds of millions; which certainly is
something:--but the "strenuously organized idleness," and what mischief
that amounts to,--have you computed it? A perpetual solecism, and
blasphemy (of its sort), set to march openly among us, dressed in
scarlet! Bull, with a more and more sulky tone, demands that such
solecism be abated; that these Fighting Establishments be as it were
disbanded, and set to do some work in the Creation, since fighting
there is now none for them. This demand is irrefragably just, is growing
urgent too; and yet this demand cannot be complied with,--not yet while
the State grounds itself on unrealities, and Downing Street continues
what it is.

The old Romans made their soldiers work during intervals of war. The New
Downing Street too, we may predict, will have less and less tolerance
for idleness on the part of soldiers or others. Nay the New Downing
Street, I foresee, when once it has got its "_Industrial_ Regiments"
organized, will make these mainly do its fighting, what fighting
there is; and so save immense sums. Or indeed, all citizens of the
Commonwealth, as is the right and the interest of every free man in
this world, will have themselves trained to arms; each citizen ready to
defend his country with his own body and soul,--he is not worthy to have
a country otherwise. In a State grounded on veracities, that would be
the rule. Downing Street, if it cannot bethink itself of returning to
the veracities, will have to vanish altogether!

To fight with its neighbors never was, and is now less than ever, the
real trade of England. For far other objects was the English People
created into this world; sent down from the Eternities, to mark with its
history certain spaces in the current of sublunary Time! Essential, too,
that the English People should discover what its real objects are; and
resolutely follow these, resolutely refusing to follow other than these.
The State will have victory so far as it can do that; so far as it
cannot, defeat.

In the New Downing Street, discerning what its real functions are, and
with sacred abhorrence putting away from it what its functions are not,
we can fancy changes enough in Foreign Office, War Office, Colonial
Office, Home Office! Our War-soldiers _Industrial_, first of all;
doing nobler than Roman works, when fighting is not wanted of them.
Seventy-fours not hanging idly by their anchors in the Tagus, or off
Sapienza (one of the saddest sights under the sun), but busy, every
Seventy-four of them, carrying over streams of British Industrials to
the immeasurable Britain that lies beyond the sea in every zone of the
world. A State grounding itself on the veracities, not on the semblances
and the injustices: every citizen a soldier for it. Here would be new
_real_ Secretaryships and Ministries, not for foreign war and diplomacy,
but for domestic peace and utility. Minister of Works; Minister of
Justice,--clearing his Model Prisons of their scoundrelism; shipping his
scoundrels wholly abroad, under hard and just drill-sergeants (hundreds
of such stand wistfully ready for you, these thirty years, in the
Rag-and-Famish Club and elsewhere!) into fertile desert countries;
to make railways,--one big railway (says the Major [Footnote: Major
Carmichael Smith; see his Pamphlets on this subject]) quite across
America; fit to employ all the able-bodied Scoundrels and efficient
Half-pay Officers in Nature!

Lastly,--or rather firstly, and as the preliminary of all, would there
not be a Minister of Education? Minister charged to get this English
People taught a little, at his and our peril! Minister of Education;
no longer dolefully embayed amid the wreck of moribund "religions," but
clear ahead of all that; steering, free and piously fearless, towards
his divine goal under the eternal stars!--O heaven, and are these things
forever impossible, then? Not a whit. To-morrow morning they might all
begin to be, and go on through blessed centuries realizing themselves,
if it were not that--alas, if it were not that we are most of us
insincere persons, sham talking-machines and hollow windy fools! Which
it is not "impossible" that we should cease to be, I hope?


Constitutions for the Colonies are now on the anvil; the discontented
Colonies are all to be cured of their miseries by Constitutions. Whether
that will cure their miseries, or only operate as a Godfrey's-cordial to
stop their whimpering, and in the end worsen all their miseries, may
be a sad doubt to us. One thing strikes a remote spectator in these
Colonial questions: the singular placidity with which the British
Statesman at this time, backed by M'Croudy and the British moneyed
classes, is prepared to surrender whatsoever interest Britain, as
foundress of those establishments, might pretend to have in the
decision. "If you want to go from us, go; we by no means want you to
stay: you cost us money yearly, which is scarce; desperate quantities
of trouble too: why not go, if you wish it?" Such is the humor of the
British Statesman, at this time.--Men clear for rebellion, "annexation"
as they call it, walk openly abroad in our American Colonies; found
newspapers, hold platform palaverings. From Canada there comes duly by
each mail a regular statistic of Annexationism: increasing fast in this
quarter, diminishing in that;--Majesty's Chief Governor seeming to take
it as a perfectly open question; Majesty's Chief Governor in fact seldom
appearing on the scene at all, except to receive the impact of a
few rotten eggs on occasion, and then duck in again to his private
contemplations. And yet one would think the Majesty's Chief Governor
ought to have a kind of interest in the thing? Public liberty is carried
to a great length in some portions of her Majesty's dominions. But
the question, "Are we to continue subjects of her Majesty, or start
rebelling against her? So many as are for rebelling, hold up your
hands!" Here is a public discussion of a very extraordinary nature to
be going on under the nose of a Governor of Canada. How the Governor
of Canada, being a British piece of flesh and blood, and not a Canadian
lumber-log of mere pine and rosin, can stand it, is not very conceivable
at first view. He does it, seemingly, with the stoicism of a Zeno. It is
a constitutional sight like few.

And yet an instinct deeper than the Gospel of M'Croudy teaches all
men that Colonies are worth something to a country! That if, under the
present Colonial Office, they are a vexation to us and themselves, some
other Colonial Office can and must be contrived which shall render them
a blessing; and that the remedy will be to contrive such a Colonial
Office or method of administration, and by no means to cut the Colonies
loose. Colonies are not to be picked off the street every day; not a
Colony of them but has been bought dear, well purchased by the toil
and blood of those we have the honor to be sons of; and we cannot just
afford to cut them away because M'Croudy finds the present management
of them cost money. The present management will indeed require to be cut
away;--but as for the Colonies, we purpose through Heaven's blessing to
retain them a while yet! Shame on us for unworthy sons of brave fathers
if we do not. Brave fathers, by valiant blood and sweat, purchased for
us, from the bounty of Heaven, rich possessions in all zones; and we,
wretched imbeciles, cannot do the function of administering them? And
because the accounts do not stand well in the ledger, our remedy is, not
to take shame to ourselves, and repent in sackcloth and ashes, and
amend our beggarly imbecilities and insincerities in that as in other
departments of our business, but to fling the business overboard, and
declare the business itself to be bad? We are a hopeful set of heirs to
a big fortune! It does not suit our Manton gunneries, grouse-shootings,
mousings in the City; and like spirited young gentlemen we will give it
up, and let the attorneys take it?

Is there no value, then, in human things, but what can write itself down
in the cash-ledger? All men know, and even M'Croudy in his inarticulate
heart knows, that to men and Nations there are invaluable values which
cannot be sold for money at all. George Robins is great; but he is not
onmipotent. George Robins cannot quite sell Heaven and Earth by auction,
excellent though he be at the business. Nay, if M'Croudy offered his own
life for _sale_ in Threadneedle Street, would anybody buy it? Not I, for
one. "Nobody bids: pass on to the next lot," answers Robins. And yet to
M'Croudy this unsalable lot is worth all the Universe:--nay, I believe,
to us also it is worth something; good monitions, as to several things,
do lie in this Professor of the dismal science; and considerable sums
even of money, not to speak of other benefit, will yet come out of his
life and him, for which nobody bids! Robins has his own field where he
reigns triumphant; but to that we will restrict him with iron limits;
and neither Colonies nor the lives of Professors, nor other such
invaluable objects shall come under his hammer.

Bad state of the ledger will demonstrate that your way of dealing
with your Colonies is absurd, and urgently in want of reform; but to
demonstrate that the Empire itself must be dismembered to bring the
ledger straight? Oh never. Something else than the ledger must intervene
to do that. Why does not England repudiate Ireland, and insist on the
"Repeal," instead of prohibiting it under death-penalties? Ireland has
never been a paying speculation yet, nor is it like soon to be! Why does
not Middlesex repudiate Surrey, and Chelsea Kensington, and each county
and each parish, and in the end each individual set up for himself
and his cash-box, repudiating the other and his, because their mutual
interests have got into an irritating course? They must change the
course, seek till they discover a soothing one; that is the remedy, when
limbs of the same body come to irritate one another. Because the paltry
tatter of a garment, reticulated for you out of thrums and listings in
Downing Street, ties foot and hand together in an intolerable manner,
will you relieve yourself by cutting off the hand or the foot? You will
cut off the paltry tatter of a pretended body-coat, I think, and fling
that to the nettles; and imperatively require one that fits your size
better.

Miserabler theory than that of money on the ledger being the primary
rule for Empires, or for any higher entity than City owls and their
mice-catching, cannot well be propounded. And I would by no means advise
Felicissimus, ill at ease on his high-trotting and now justly impatient
Sleswicker, to let the poor horse in its desperation go in that
direction for a momentary solace. If by lumber-log Governors, by
Godfrey's cordial Constitutions or otherwise, be contrived to cut
off the Colonies or any real right the big British Empire has in her
Colonies, both he and the British Empire will bitterly repent it one
day! The Sleswicker, relieved in ledger for a moment, will find that
it is wounded in heart and honor forever; and the turning of its wild
forehoofs upon Felicissimus as he lies in the ditch combed off, is not
a thing I like to think of! Britain, whether it be known to Felicissimus
or not, has other tasks appointed her in God's Universe than the making
of money; and woe will betide her if she forget those other withal.
Tasks, colonial and domestic, which are of an eternally _divine_ nature,
and compared with which all money, and all that is procurable by money,
are in strict arithmetic an imponderable quantity, have been assigned
this Nation; and they also at last are coming upon her again, clamorous,
abstruse, inevitable, much to her bewilderment just now!

This poor Nation, painfully dark about said tasks and the way of doing
them, means to keep its Colonies nevertheless, as things which somehow
or other must have a value, were it better seen into. They are portions
of the general Earth, where the children of Britain now dwell; where the
gods have so far sanctioned their endeavor, as to say that they have a
right to dwell. England will not readily admit that her own children
are worth nothing but to be flung out of doors! England looking on her
Colonies can say: "Here are lands and seas, spice-lands, corn-lands,
timber-lands, overarched by zodiacs and stars, clasped by many-sounding
seas; wide spaces of the Maker's building, fit for the cradle yet of
mighty Nations and their Sciences and Heroisms. Fertile continents
still inhabited by wild beasts are mine, into which all the distressed
populations of Europe might pour themselves, and make at once an Old
World and a New World human. By the eternal fiat of the gods, this
must yet one day be; this, by all the Divine Silences that rule this
Universe, silent to fools, eloquent and awful to the hearts of the wise,
is incessantly at this moment, and at all moments, commanded to begin to
be. Unspeakable deliverance, and new destiny of thousand-fold expanded
manfulness for all men, dawns out of the Future here. To me has fallen
the godlike task of initiating all that: of me and of my Colonies, the
abstruse Future asks, Are you wise enough for so sublime a destiny? Are
you too foolish?"


That you ask advice of whatever wisdom is to be had in the Colony, and
even take note of what _un_wisdom is in it, and record that too as an
existing fact, will certainly be very advantageous. But I suspect the
kind of Parliament that will suit a Colony is much of a secret just now!
Mr. Wakefield, a democratic man in all fibres of him, and acquainted
with Colonial Socialities as few are, judges that the franchise for
your Colonial Parliament should be decidedly select, and advises a high
money-qualification; as there is in all Colonies a fluctuating migratory
mass, not destitute of money, but very much so of loyalty, permanency,
or civic availability; whom it is extremely advantageous not to consult
on what you are about attempting for the Colony or Mother Country. This
I can well believe;--and also that a "high money-qualification," in
the present sad state of human affairs, might be some help to you
in selecting; though whether even that would quite certainly bring
"wisdom," the one thing indispensable, is much a question with me. It
might help, it might help! And if by any means you could (which you
cannot) exclude the Fourth Estate, and indicate decisively that Wise
Advice was the thing wanted here, and Parliamentary Eloquence was not
the thing wanted anywhere just now,--there might really some light of
experience and human foresight, and a truly valuable benefit, be found
for you in such assemblies.

And there is one thing, too apt to be forgotten, which it much behooves
us to remember: In the Colonies, as everywhere else in this world, the
vital point is not who decides, but what is decided on! That measures
tending really to the best advantage temporal and spiritual of the
Colony be adopted, and strenuously put in execution; there lies
the grand interest of every good citizen British and Colonial. Such
measures, whosoever have originated and prescribed them, will gradually
be sanctioned by all men and gods; and clamors of every kind in
reference to them may safely to a great extent be neglected, as
clamorous merely, and sure to be transient. Colonial Governor, Colonial
Parliament, whoever or whatever does an injustice, or resolves on an
_un_wisdom, he is the pernicious object, however parliamentary he be!

I have known things done, in this or the other Colony, in the most
parliamentary way before now, which carried written on the brow of them
sad symptoms of eternal reprobation; not to be mistaken, had you painted
an inch thick. In Montreal, for example, at this moment, standing amid
the ruins of the "Elgin Marbles" (as they call the burnt walls of the
Parliament House there), what rational British soul but is forced to
institute the mournfulest constitutional reflection? Some years ago the
Canadas, probably not without materials for discontent, and blown upon
by skilful artists, blazed up into crackling of musketry, open flame of
rebellion; a thing smacking of the gallows in all countries that pretend
to have any "Government." Which flame of rebellion, had there been no
loyal population to fling themselves upon it at peril of their life,
might have ended we know not how. It ended speedily, in the good way;
Canada got a Godfrey's-cordial Constitution; and for the moment all was
varnished into some kind of feasibility again. A most poor feasibility;
momentary, not lasting, nor like to be of profit to Canada! For this
year, the Canadian most constitutional Parliament, such a congeries
of persons as one can imagine, decides that the aforesaid flame of
rebellion shall not only be forgotten as per bargain, but that--the
loyal population, who flung their lives upon it and quenched it in the
nick of time, shall pay the rebels their damages! Of this, I believe,
on sadly conclusive evidence, there is no doubt whatever. Such, when you
wash off the constitutional pigments, is the Death's-head that discloses
itself. I can only say, if all the Parliaments in the world were to
vote that such a thing was just, I should feel painfully constrained to
answer, at my peril, "No, by the Eternal, never!" And I would recommend
any British Governor who might come across that Business, there or here,
to overhaul it again. What the meaning of a Governor, if he is not
to overhaul and control such things, may be, I cannot conjecture. A
Canadian Lumber-log may as well be made Governor. _He_ might have
some cast-metal hand or shoulder-crank (a thing easily contrivable in
Birmingham) for signing his name to Acts of the Colonial Parliament; he
would be a "native of the country" too, with popularity on that score if
on no other;--he is your man, if you really want a Log Governor!--


I perceive therefore that, besides choosing Parliaments never so well,
the New Colonial Office will have another thing to do: Contrive to send
out a new kind of Governors to the Colonies. This will be the mainspring
of the business; without this the business will not go at all. An
experienced, wise and valiant British man, to represent the Imperial
Interest; he, with such a speaking or silent Collective Wisdom as he can
gather round him in the Colony, will evidently be the condition of all
good between the Mother Country and it. If you can find such a man, your
point is gained; if you cannot, lost. By him and his Collective Wisdom
all manner of _true_ relations, mutual interests and duties such as they
do exist in fact between Mother Country and Colony, can be gradually
developed into practical methods and results; and all manner of true and
noble successes, and veracities in the way of governing, be won.
Choose well your Governor;--not from this or that poor section of the
Aristocracy, military, naval, or red-tapist; wherever there are born
kings of men, you had better seek them out, and breed them to this work.
All sections of the British Population will be open to you: and, on the
whole, you must succeed in finding a man _fit_. And having found him, I
would farther recommend you to keep him some time! It would be a great
improvement to end this present nomadism of Colonial Governors. Give
your Governor due power; and let him know withal that he is wedded to
his enterprise, and having once well learned it, shall continue with it;
that it is not a Canadian Lumber-log you want there, to tumble upon
the vertexes and sign its name by a Birmingham shoulder-crank, but
a Governor of Men; who, you mean, shall fairly gird himself to his
enterprise, and fail with it and conquer with it, and as it were live
and die with it: he will have much to learn; and having once learned it,
will stay, and turn his knowledge to account.

From this kind of Governor, were you once in the way of finding him
with moderate certainty, from him and his Collective Wisdom, all good
whatsoever might be anticipated. And surely, were the Colonies
once enfranchised from red-tape, and the poor Mother Country once
enfranchised from it; were our idle Seventy-fours all busy carrying
out streams of British Industrials, and those Scoundrel Regiments all
working, under divine drill-sergeants, at the grand Atlantic and Pacific
Junction Railway,--poor Britain and her poor Colonies might find that
they _had_ true relations to each other: that the Imperial _Mother_ and
her constitutionally obedient Daughters were not a red-tape fiction,
provoking bitter mockery as at present, but a blessed God's-Fact
destined to fill half the world with its fruits one day!


But undoubtedly our grand primary concern is the Home Office, and its
Irish Giant named of Despair. When the Home Office begins dealing with
this Irish Giant, which it is vitally urgent for us the Home Office
should straightway do, it will find its duties enlarged to a most
unexpected extent, and, as it were, altered from top to bottom. A
changed time now when the question is, What to do with three millions
of paupers (come upon you for food, since you have no work for them)
increasing at a frightful rate per day? Home Office, Parliament, King,
Constitution will find that they have now, if they will continue in this
world long, got a quite immense new question and continually recurring
set of questions. That huge question of the Irish Giant with his Scotch
and English Giant-Progeny advancing open-mouthed upon us, will, as I
calculate, change from top to bottom not the Home Office only but
all manner of Offices and Institutions whatsoever, and gradually the
structure of Society itself. I perceive, it will make us a new Society,
if we are to continue a Society at all. For the alternative is not, Stay
where we are, or change? But Change, with new wise effort fit for the
new time, to true and wider nobler National Life; or Change, by indolent
folding of the arms, as we are now doing, in horrible anarchies and
convulsions to Dissolution, to National Death, or Suspended-animation?
Suspended-animation itself is a frightful possibility for Britain: this
Anarchy whither all Europe has preceded us, where all Europe is now
weltering, would suit us as ill as any! The question for the British
Nation is: Can we work our course pacifically, on firm land, into the
New Era; or must it be, for us too, as for all the others, through black
abysses of Anarchy, hardly escaping, if we do with all our struggles
escape, the jaws of eternal Death?

For Pauperism, though it now absorbs its high figure of millions
annually, is by no means a question of money only, but of infinitely
higher and greater than all conceivable money. If our Chancellor of the
Exchequer had a Fortunatus' purse, and miraculous sacks of Indian meal
that would stand scooping from forever,--I say, even on these terms
Pauperism could not be endured; and it would vitally concern all British
Citizens to abate Pauperism, and never rest till they had ended it
again. Pauperism is the general leakage through every joint of the ship
that it is rotten. Were all men doing their duty, or even seriously
trying to do it, there would be no Pauper. Were the pretended Captains
of the world at all in the habit of commanding; were the pretended
Teachers of the world at all in the habit of teaching,--of admonishing
said Captains among others, and with sacred zeal apprising them to what
place such neglect was leading,--how could Pauperism exist? Pauperism
would lie far over the horizon; we should be lamenting and denouncing
quite inferior sins of men, which were only tending afar off towards
Pauperism. A true Captaincy; a true Teachership, either making all men
and Captains know and devoutly recognize the eternal law of things, or
else breaking its own heart, and going about with sackcloth round its
loins, in testimony of continual sorrow and protest, and prophecy of
God's vengeance upon such a course of things: either of these divine
equipments would have saved us; and it is because we have neither of
them that we are come to such a pass!

We may depend upon it, where there is a Pauper, there is a sin; to
make one Pauper there go many sins. Pauperism is our Social Sin grown
manifest; developed from the state of a spiritual ignobleness, a
practical impropriety and base oblivion of duty, to an affair of the
ledger. Here is not now an unheeded sin against God; here is a concrete
ugly bulk of Beggary demanding that you should buy Indian meal for it.
Men of reflection have long looked with a horror for which there was no
response in the idle public, upon Pauperism; but the quantity of meal it
demands has now awakened men of no reflection to consider it. Pauperism
is the poisonous dripping from all the sins, and putrid unveracities and
god-forgetting greedinesses and devil-serving cants and jesuitisms, that
exist among us. Not one idle Sham lounging about Creation upon false
pretences, upon means which he has not earned, upon theories which he
does not practise, but yields his share of Pauperism somewhere or
other. His sham-work oozes down; finds at last its issue as human
Pauperism,--in a human being that by those false pretences cannot live.
The Idle Workhouse, now about to burst of overfilling, what is it
but the scandalous poison-tank of drainage from the universal Stygian
quagmire of our affairs? Workhouse Paupers; immortal sons of Adam rotted
into that scandalous condition, subter-slavish, demanding that you would
make slaves of them as an unattainable blessing! My friends, I perceive
the quagmire must be drained, or we cannot live. And farther, I
perceive, this of Pauperism is the corner where we must _begin_,--the
levels all pointing thitherward, the possibilities lying all clearly
there. On that Problem we shall find that innumerable things, that all
things whatsoever hang. By courageous steadfast persistence in that, I
can foresee Society itself regenerated. In the course of long strenuous
centuries, I can see the State become what it is actually bound to be,
the keystone of a most real "Organization of Labor,"--and on this Earth
a world of some veracity, and some heroism, once more worth living in!


The State in all European countries, and in England first of all, as I
hope, will discover that its functions are now, and have long been, very
wide of what the State in old pedant Downing Streets has aimed at;
that the State is, for the present, not a reality but in great part a
dramatic speciosity, expending its strength in practices and objects
fallen many of them quite obsolete; that it must come a little nearer
the true aim again, or it cannot continue in this world. The "Champion
of England" eased in iron or tin, and "able to mount his horse with
little assistance,"--this Champion and the thousand-fold cousinry of
Phantasms he has, nearly all dead now but still walking as ghosts,
must positively take himself away: who can endure him, and his solemn
trumpetings and obsolete gesticulations, in a Time that is full of
deadly realities, coming open-mouthed upon us? At Drury Lane, let him
play his part, him and his thousand-fold cousinry; and welcome, so long
as any public will pay a shilling to see him: but on the solid earth,
under the extremely earnest stars, we dare not palter with him, or
accept his tomfooleries any more. Ridiculous they seem to some; horrible
they seem to me: all lies, if one look whence they come and whither they
go, are horrible.

Alas, it will be found, I doubt, that in England more than in any
country, our Public Life and our Private, our State and our Religion,
and all that we do and speak (and the most even of what we _think_),
is a tissue of half-truths and whole-lies; of hypocrisies,
conventionalisms, worn-out traditionary rags and cobwebs; such a
life-garment of beggarly incredible and uncredited falsities as no
honest souls of Adam's Posterity were ever enveloped in before. And we
walk about in it with a stately gesture, as if it were some priestly
stole or imperial mantle; not the foulest beggar's gabardine that ever
was. "No Englishman dare believe the truth," says one: "he stands, for
these two hundred years, enveloped in lies of every kind; from nadir to
zenith an ocean of traditionary cant surrounds him as his life-element.
He really thinks the truth dangerous. Poor wretch, you see him
everywhere endeavoring to temper the truth by taking the falsity
along with it, and welding them together; this he calls 'safe course,'
'moderate course,' and other fine names; there, balanced between God and
the Devil, he thinks he _can_ serve two masters, and that things will go
well with him."

In the cotton-spinning and similar departments our English friend
knows well that truth or God will have nothing to do with the Devil or
falsehood, but will ravel all the web to pieces if you introduce
the Devil or Non-veracity in any form into it: in this department,
therefore, our English friend avoids falsehood. But in the religious,
political, social, moral, and all other spiritual departments he freely
introduces falsehood, nothing doubting; and has long done so, with a
profuseness not elsewhere met with in the world. The unhappy creature,
does he not know, then, that every lie is accursed, and the parent of
mere curses? That he must _think_ the truth; much more speak it? That,
above all things, by the oldest law of Heaven and Earth which no man
violates with impunity, he must not and shall not wag the tongue of
him except to utter his thought? That there is not a grin or beautiful
acceptable grimace he can execute upon his poor countenance, but is
either an express veracity, the image of what passes within him; or else
is a bit of Devil-worship which he and the rest of us will have to pay
for yet? Alas, the grins he executes upon his poor _mind_ (which is all
tortured into St. Vitus dances, and ghastly merry-andrewisms, by the
practice) are the most extraordinary this sun ever saw.

We have Puseyisms, black-and-white surplice controversies:--do not,
officially and otherwise, the select of the longest heads in England
sit with intense application and iron gravity, in open forum, judging of
"prevenient grace"? Not a head of them suspects that it can be improper
so to sit, or of the nature of treason against the Power who gave an
Intellect to man;--that it can be other than the duty of a good citizen
to use his god-given intellect in investigating prevenient grace,
supervenient moonshine, or the color of the Bishop's nightmare, if that
happened to turn up. I consider them far ahead of Cicero's Roman Augurs
with their chicken-bowels: "Behold these divine chicken-bowels, O Senate
and Roman People; the midriff has fallen eastward!" solemnly intimates
one Augur. "By Proserpina and the triple Hecate!" exclaims the other,
"I say the midriff has fallen to the west!" And they look at one another
with the seriousness of men prepared to die in their opinion,--the
authentic seriousness of men betting at Tattersall's, or about to
receive judgment in Chancery. There is in the Englishman something
great, beyond all Roman greatness, in whatever line you meet him; even
as a Latter-Day Augur he seeks his fellow!--Poor devil, I believe it is
his intense love of peace, and hatred of breeding discussions which lead
no-whither, that has led him into this sad practice of amalgamating true
and false.

He has been at it these two hundred years; and has now carried it to a
terrible length. He couldn't follow Oliver Cromwell in the Puritan
path heavenward, so steep was it, and beset with thorns,--and becoming
uncertain withal. He much preferred, at that juncture, to go heavenward
with his Charles Second and merry Nell Gwynns, and old decent
formularies and good respectable aristocratic company, for escort; sore
he tried, by glorious restorations, glorious revolutions and so
forth, to perfect this desirable amalgam; hoped always it might be
possible;--is only just now, if even now, beginning to give up the
hope; and to see with wide-eyed horror that it is not at Heaven he
is arriving, but at the Stygian marshes, with their thirty thousand
Needlewomen, cannibal Connaughts, rivers of lamentation, continual wail
of infants, and the yellow-burning gleam of a Hell-on-Earth!--Bull, my
friend, you must strip that astonishing pontiff-stole, imperial mantle,
or whatever you imagine it to be, which I discern to be a garment of
curses, and poisoned Nessus'-shirt now at last about to take fire upon
you; you must strip that off your poor body, my friend; and, were it
only in a soul's suit of Utilitarian buff, and such belief as that a
big loaf is better than a small one, come forth into contact with your
world, under _true_ professions again, and not false. You wretched man,
you ought to weep for half a century on discovering what lies you have
believed, and what every lie leads to and proceeds from. O my friend, no
honest fellow in this Planet was ever so served by his cooks before; or
has eaten such quantities and qualities of dirt as you have been made
to do, for these two centuries past. Arise, my horribly maltreated yet
still beloved Bull; steep yourself in running water for a long while, my
friend; and begin forthwith in every conceivable direction, physical and
spiritual, the long-expected _Scavenger Age_.

Many doctors have you had, my poor friend; but I perceive it is the
Water-Cure alone that will help you: a complete course of _scavengerism_
is the thing you need! A new and veritable heart-divorce of England from
the Babylonish woman, who is Jesuitism and Unveracity, and dwells not
at Rome now, but under your own nose and everywhere; whom, and her foul
worship of Phantasms and Devils, poor England _had_ once divorced, with
a divine heroism not forgotten yet, and well worth remembering now: a
 Phantasms which have too long nestled thick there, under those
astonishing "Defenders of the Faith,"--Defenders of the Hypocrisies, the
spiritual Vampires and obscene Nightmares, under which England lies in
syncope;--this is what you need; and if you cannot get it, you must die,
my poor friend!

Like people, like priest. Priest, King, Home Office, all manner of
establishments and offices among a people bear a striking resemblance to
the people itself. It is because Bull has been eating so much dirt that
his Home Offices have got into such a shockingly dirty condition,--the
old pavements of them quite gone out of sight and out of memory, and
nothing but mountains of long-accumulated dung in which the poor cattle
are sprawling and tumbling. Had his own life been pure, had his own
daily conduct been grounding itself on the clear pavements or actual
beliefs and veracities, would he have let his Home Offices come to such
a pass? Not in Downing Street only, but in all other thoroughfares and
arenas and spiritual or physical departments of his existence, running
water and Herculean scavengerism have become indispensable, unless the
poor man is to choke in his own exuviae, and die the sorrowfulest death.


If the State could once get back to the real sight of its essential
function, and with religious resolution begin doing that, and putting
away its multifarious imaginary functions, and indignantly casting out
these as mere dung and insalubrious horror and abomination (which they
are), what a promise of reform were there! The British Home Office,
surely this and its kindred Offices exist, if they will think of it,
that life and work may continue possible, and may not become impossible,
for British men. If honorable existence, or existence on human terms
at all, have become impossible for millions of British men, how can
the Home Office or any other Office long exist? With thirty thousand
Needlewomen, a Connaught fallen into potential cannibalism, and the Idle
Workhouse everywhere bursting, and declaring itself an inhumanity and
stupid ruinous brutality not much longer to be tolerated among rational
human creatures, it is time the State were bethinking itself.

So soon as the State attacks that tremendous cloaca of Pauperism, which
will choke the world if it be not attacked, the State will find its real
functions very different indeed from what it had long supposed them!
The State is a reality, and not a dramaturgy; it exists here to render
existence possible, existence desirable and noble, for the State's
subjects. The State, as it gets into the track of its real work, will
find that same expand into whole continents of new unexpected, most
blessed activity; as its dramatic functions, declared superfluous,
more and more fall inert, and go rushing like huge torrents of extinct
exuviae, dung and rubbish, down to the Abyss forever. O Heaven, to see
a State that knew a little why it was there, and on what ground, in this
Year 1850, it could pretend to exist, in so extremely earnest a world as
ours is growing! The British State, if it will be the crown and keystone
of our British Social Existence, must get to recognize, with a veracity
very long unknown to it, what the real objects and indispensable
necessities of our Social Existence are. Good Heavens, it is not
prevenient grace, or the color of the Bishop's nightmare, that is
pinching us; it is the impossibility to get along any farther for
mountains of accumulated dung and falsity and horror; the total
closing-up of noble aims from every man,--of any aim at all, from many
men, except that of rotting out in Idle Workhouses an existence below
that of beasts!

Suppose the State to have fairly started its "Industrial Regiments of
the New Era," which alas, are yet only beginning to be talked of,--what
continents of new real work opened out, for the Home and all other
Public Offices among us! Suppose the Home Office looking out, as for
life and salvation, for proper men to command these "Regiments." Suppose
the announcement were practically made to all British souls that the
want of wants, more indispensable than any jewel in the crown, was that
of men _able to command men_ in ways of industrial and moral well-doing;
that the State would give its very life for such men; that such men
_were_ the State; that the quantity of them to be found in England
lamentably small at present, was the exact measure of England's
worth,--what a new dawn of everlasting day for all British souls! Noble
British soul, to whom the gods have given faculty and heroism, what men
call genius, here at last is a career for thee. It will not be needful
now to swear fealty to the Incredible, and traitorously cramp thyself
into a cowardly canting play-actor in God's Universe; or, solemnly
forswearing that, into a mutinous rebel and waste bandit in thy
generation: here is an aim that is clear and credible, a course fit
for a man. No need to become a tormenting and self-tormenting mutineer,
banded with rebellious souls, if thou wouldst live; no need to rot in
suicidal idleness; or take to platform preaching, and writing in Radical
Newspapers, to pull asunder the great Falsity in which thou and all of
us are choking. The great Falsity, behold it has become, in the very
heart of it, a great Truth of Truths; and invites thee and all brave men
to cooperate with it in transforming all the body and the joints into
the noble likeness of that heart! Thrice-blessed change. The State aims,
once more, with a true aim; and has loadstars in the eternal Heaven.
Struggle faithfully for it; noble is _this_ struggle; thou too,
according to thy faculty, shalt reap in due time, if thou faint not.
Thou shalt have a wise command of men, thou shalt be wisely commanded by
men,--the summary of all blessedness for a social creature here below.
The sore struggle, never to be relaxed, and not forgiven to any son of
man, is once more a noble one; glory to the Highest, it is now once more
a true and noble one, wherein a man can afford to die! Our path is now
again Heavenward. Forward, with steady pace, with drawn weapons, and
unconquerable hearts, in the name of God that made us all!--

Wise obedience and wise command, I foresee that the regimenting of
Pauper Banditti into Soldiers of Industry is but the beginning of
this blessed process, which will extend to the topmost heights of our
Society; and, in the course of generations, make us all once more a
Governed Commonwealth, and _Civitas Dei_, if it please God! Waste-land
Industrials succeeding, other kinds of Industry, as cloth-making,
shoe-making, plough-making, spade-making, house-building,--in the end,
all kinds of Industry whatsoever, will be found capable of regimenting.
Mill-operatives, all manner of free operatives, as yet unregimented,
nomadic under private masters, they, seeing such example and its
blessedness, will say: "Masters, you must regiment us a little; make our
interests with you permanent a little, instead of temporary and nomadic;
we will enlist with the State otherwise!" This will go on, on the one
hand, while the State-operation goes on, on the other: thus will
all Masters of Workmen, private Captains of Industry, be forced to
incessantly co-operate with the State and its public Captains; they
regimenting in their way, the State in its way, with ever-widening
field; till their fields _meet_ (so to speak) and coalesce, and there be
no unregimented worker, or such only as are fit to remain unregimented,
any more.--O my friends, I clearly perceive this horrible cloaca of
Pauperism, wearing nearly bottomless now, is the point where we
must begin. Here, in this plainly unendurable portion of the general
quagmire, the lowest point of all, and hateful even to M'Croudy, must
our main drain begin: steadily prosecuting that, tearing that along with
Herculean labor and divine fidelity, we shall gradually drain the entire
Stygian swamp, and make it all once more a fruitful field!

For the State, I perceive, looking out with right sacred earnestness for
persons able to command, will straightway also come upon the question:
"What kind of schools and seminaries, and teaching and also preaching
establishments have I, for the training of young souls to take command
and to yield obedience? Wise command, wise obedience: the capability of
these two is the net measure of culture, and human virtue, in every man;
all good lies in the possession of these two capabilities; all evil,
wretchedness and ill-success in the want of these. He is a good man that
can command and obey; he that cannot is a bad. If my teachers and my
preachers, with their seminaries, high schools and cathedrals, do train
men to these gifts, the thing they are teaching and preaching must be
true; if they do not, not true!"

The State, once brought to its veracities by the thumb-screw in this
manner, what will it think of these same seminaries and cathedrals!
I foresee that our Etons and Oxfords with their nonsense-verses,
college-logics, and broken crumbs of mere _speech_,--which is not even
English or Teutonic speech, but old Grecian and Italian speech, dead
and buried and much lying out of our way these two thousand years last
past,--will be found a most astonishing seminary for the training of
young English souls to take command in human Industries, and act a
valiant part under the sun! The State does not want vocables, but manly
wisdoms and virtues: the State, does it want parliamentary orators,
first of all, and men capable of writing books? What a rag-fair of
extinct monkeries, high-piled here in the very shrine of our existence,
fit to smite the generations with atrophy and beggarly paralysis,--as we
see it do! The Minister of Education will not want for work, I think, in
the New Downing Street!

How it will go with Souls'-Overseers, and what the _new_ kind will be,
we do not prophesy just now. Clear it is, however, that the last finish
of the State's efforts, in this operation of regimenting, will be to get
the _true_ Souls'-Overseers set over men's souls, to regiment, as the
consummate flower of all, and constitute into some Sacred Corporation,
bearing authority and dignity in their generation, the Chosen of the
Wise, of the Spiritual and Devout-minded, the Reverent who deserve
reverence, who are as the Salt of the Earth;--that not till this is done
can the State consider its edifice to have reached the first story, to
be safe for a moment, to be other than an arch without the keystones,
and supported hitherto on mere wood. How will this be done? Ask not; let
the second or the third generation after this begin to ask!--Alas, wise
men do exist, born duly into the world in every current generation; but
the getting of _them_ regimented is the highest pitch of human Polity,
and the feat of all feats in political engineering:--impossible for us,
in this poor age, as the building of St. Paul's would be for Canadian
Beavers, acquainted only with the architecture of fish-dams, and with no
trowel but their tail.

Literature, the strange entity so called,--that indeed is here. If
Literature continue to be the haven of expatriated spiritualisms, and
have its Johnsons, Goethes and _true_ Archbishops of the World, to show
for itself as heretofore, there may be hope in Literature. If Literature
dwindle, as is probable, into mere merry-andrewism, windy twaddle,
and feats of spiritual legerdemain, analogous to rope-dancing,
opera-dancing, and street-fiddling with a hat carried round for
halfpence, or for guineas, there will be no hope in Literature. What
if our next set of Souls'-Overseers were to be _silent_ ones very
mainly?--Alas, alas, why gaze into the blessed continents and delectable
mountains of a Future based on _truth_, while as yet we struggle far
down, nigh suffocated in a slough of lies, uncertain whether or how we
shall be able to climb at all!


Who will begin the long steep journey with us; who of living statesmen
will snatch the standard, and say, like a hero on the forlorn-hope for
his country, Forward! Or is there none; no one that can and dare? And
our lot too, then, is Anarchy by barricade or ballot-box, and Social
Death?--We will not think so.


Whether Sir Robert Peel will undertake the Reform of Downing Street for
us, or any Ministry or Reform farther, is not known. He, they say, is
getting old, does himself recoil from it, and shudder at it; which is
possible enough. The clubs and coteries appear to have settled that
he surely will not; that this melancholy wriggling seesaw of red-tape
Trojans and Protectionist Greeks must continue its course till--what
_can_ happen, my friends, if this go on continuing?

And yet, perhaps, England has by no means so settled it. Quit the clubs
and coteries, you do not hear two rational men speak long together upon
politics, without pointing their inquiries towards this man. A Minister
that will attack the Augeas Stable of Downing Street, and begin
producing a real Management, no longer an imaginary one, of our affairs;
_he_, or else in few years Chartist Parliament and the Deluge come: that
seems the alternative. As I read the omens, there was no man in my time
more authentically called to a post of difficulty, of danger, and of
honor than this man. The enterprise is ready for him, if he is ready for
it. He has but to lift his finger in this enterprise, and whatsoever
is wise and manful in England will rally round him. If the faculty and
heart for it be in him, he, strangely and almost tragically if we look
upon his history, is to have leave to try it; he now, at the eleventh
hour, has the opportunity for such a feat in reform as has not, in these
late generations, been attempted by all our reformers put together.

As for Protectionist jargon, who in these earnest days would occupy many
moments of his time with that? "A Costermonger in this street," says
Crabbe, "finding lately that his rope of onions, which he hoped would
have brought a shilling, was to go for only sevenpence henceforth, burst
forth into lamentation, execration and the most pathetic tears. Throwing
up the window, I perceived the other costermongers preparing impatiently
to pack this one out of their company as a disgrace to it, if he would
not hold his peace and take the market-rate for his onions. I
looked better at this Costermonger. To my astonished imagination, a
star-and-garter dawned upon the dim figure of the man; and I perceived
that here was no Costermonger to be expelled with ignominy, but a
sublime goddess-born Ducal Individual, whom I forbear to name at this
moment! What an omen;--nay to my astonished imagination, there dawned
still fataler omens. Surely, of all human trades ever heard of, the
trade of Owning Land in England ought _not_ to bully us for drink--money
just now!"

"Hansard's Debates," continues Crabbe farther on, "present many
inconsistencies of speech; lamentable unveracities uttered in
Parliament, by one and indeed by all; in which sad list Sir Robert Peel
stands for his share among others. Unveracities not a few were spoken in
Parliament: in fact, to one with a sense of what is called God's truth,
it seemed all one unveracity, a talking from the teeth outward, not as
the convictions but as the expediencies and inward astucities directed;
and, in the sense of God's _truth_, I have heard no true word uttered in
Parliament at all. Most lamentable unveracities continually _spoken_ in
Parliament, by almost every one that had to open his mouth there. But
the largest veracity ever _done_ in Parliament in our time, as we all
know, was of this man's doing;--and that, you will find, is a very
considerable item in the calculation!"

Yes, and I believe England in her dumb way remembers that too. And
"the Traitor Peel" can very well afford to let innumerable Ducal
Costermongers, parliamentary Adventurers, and lineal representatives of
the Impenitent Thief, say all their say about him, and do all their do.
With a virtual England at his back, and an actual eternal sky above him,
there is not much in the total net-amount of that. When the master of
the horse rides abroad, many dogs in the village bark; but he pursues
his journey all the same.




No. V. STUMP-ORATOR. [May 1, 1850.]

It lies deep in our habits, confirmed by all manner of educational and
other arrangements for several centuries back, to consider human talent
as best of all evincing itself by the faculty of eloquent speech. Our
earliest schoolmasters teach us, as the one gift of culture they have,
the art of spelling and pronouncing, the rules of correct speech;
rhetorics, logics follow, sublime mysteries of grammar, whereby we may
not only speak but write. And onward to the last of our schoolmasters in
the highest university, it is still intrinsically grammar, under various
figures grammar. To speak in various languages, on various things, but
on all of them to speak, and appropriately deliver ourselves by tongue
or pen,--this is the sublime goal towards which all manner of beneficent
preceptors and learned professors, from the lowest hornbook upwards, are
continually urging and guiding us. Preceptor or professor, looking over
his miraculous seedplot, seminary as he well calls it, or crop of young
human souls, watches with attentive view one organ of his delightful
little seedlings growing to be men,--the tongue. He hopes we shall
all get to speak yet, if it please Heaven. "Some of you shall be
book-writers, eloquent review-writers, and astonish mankind, my young
friends: others in white neckcloths shall do sermons by Blair and
Lindley Murray, nay by Jeremy Taylor and judicious Hooker, and be
priests to guide men heavenward by skilfully brandished handkerchief and
the torch of rhetoric. For others there is Parliament and the election
beer-barrel, and a course that leads men very high indeed; these shall
shake the senate-house, the Morning Newspapers, shake the very spheres,
and by dexterous wagging of the tongue disenthrall mankind, and lead our
afflicted country and us on the way we are to go. The way if not where
noble deeds are done, yet where noble words are spoken,--leading us if
not to the real Home of the Gods, at least to something which shall more
or less deceptively resemble it!"

So fares it with the son of Adam, in these bewildered epochs; so, from
the first opening of his eyes in this world, to his last closing of
them, and departure hence. Speak, speak, oh speak;--if thou have
any faculty, speak it, or thou diest and it is no faculty! So in
universities, and all manner of dames' and other schools, of the very
highest class as of the very lowest; and Society at large, when we
enter there, confirms with all its brilliant review-articles, successful
publications, intellectual tea-circles, literary gazettes, parliamentary
eloquences, the grand lesson we had. Other lesson in fact we have none,
in these times. If there be a human talent, let it get into the tongue,
and make melody with that organ. The talent that can say nothing for
itself, what is it? Nothing; or a thing that can do mere drudgeries, and
at best make money by railways.

All this is deep-rooted in our habits, in our social, educational and
other arrangements; and all this, when we look at it impartially, is
astonishing. Directly in the teeth of all this it may be asserted that
speaking is by no means the chief faculty a human being can attain to;
that his excellence therein is by no means the best test of his general
human excellence, or availability in this world; nay that, unless we
look well, it is liable to become the very worst test ever devised for
said availability. The matter extends very far, down to the very roots
of the world, whither the British reader cannot conveniently follow me
just now; but I will venture to assert the three following things, and
invite him to consider well what truth he can gradually find in them:--

First, that excellent speech, even speech _really_ excellent, is not,
and never was, the chief test of human faculty, or the measure of a
man's ability, for any true function whatsoever; on the contrary, that
excellent _silence_ needed always to accompany excellent speech, and was
and is a much rarer and more difficult gift.

_Secondly_, that really excellent speech--which I, being possessed
of the Hebrew Bible or Book, as well as of other books in my own and
foreign languages, and having occasionally heard a wise man's word among
the crowd of unwise, do almost unspeakably esteem, as a human gift--is
terribly apt to get confounded with its counterfeit, sham-excellent
speech! And furthermore, that if really excellent human speech is among
the best of human things, then sham-excellent ditto deserves to be
ranked with the very worst. False speech,--capable of becoming, as some
one has said, the falsest and basest of all human things:--put the case,
one were listening to _that_ as to the truest and noblest! Which, little
as we are conscious of it, I take to be the sad lot of many excellent
souls among us just now. So many as admire parliamentary eloquence,
divine popular literature, and such like, are dreadfully liable to
it just now: and whole nations and generations seem as if getting
themselves _asphyxiaed_, constitutionally into their last sleep, by
means of it just now!

For alas, much as we worship speech on all hands, here is a _third_
assertion which a man may venture to make, and invite considerate men
to reflect upon: That in these times, and for several generations back,
there has been, strictly considered, no really excellent speech at all,
but sham-excellent merely; that is to say, false or quasi-false
speech getting itself admired and worshipped, instead of detested and
suppressed. A truly alarming predicament; and not the less so if we find
it a quite pleasant one for the time being, and welcome the advent of
asphyxia, as we would that of comfortable natural sleep;--as, in so
many senses, we are doing! Surly judges there have been who did not much
admire the "Bible of Modern Literature," or anything you could distil
from it, in contrast with the ancient Bibles; and found that in the
matter of speaking, our far best excellence, where that could be
obtained, was excellent silence, which means endurance and exertion, and
good work with lips closed; and that our tolerablest speech was of the
nature of honest commonplace introduced where indispensable, which
only set up for being brief and true, and could not be mistaken for
excellent.

These are hard sayings for many a British reader, unconscious of any
damage, nay joyfully conscious to himself of much profit, from that side
of his possessions. Surely on this side, if on no other, matters stood
not ill with him? The ingenuous arts had softened his manners; the
parliamentary eloquences supplied him with a succedaneum for government,
the popular literatures with the finer sensibilities of the heart:
surely on this _wind_ward side of things the British reader was not ill
off?--Unhappy British reader!

In fact, the spiritual detriment we unconsciously suffer, in every
province of our affairs, from this our prostrate respect to power of
speech is incalculable. For indeed it is the natural consummation of
an epoch such as ours. Given a general insincerity of mind for several
generations, you will certainly find the Talker established in the
place of honor; and the Doer, hidden in the obscure crowd, with activity
lamed, or working sorrowfully forward on paths unworthy of him. All
men are devoutly prostrate, worshipping the eloquent talker; and no man
knows what a scandalous idol he is. Out of whom in the mildest
manner, like comfortable natural rest, comes mere asphyxia and death
everlasting! Probably there is not in Nature a more distracted phantasm
than your commonplace eloquent speaker, as he is found on platforms,
in parliaments, on Kentucky stumps, at tavern-dinners, in windy, empty,
insincere times like ours. The "excellent Stump-orator," as our admiring
Yankee friends define him, he who in any occurrent set of circumstances
can start forth, mount upon his "stump," his rostrum, tribune, place
in parliament, or other ready elevation, and pour forth from him
his appropriate "excellent speech," his interpretation of the said
circumstances, in such manner as poor windy mortals round him shall cry
bravo to,--he is not an artist I can much admire, as matters go! Alas,
he is in general merely the windiest mortal of them all; and is admired
for being so, into the bargain. Not a windy blockhead there who kept
silent but is better off than this excellent stump-orator. Better off,
for a great many reasons; for this reason, were there no other: the
silent one is not admired; the silent suspects, perhaps partly admits,
that he is a kind of blockhead, from which salutary self-knowledge
the excellent stump-orator is debarred. A mouthpiece of Chaos to poor
benighted mortals that lend ear to him as to a voice from Cosmos, this
excellent stump-orator fills me with amazement. Not empty these musical
wind-utterances of his; they are big with prophecy; they announce, too
audibly to me, that the end of many things is drawing nigh!

Let the British reader consider it a little; he too is not a little
interested in it. Nay he, and the European reader in general, but he
chiefly in these days, will require to consider it a great deal,--and to
take important steps in consequence by and by, if I mistake not. And in
the mean while, sunk as he himself is in that bad element, and like a
jaundiced man struggling to discriminate yellow colors,--he will have to
meditate long before he in any measure get the immense meanings of the
thing brought home to him; and discern, with astonishment, alarm, and
almost terror and despair, towards what fatal issues, in our Collective
Wisdom and elsewhere, this notion of talent meaning eloquent speech, so
obstinately entertained this long while, has been leading us! Whosoever
shall look well into origins and issues, will find this of eloquence
and the part it now plays in our affairs, to be one of the gravest
phenomena; and the excellent stump-orator of these days to be not only
a ridiculous but still more a highly tragical personage. While the
many listen to him, the few are used to pass rapidly, with some gust of
scornful laughter, some growl of impatient malediction; but he deserves
from this latter class a much more serious attention.


In the old Ages, when Universities and Schools were first instituted,
this function of the schoolmaster, to teach mere speaking, was the
natural one. In those healthy times, guided by silent instincts and the
monition of Nature, men had from of old been used to teach themselves
what it was essential to learn, by the one sure method of learning
anything, practical apprenticeship to it. This was the rule for all
classes; as it now is the rule, unluckily, for only one class. The
Working Man as yet sought only to know his craft; and educated himself
sufficiently by ploughing and hammering, under the conditions given, and
in fit relation to the persons given: a course of education, then as
now and ever, really opulent in manful culture and instruction to him;
teaching him many solid virtues, and most indubitably useful knowledges;
developing in him valuable faculties not a few both to do and to
endure,--among which the faculty of elaborate grammatical utterance,
seeing he had so little of extraordinary to utter, or to learn from
spoken or written utterances, was not bargained for; the grammar of
Nature, which he learned from his mother, being still amply sufficient
for him. This was, as it still is, the grand education of the Working
Man.

As for the Priest, though his trade was clearly of a reading and
speaking nature, he knew also in those veracious times that grammar, if
needful, was by no means the one thing needful, or the chief thing. By
far the chief thing needful, and indeed the one thing then as now, was,
That there should be in him the feeling and the practice of reverence
to God and to men; that in his life's core there should dwell, spoken
or silent, a ray of pious wisdom fit for illuminating dark human
destinies;--not so much that he should possess the art of speech, as
that he should have something to speak! And for that latter requisite
the Priest also trained himself by apprenticeship, by actual attempt
to practise, by manifold long-continued trial, of a devout and painful
nature, such as his superiors prescribed to him. This, when once judged
satisfactory, procured him ordination; and his grammar-learning, in
the good times of priesthood, was very much of a parergon with him,
as indeed in all times it is intrinsically quite insignificant in
comparison.

The young Noble again, for whom grammar schoolmasters were first hired
and high seminaries founded, he too without these, or above and over
these, had from immemorial time been used to learn his business by
apprenticeship. The young Noble, before the schoolmaster as after him,
went apprentice to some elder noble; entered himself as page with some
distinguished earl or duke; and here, serving upwards from step to step,
under wise monition, learned his chivalries, his practice of arms and
of courtesies, his baronial duties and manners, and what it would beseem
him to do and to be in the world,--by practical attempt of his own, and
example of one whose life was a daily concrete pattern for him. To such
a one, already filled with intellectual substance, and possessing what
we may call the practical gold-bullion of human culture, it was an
obvious improvement that he should be taught to speak it out of him on
occasion; that he should carry a spiritual banknote producible on demand
for what of "gold-bullion" he had, not so negotiable otherwise, stored
in the cellars of his mind. A man, with wisdom, insight and heroic worth
already acquired for him, naturally demanded of the schoolmaster this
one new faculty, the faculty of uttering in fit words what he had. A
valuable superaddition of faculty:--and yet we are to remember it was
scarcely a new faculty; it was but the tangible sign of what
other faculties the man had in the silent state: and many a rugged
inarticulate chief of men, I can believe, was most enviably
"educated," who had not a Book on his premises; whose signature, a true
sign-_manual_, was the stamp of his iron hand duly inked and clapt upon
the parchment; and whose speech in Parliament, like the growl of lions,
did indeed convey his meaning, but would have torn Lindley Murray's
nerves to pieces! To such a one the schoolmaster adjusted himself very
naturally in that manner; as a man wanted for teaching grammatical
utterance; the thing to utter being already there. The thing to utter,
here was the grand point! And perhaps this is the reason why among
earnest nations, as among the Romans for example, the craft of the
schoolmaster was held in little regard; for indeed as mere teacher of
grammar, of ciphering on the abacus and such like, how did he differ
much from the dancing-master or fencing-master, or deserve much
regard?--Such was the rule in the ancient healthy times.


Can it be doubtful that this is still the rule of human education; that
the human creature needs first of all to be educated not that he may
speak, but that he may have something weighty and valuable to say! If
speech is the bank-note of an inward capital of culture, of insight and
noble human worth, then speech is precious, and the art of speech shall
be honored. But if there is no inward capital; if speech represent no
real culture of the mind, but an imaginary culture; no bullion, but
the fatal and now almost hopeless deficit of such? Alas, alas, said
bank-note is then a _forged_ one; passing freely current in the market;
but bringing damages to the receiver, to the payer, and to all the
world, which are in sad truth infallible, and of amount incalculable.
Few think of it at present; but the truth remains forever so. In
parliaments and other loud assemblages, your eloquent talk, disunited
from Nature and her facts, is taken as wisdom and the correct image of
said facts: but Nature well knows what it is, Nature will not have it
as such, and will reject your forged note one day, with huge costs. The
foolish traders in the market pass freely, nothing doubting, and rejoice
in the dexterous execution of the piece: and so it circulates from hand
to hand, and from class to class; gravitating ever downwards towards the
practical class; till at last it reaches some poor _working_ hand, who
can pass it no farther, but must take it to the bank to get bread with
it, and there the answer is, "Unhappy caitiff, this note is forged. It
does not mean performance and reality, in parliaments and elsewhere, for
thy behoof; it means fallacious semblance of performance; and thou, poor
dupe, art thrown into the stocks on offering it here!"

Alas, alas, looking abroad over Irish difficulties, Mosaic
sweating-establishments, French barricades, and an anarchic Europe, is
it not as if all the populations of the world were rising or had risen
into incendiary madness;--unable longer to endure such an avalanche
of forgeries, and of penalties in consequence, as had accumulated upon
them? The speaker is "excellent;" the notes he does are beautiful?
Beautifully fit for the market, yes; _he_ is an excellent artist in his
business;--and the more excellent he is, the more is my desire to lay
him by the heels, and fling _him_ into the treadmill, that I might save
the poor sweating tailors, French Sansculottes, and Irish Sanspotatoes
from bearing the smart!

For the smart must be borne; some one must bear it, as sure as God
lives. Every word of man is either a note or a forged note:--have these
eternal skies forgotten to be in earnest, think you, because men go
grinning like enchanted apes? Foolish souls, this now as of old is the
unalterable law of your existence. If you know the truth and do it,
the Universe itself seconds you, bears you on to sure victory
everywhere:--and, observe, to sure defeat everywhere if you do not
do the truth. And alas, if you _know_ only the eloquent fallacious
semblance of the truth, what chance is there of your ever doing it?
You will do something very different from it, I think!--He who well
considers, will find this same "art of speech," as we moderns have
it, to be a truly astonishing product of the Ages; and the longer he
considers it, the more astonishing and alarming. I reckon it the saddest
of all the curses that now lie heavy on us. With horror and amazement,
one perceives that this much-celebrated "art," so diligently practised
in all corners of the world just now, is the chief destroyer of whatever
good is born to us (softly, swiftly shutting up all nascent good, as if
under exhausted glass receivers, there to choke and die); and the grand
parent manufactory of evil to us,--as it were, the last finishing and
varnishing workshop of all the Devil's ware that circulates under the
sun. No Devil's sham is fit for the market till it have been polished
and enamelled here; this is the general assaying-house for such, where
the artists examine and answer, "Fit for the market; not fit!" Words
will not express what mischiefs the misuse of words has done, and is
doing, in these heavy-laden generations.

Do you want a man _not_ to practise what he believes, then encourage
him to keep often speaking it in words. Every time he speaks it, the
tendency to do it will grow less. His empty speech of what he believes,
will be a weariness and an affliction to the wise man. But do you wish
his empty speech of what he believes, to become farther an insincere
speech of what he does not believe? Celebrate to him his gift of speech;
assure him that he shall rise in Parliament by means of it, and achieve
great things without any performance; that eloquent speech, whether
performed or not, is admirable. My friends, eloquent unperformed speech,
in Parliament or elsewhere, is horrible! The eloquent man that delivers,
in Parliament or elsewhere, a beautiful speech, and will perform nothing
of it, but leaves it as if already performed,--what can you make of that
man? He has enrolled himself among the _Ignes Fatui_ and Children of
the Wind; means to serve, as beautifully illuminated Chinese Lantern,
in that corps henceforth. I think, the serviceable thing you could do
to that man, if permissible, would be a severe one: To clip off a bit
of his eloquent tongue by way of penance and warning; another bit, if
he again spoke without performing; and so again, till you had clipt the
whole tongue away from him,--and were delivered, you and he, from at
least one miserable mockery: "There, eloquent friend, see now in silence
if there be any redeeming deed in thee; of blasphemous wind-eloquence,
at least, we shall have no more!" How many pretty men have gone this
road, escorted by the beautifulest marching music from all the "public
organs;" and have found at last that it ended--where? It is the _broad_
road, that leads direct to Limbo and the Kingdom of the Inane. Gifted
men, and once valiant nations, and as it were the whole world with one
accord, are marching thither, in melodious triumph, all the drums and
hautboys giving out their cheerfulest _Ca-ira_. It is the universal
humor of the world just now. My friends, I am very sure you will
_arrive_, unless you halt!--


Considered as the last finish of education, or of human culture, worth
and acquirement, the art of speech is noble, and even divine; it is
like the kindling of a Heaven's light to show us what a glorious world
exists, and has perfected itself, in a man. But if no world exist in the
man; if nothing but continents of empty vapor, of greedy self-conceits,
common-place hearsays, and indistinct loomings of a sordid _chaos_
exist in him, what will be the use of "light" to show us that? Better
a thousand times that such a man do not speak; but keep his empty
vapor and his sordid chaos to himself, hidden to the utmost from all
beholders. To look on that, can be good for no human beholder; to
look away from that, must be good. And if, by delusive semblances of
rhetoric, logic, first-class degrees, and the aid of elocution-masters
and parliamentary reporters, the poor proprietor of said chaos should
be led to persuade himself, and get others persuaded,--which it is the
nature of his sad task to do, and which, in certain eras of the world,
it is fatally possible to do,--that this is a cosmos which he owns; that
_he_, being so perfect in tongue-exercise and full of college-honors,
is an "educated" man, and pearl of great price in his generation; that
round him, and his parliament emulously listening to him, as round some
divine apple of gold set in a picture of silver, all the world should
gather to adore: what is likely to become of him and the gathering
world? An apple of Sodom set in the clusters of Gomorrah: that, little
as he suspects it, is the definition of the poor chaotically
eloquent man, with his emulous parliament and miserable adoring
world!--Considered as the whole of education, or human culture, which
it now is in our modern manners; all apprenticeship except to mere
handicraft having fallen obsolete, and the "educated man" being with us
emphatically and exclusively the man that can speak well with tongue
or pen, and astonish men by the quantities of speech he has _heard_
("tremendous _reader_," "walking encyclopaedia," and such like),--the
Art of Speech is probably definable in that case as the short summary of
all the Black Arts put together.


But the Schoolmaster is secondary, an effect rather than a cause in
this matter: what the Schoolmaster with his universities shall manage
or attempt to teach will be ruled by what the Society with its practical
industries is continually demanding that men should learn. We spoke once
of vital lungs for Society: and in fact this question always rises as
the alpha and omega of social questions, What methods the Society has of
summoning aloft into the high places, for its help and governance, the
wisdom that is born to it in all places, and of course is born chiefly
in the more populous or lower places? For this, if you will consider it,
expresses the ultimate available result, and net sum-total, of all the
efforts, struggles and confused activities that go on in the Society;
and determines whether they are true and wise efforts, certain to be
victorious, or false and foolish, certain to be futile, and to fall
captive and caitiff. How do men rise in your Society? In all Societies,
Turkey included, and I suppose Dahomey included, men do rise; but the
question of questions always is, What kind of men? Men of noble gifts,
or men of ignoble? It is the one or the other; and a life-and-death
inquiry which! For in all places and all times, little as you may heed
it, Nature most silently but most inexorably demands that it be the one
and not the other. And you need not try to palm an ignoble sham upon
her, and call it noble; for she is a judge. And her penalties, as quiet
as she looks, are terrible: amounting to world-earthquakes, to anarchy
and death everlasting; and admit of no appeal!--

Surely England still flatters herself that she has lungs; that she can
still breathe a little? Or is it that the poor creature, driven into
mere blind industrialisms; and as it were, gone pearl-diving this long
while many fathoms deep, and tearing up the oyster-beds so as never
creature did before, hardly knows,--so busy in the belly of the oyster
chaos, where is no thought of "breathing,"--whether she has lungs or
not? Nations of a robust habit, and fine deep chest, can sometimes take
in a deal of breath _before_ diving; and live long, in the muddy deeps,
without new breath: but they too come to need it at last, and will die
if they cannot get it!

To the gifted soul that is born in England, what is the career, then,
that will carry him, amid noble Olympic dust, up to the immortal gods?
For his country's sake, that it may not lose the service he was born
capable of doing it; for his own sake, that his life be not choked and
perverted, and his light from Heaven be not changed into lightning
from the Other Place,--it is essential that there be such a career. The
country that can offer no career in that case, is a doomed country; nay
it is already a dead country: it has secured the ban of Heaven upon it;
will not have Heaven's light, will have the Other Place's lightning; and
may consider itself as appointed to expire, in frightful coughings of
street musketry or otherwise, on a set day, and to be in the eye of law
dead. In no country is there not some career, inviting to it either the
noble Hero, or the tough Greek of the Lower Empire: which of the two do
your careers invite? There is no question more important. The kind of
careers you offer in countries still living, determines with perfect
exactness the kind of the life that is in them,--whether it is natural
blessed life, or galvanic accursed ditto, and likewise what degree of
strength is in the same.

Our English careers to born genius are twofold. There is the silent or
unlearned career of the Industrialisms, which are very many among us;
and there is the articulate or learned career of the three professions,
Medicine, Law (under which we may include Politics), and the Church.
Your born genius, therefore, will first have to ask himself, Whether he
can hold his tongue or cannot? True, all human talent, especially all
deep talent, is a talent to _do_, and is intrinsically of silent nature;
inaudible, like the Sphere Harmonies and Eternal Melodies, of which it
is an incarnated fraction. All real talent, I fancy, would much rather,
if it listened only to Nature's monitions, express itself in rhythmic
facts than in melodious words, which latter at best, where they are good
for anything, are only a feeble echo and shadow or foreshadow of the
former. But talents differ much in this of power to be silent; and
circumstances, of position, opportunity and such like, modify them
still more;--and Nature's monitions, oftenest quite drowned in foreign
hearsays, are by no means the only ones listened to in deciding!--The
Industrialisms are all of silent nature; and some of them are heroic
and eminently human; others, again, we may call unheroic, not eminently
human: _beaverish_ rather, but still honest; some are even _vulpine_,
altogether inhuman and dishonest. Your born genius must make his choice.

If a soul is born with divine intelligence, and has its lips touched
with hallowed fire, in consecration for high enterprises under the sun,
this young soul will find the question asked of him by England every
hour and moment: "Canst thou turn thy human intelligence into the beaver
sort, and make honest contrivance, and accumulation of capital by it? If
so, do it; and avoid the vulpine kind, which I don't recommend. Honest
triumphs in engineering and machinery await thee; scrip awaits
thee, commercial successes, kingship in the counting-room, on the
stock-exchange;--thou shalt be the envy of surrounding flunkies, and
collect into a heap more gold than a dray-horse can draw."--"Gold, so
much gold?" answers the ingenuous soul, with visions of the envy of
surrounding flunkies dawning on him; and in very many cases decides that
he will contract himself into beaverism, and with such a horse-draught
of gold, emblem of a never-imagined success in beaver heroism, strike
the surrounding flunkies yellow.

This is our common course; this is in some sort open to every creature,
what we call the beaver career; perhaps more open in England, taking in
America too, than it ever was in any country before. And, truly, good
consequences follow out of it: who can be blind to them? Half of a most
excellent and opulent result is realized to us in this way; baleful
only when it sets up (as too often now) for being the whole result. A
half-result which will be blessed and heavenly so soon as the other half
is had,--namely wisdom to guide the first half. Let us honor all honest
human power of contrivance in its degree. The beaver intellect, so
long as it steadfastly refuses to be vulpine, and answers the tempter
pointing out short routes to it with an honest "No, no," is truly
respectable to me; and many a highflying speaker and singer whom I have
known, has appeared to me much less of a developed man than certain
of my mill-owning, agricultural, commercial, mechanical, or otherwise
industrial friends, who have held their peace all their days and gone on
in the silent state. If a man can keep his intellect silent, and make it
even into honest beaverism, several very manful moralities, in danger
of wreck on other courses, may comport well with that, and give it a
genuine and partly human character; and I will tell him, in these days
he may do far worse with himself and his intellect than change it into
beaverism, and make honest money with it. If indeed he could become a
_heroic_ industrial, and have a life "eminently human"! But that is not
easy at present. Probably some ninety-nine out of every hundred of our
gifted souls, who have to seek a career for themselves, go this
beaver road. Whereby the first half-result, national wealth namely, is
plentifully realized; and only the second half, or wisdom to guide it,
is dreadfully behindhand.

But now if the gifted soul be not of taciturn nature, be of vivid,
impatient, rapidly productive nature, and aspire much to give itself
sensible utterance,--I find that, in this case, the field it has in
England is narrow to an extreme; is perhaps narrower than ever offered
itself, for the like object, in this world before. Parliament, Church,
Law: let the young vivid soul turn whither he will for a career, he
finds among variable conditions one condition invariable, and extremely
surprising, That the proof of excellence is to be done by the tongue.
For heroism that will not speak, but only act, there is no account
kept:--The English Nation does not need that silent kind, then, but only
the talking kind? Most astonishing. Of all the organs a man has, there
is none held in account, it would appear, but the tongue he uses
for talking. Premiership, woolsack, mitre, and quasi-crown: all is
attainable if you can talk with due ability. Everywhere your proof-shot
is to be a well-fired volley of talk. Contrive to talk well, you will
get to Heaven, the modern Heaven of the English. Do not talk well, only
work well, and heroically hold your peace, you have no chance whatever
to get thither; with your utmost industry you may get to Threadneedle
Street, and accumulate more gold than a dray-horse can draw. Is not this
a very wonderful arrangement?

I have heard of races done by mortals tied in sacks; of human
competitors, high aspirants, climbing heavenward on the soaped pole;
seizing the soaped pig; and clutching with cleft fist, at full gallop,
the fated goose tied aloft by its foot;--which feats do prove agility,
toughness and other useful faculties in man: but this of dexterous talk
is probably as strange a competition as any. And the question rises,
Whether certain of these other feats, or perhaps an alternation of all
of them, relieved now and then by a bout of grinning through the collar,
might not be profitably substituted for the solitary proof-feat of talk,
now getting rather monotonous by its long continuance? Alas, Mr. Bull,
I do find it is all little other than a proof of toughness, which is a
quality I respect, with more or less expenditure of falsity and
astucity superadded, which I entirely condemn. Toughness _plus_
astucity:--perhaps a simple wooden mast set up in Palace-Yard, well
soaped and duly presided over, might be the honester method? Such a
method as this by trial of talk, for filling your chief offices in
Church and State, was perhaps never heard of in the solar system
before. You are quite used to it, my poor friend; and nearly dead by the
consequences of it: but in the other Planets, as in other epochs of your
own Planet it would have done had you proposed it, the thing awakens
incredulous amazement, world-wide Olympic laughter, which ends in
tempestuous hootings, in tears and horror! My friend, if you can, as
heretofore this good while, find nobody to take care of your affairs
but the expertest talker, it is all over with your affairs and you. Talk
never yet could guide any man's or nation's affairs; nor will it yours,
except towards the _Limbus Patrum_, where all talk, except a very select
kind of it, lodges at last.


Medicine, guarded too by preliminary impediments, and frightful
medusa-heads of quackery, which deter many generous souls from entering,
is of the _half_-articulate professions, and does not much invite the
ardent kinds of ambition. The intellect required for medicine might be
wholly human, and indeed should by all rules be,--the profession of the
Human Healer being radically a sacred one and connected with the
highest priesthoods, or rather being itself the outcome and acme of all
priesthoods, and divinest conquests of intellect here below. As will
appear one day, when men take off their old monastic and ecclesiastic
spectacles, and look with eyes again! In essence the Physician's task
is always heroic, eminently human: but in practice most unluckily at
present we find it too become in good part _beaverish_; yielding a
money-result alone. And what of it is not beaverish,--does not that too
go mainly to ingenious talking, publishing of yourself, ingratiating
of yourself; a partly human exercise or waste of intellect, and alas a
partly vulpine ditto;--making the once sacred [Gr.] _'Iatros_, or Human
Healer, more impossible for us than ever!

Angry basilisks watch at the gates of Law and Church just now; and
strike a sad damp into the nobler of the young aspirants. Hard bonds
are offered you to sign; as it were, a solemn engagement to constitute
yourself an impostor, before ever entering; to declare your belief
in incredibilities,--your determination, in short, to take Chaos for
Cosmos, and Satan for the Lord of things, if he come with money in his
pockets, and horsehair and bombazine decently wrapt about him. Fatal
preliminaries, which deter many an ingenuous young soul, and send him
back from the threshold, and I hope will deter ever more. But if you do
enter, the condition is well known: "Talk; who can talk best here? His
shall be the mouth of gold, and the purse of gold; and with my [Gr.]
_mitra_ (once the head-dress of unfortunate females, I am told) shall
his sacred temples be begirt."

Ingenuous souls, unless forced to it, do now much shudder at the
threshold of both these careers, and not a few desperately turn back
into the wilderness rather, to front a very rude fortune, and be
devoured by wild beasts as is likeliest. But as to Parliament, again,
and its eligibility if attainable, there is yet no question anywhere;
the ingenuous soul, if possessed of money-capital enough, is predestined
by the parental and all manner of monitors to that career of talk; and
accepts it with alacrity and clearness of heart, doubtful only whether
he shall be _able_ to make a speech. Courage, my brave young fellow. If
you can climb a soaped pole of any kind, you will certainly be able to
make a speech. All mortals have a tongue; and carry on some jumble,
if not of thought, yet of stuff which they could talk. The weakest of
animals has got a cry in it, and can give voice before dying. If you are
tough enough, bent upon it desperately enough, I engage you shall make
a speech;--but whether that will be the way to Heaven for you, I do not
engage.

These, then, are our two careers for genius: mute Industrialism, which
can seldom become very human, but remains beaverish mainly: and the
three Professions named learned,--that is to say, able to talk. For the
heroic or higher kinds of human intellect, in the silent state, there is
not the smallest inquiry anywhere; apparently a thing not wanted in this
country at present. What the supply may be, I cannot inform M'Croudy;
but the market-demand, he may himself see, is _nil_. These are our three
professions that require human intellect in part or whole, not able to
do with mere beaverish; and such a part does the gift of talk play in
one and all of them. Whatsoever is not beaverish seems to go forth
in the shape of talk. To such length is human intellect wasted or
suppressed in this world!

If the young aspirant is not rich enough for Parliament, and is deterred
by the basilisks or otherwise from entering on Law or Church, and cannot
altogether reduce his human intellect to the beaverish condition, or
satisfy himself with the prospect of making money,--what becomes of
him in such case, which is naturally the case of very many, and ever
of more? In such case there remains but one outlet for him, and notably
enough that too is a talking one: the outlet of Literature, of trying
to write Books. Since, owing to preliminary basilisks, want of cash, or
superiority to cash, he cannot mount aloft by eloquent talking, let
him try it by dexterous eloquent writing. Here happily, having three
fingers, and capital to buy a quire of paper, he can try it to all
lengths and in spite of all mortals: in this career there is happily
no public impediment that can turn him back; nothing but private
starvation--which is itself a _finis_ or kind of goal--can pretend to
hinder a British man from prosecuting Literature to the very utmost, and
wringing the final secret from her: "A talent is in thee; No talent is
in thee." To the British subject who fancies genius may be lodged in
him, this liberty remains; and truly it is, if well computed, almost the
only one he has.

A crowded portal this of Literature, accordingly! The haven of
expatriated spiritualisms, and alas also of expatriated vanities and
prurient imbecilities: here do the windy aspirations, foiled activities,
foolish ambitions, and frustrate human energies reduced to the vocable
condition, fly as to the one refuge left; and the Republic of Letters
increases in population at a faster rate than even the Republic of
America. The strangest regiment in her Majesty's service, this of the
Soldiers of Literature:--would your Lordship much like to march through
Coventry with them? The immortal gods are there (quite irrecognizable
under these disguises), and also the lowest broken valets;--an extremely
miscellaneous regiment. In fact the regiment, superficially viewed,
looks like an immeasurable motley flood of discharged play-actors,
funambulists, false prophets, drunken ballad-singers; and marches not
as a regiment, but as a boundless canaille,--without drill, uniform,
captaincy or billet; with huge over-proportion of drummers; you would
say, a regiment gone wholly to the drum, with hardly a good musket to
be seen in it,--more a canaille than a regiment. Canaille of all the
loud-sounding levities, and general winnowings of Chaos, marching
through the world in a most ominous manner; proclaiming, audibly if
you have ears: "Twelfth hour of the Night; ancient graves yawning; pale
clammy Puseyisms screeching in their winding-sheets; owls busy in the
City regions; many goblins abroad! Awake ye living; dream no more; arise
to judgment! Chaos and Gehenna are broken loose; the Devil with his
Bedlams must be flung in chains again, and the Last of the Days is about
to dawn!" Such is Literature to the reflective soul at this moment.

But what now concerns us most is the circumstance that here too the
demand is, Vocables, still vocables. In all appointed courses of
activity and paved careers for human genius, and in this unpaved,
unappointed, broadest career of Literature, broad way that leadeth to
destruction for so many, the one duty laid upon you is still, Talk,
talk. Talk well with pen or tongue, and it shall be well with you;
do not talk well, it shall be ill with you. To wag the tongue with
dexterous acceptability, there is for human worth and faculty, in our
England of the Nineteenth Century, that one method of emergence and no
other. Silence, you would say, means annihilation for the Englishman of
the Nineteenth Century. The worth that has not spoken itself, is not;
or is potentially only, and as if it were not. Vox is the God of this
Universe. If you have human intellect, it avails nothing unless you
either make it into beaverism, or talk with it. Make it into beaverism,
and gather money; or else make talk with it, and gather what you can.
Such is everywhere the demand for talk among us: to which, of course,
the supply is proportionate.

From dinners up to woolsacks and divine mitres, here in England, much
may be gathered by talk; without talk, of the human sort nothing. Is
Society become wholly a bag of wind, then, ballasted by guineas? Are our
interests in it as a sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal?--In Army or
Navy, when unhappily we have war on hand, there is, almost against our
will, some kind of demand for certain of the silent talents. But in
peace, that too passes into mere demand of the ostentations, of the
pipeclays and the blank cartridges; and,--except that Naval men are
occasionally, on long voyages, forced to hold their tongue, and converse
with the dumb elements, and illimitable oceans, that moan and rave there
without you and within you, which is a great advantage to the Naval
man,--our poor United Services have to make conversational windbags and
ostentational paper-lanterns of themselves, or do worse, even as the
others.


My friends, must I assert, then, what surely all men know, though all
men seem to have forgotten it, That in the learned professions as in the
unlearned, and in human things throughout, in every place and in every
time, the true function of intellect is not that of talking, but of
understanding and discerning with a view to performing! An intellect may
easily talk too much, and perform too little. Gradually, if it get into
the noxious habit of talk, there will less and less performance come
of it, talk being so delightfully handy in comparison with work; and
at last there will no work, or thought of work, be got from it at
all. Talk, except as the preparation for work, is worth almost
nothing;--sometimes it is worth infinitely less than nothing; and
becomes, little conscious of playing such a fatal part, the general
summary of pretentious nothingnesses, and the chief of all the curses
the Posterity of Adam are liable to in this sublunary world! Would you
discover the Atropos of Human Virtue; the sure Destroyer, "by painless
extinction," of Human Veracities, Performances, and Capabilities to
perform or to be veracious,--it is this, you have it here.

Unwise talk is matchless in unwisdom. Unwise work, if it but persist, is
everywhere struggling towards correction, and restoration to health;
for it is still in contact with Nature, and all Nature incessantly
contradicts it, and will heal it or annihilate it: not so with unwise
talk, which addresses itself, regardless of veridical Nature, to the
universal suffrages; and can if it be dexterous, find harbor there
till all the suffrages are bankrupt and gone to Houndsditch, Nature not
interfering with her protest till then. False speech, definable as the
acme of unwise speech, is capable, as we already said, of becoming the
falsest of all things. Falsest of all things:--and whither will the
general deluge of that, in Parliament and Synagogue, in Book and
Broadside, carry you and your affairs, my friend, when once they are
embarked on it as now?


Parliament, _Parliamentum_, is by express appointment the Talking
Apparatus; yet not in Parliament either is the essential function, by
any means, talk. Not to speak your opinion well, but to have a good and
just opinion worth speaking,--for every Parliament, as for every man,
this latter is the point. Contrive to have a true opinion, you will get
it told in some way, better or worse; and it will be a blessing to all
creatures. Have a false opinion, and tell it with the tongue of Angels,
what can that profit? The better you tell it, the worse it will be!

In Parliament and out of Parliament, and everywhere in this Universe,
your one salvation is, That you can discern with just insight, and
follow with noble valor, what the law of the case before you is, what
the appointment of the Maker in regard to it has been. Get this out
of one man, you are saved; fail to get this out of the most August
Parliament wrapt in the sheepskins of a thousand years, you are
lost,--your Parliament, and you, and all your sheepskins are lost.
Beautiful talk is by no means the most pressing want in Parliament! We
have had some reasonable modicum of talk in Parliament! What talk has
done for us in Parliament, and is now doing, the dullest of us at length
begins to see!

Much has been said of Parliament's breeding men to business; of the
training an Official Man gets in this school of argument and talk. He is
here inured to patience, tolerance; sees what is what in the Nation and
in the Nation's Government attains official knowledge, official
courtesy and manners--in short, is polished at all points into official
articulation, and here better than elsewhere qualifies himself to be
a Governor of men. So it is said.--Doubtless, I think, he will see and
suffer much in Parliament, and inure himself to several things;--he
will, with what eyes he has, gradually _see_ Parliament itself, for one
thing; what a high-soaring, helplessly floundering, ever-babbling yet
inarticulate dark dumb Entity it is (certainly one of the strangest
under the sun just now): which doubtless, if he have in view to get
measures voted there one day, will be an important acquisition for him.
But as to breeding himself for a Doer of Work, much more for a King, or
Chief of Doers, here in this element of talk; as to that I confess
the fatalest doubts, or rather, alas, I have no doubt! Alas, it is
our fatalest misery just now, not easily alterable, and yet urgently
requiring to be altered, That no British man can attain to be a
Statesman, or Chief of _Workers_, till he has first proved himself
a Chief of _Talkers_: which mode of trial for a Worker, is it not
precisely, of all the trials you could set him upon, the falsest and
unfairest?

Nay, I doubt much you are not likely ever to meet the fittest material
for a Statesman, or Chief of Workers, in such an element as that. Your
Potential Chief of Workers, will he come there at all, to try whether he
can talk? Your poor tenpound franchisers and electoral world generally,
in love with eloquent talk, are they the likeliest to discern what man
it is that has worlds of silent work in him? No. Or is such a man, even
if born in the due rank for it, the likeliest to present himself, and
court their most sweet voices? Again, no.

The Age that admires talk so much can have little discernment for
inarticulate work, or for anything that is deep and genuine. Nobody, or
hardly anybody, having in himself an earnest sense for truth, how can
anybody recognize an inarticulate Veracity, or Nature-fact of any
kind; a Human _Doer_ especially, who is the most complex, profound, and
inarticulate of all Nature's Facts? Nobody can recognize him: till once
he is patented, get some public stamp of authenticity, and has been
articulately proclaimed, and asserted to be a Doer. To the worshipper of
talk, such a one is a sealed book. An excellent human soul, direct from
Heaven,--how shall any excellence of man become recognizable to
this unfortunate? Not except by announcing and placarding itself as
excellent,--which, I reckon, it above other things will probably be in
no great haste to do.

Wisdom, the divine message which every soul of man brings into this
world; the divine prophecy of what the new man has got the new and
peculiar capability to do, is intrinsically of silent nature. It cannot
at once, or completely at all, be read off in words; for it is written
in abstruse facts, of endowment, position, desire, opportunity, granted
to the man;--interprets itself in presentiments, vague struggles,
passionate endeavors and is only legible in whole when his work is
_done_. Not by the noble monitions of Nature, but by the ignoble, is a
man much tempted to publish the secret of his soul in words. Words, if
he have a secret, will be forever inadequate to it. Words do but disturb
the real answer of fact which could be given to it; disturb, obstruct,
and will in the end abolish, and render impossible, said answer. No
grand Doer in this world can be a copious speaker about his doings.
William the Silent spoke himself best in a country liberated; Oliver
Cromwell did not shine in rhetoric; Goethe, when he had but a book in
view, found that he must say nothing even of that, if it was to succeed
with him.

Then as to politeness, and breeding to business. An official man must be
bred to business; of course he must: and not for essence only, but even
for the manners of office he requires breeding. Besides his intrinsic
faculty, whatever that may be, he must be cautious, vigilant,
discreet,--above all things, he must be reticent, patient, polite.
Certain of these qualities are by nature imposed upon men of station;
and they are trained from birth to some exercise of them: this
constitutes their one intrinsic qualification for office;--this is their
one advantage in the New Downing Street projected for this New Era; and
it will not go for much in that Institution. One advantage, or temporary
advantage; against which there are so many counterbalances. It is the
indispensable preliminary for office, but by no means the complete
outfit,--a miserable outfit where there is nothing farther.

Will your Lordship give me leave to say that, practically, the intrinsic
qualities will presuppose these preliminaries too, but by no means _vice
versa_. That, on the whole, if you have got the intrinsic qualities, you
have got everything, and the preliminaries will prove attainable; but
that if you have got only the preliminaries, you have yet got nothing.
A man of real dignity will not find it impossible to bear himself in a
dignified manner; a man of real understanding and insight will get
to know, as the fruit of his very first study, what the laws of his
situation are, and will conform to these. Rough old Samuel Johnson,
blustering Boreas and rugged Arctic Bear as he often was, defined
himself, justly withal, as a polite man: a noble manful attitude of soul
is his; a clear, true and loyal sense of what others are, and what he
himself is, shines through the rugged coating of him; comes out as
grave deep rhythmus when his King honors him, and he will not "bandy
compliments with his King;"--is traceable too in his indignant trampling
down of the Chesterfield patronages, tailor-made insolences, and
contradictions of sinners; which may be called his _revolutionary_
movements, hard and peremptory by the law of them; these could not be
soft like his _constitutional_ ones, when men and kings took him for
somewhat like the thing he was. Given a noble man, I think your Lordship
may expect by and by a polite man. No "politer" man was to be found in
Britain than the rustic Robert Burns: high duchesses were captivated
with the chivalrous ways of the man; recognized that here was the true
chivalry, and divine nobleness of bearing,--as indeed they well might,
now when the Peasant God and Norse Thor had come down among them again!
Chivalry this, if not as they do chivalry in Drury Lane or West-End
drawing-rooms, yet as they do it in Valhalla and the General Assembly of
the Gods.

For indeed, who _invented_ chivalry, politeness, or anything that is
noble and melodious and beautiful among us, except precisely the like
of Johnson and of Burns? The select few who in the generations of
this world were wise and valiant, they, in spite of all the tremendous
majority of blockheads and slothful belly-worshippers, and noisy ugly
persons, have devised whatsoever is noble in the manners of man to man.
I expect they will learn to be polite, your Lordship, when you give them
a chance!--Nor is it as a school of human culture, for this or for
any other grace or gift, that Parliament will be found first-rate
or indispensable. As experience in the river is indispensable to the
ferryman, so is knowledge of his Parliament to the British Peel or
Chatham;--so was knowledge of the OEil-de-Boeuf to the French Choiseul.
Where and how said river, whether Parliament with Wilkeses, or
OEil-de-Boeuf with Pompadours, can be waded, boated, swum; how the
miscellaneous cargoes, "measures" so called, can be got across it,
according to their kinds, and landed alive on the hither side as
facts:--we have all of us our _ferries_ in this world; and must know the
river and its ways, or get drowned some day! In that sense, practice
in Parliament is indispensable to the British Statesman; but not in any
other sense.

A school, too, of manners and of several other things, the Parliament
will doubtless be to the aspirant Statesman; a school better or
worse;--as the OEil-de-Boeuf likewise was, and as all scenes where men
work or live are sure to be. Especially where many men work together,
the very rubbing against one another will grind and polish off their
angularities into roundness, into "politeness" after a sort; and the
official man, place him how you may, will never want for schooling,
of extremely various kinds. A first-rate school one cannot call this
Parliament for him;--I fear to say what rate at present! In so far as it
teaches him vigilance, patience, courage, toughness of lungs or of soul,
and skill in any kind of swimming, it is a good school. In so far as it
forces him to speak where Nature orders silence; and even, lest all the
world should learn his secret (which often enough would kill his secret,
and little profit the world), forces him to speak falsities, vague
ambiguities, and the froth-dialect usual in Parliaments in these times,
it may be considered one of the worst schools ever devised by man; and,
I think, may almost challenge the OEil-de-Boeuf to match it in badness.

Parliament will train your men to the manners required of a statesman;
but in a much less degree to the intrinsic functions of one. To these
latter, it is capable of mistraining as nothing else can. Parliament
will train you to talk; and above all things to hear, with patience,
unlimited quantities of foolish talk. To tell a good story for yourself,
and to make it _appear_ that you have done your work: this, especially
in constitutional countries, is something;--and yet in all countries,
constitutional ones too, it is intrinsically nothing, probably even
less. For it is not the function of any mortal, in Downing Street or
elsewhere here below, to wag the tongue of him, and make it appear that
he has done work; but to wag some quite other organs of him, and to
do work; there is no danger of his work's appearing by and by. Such an
accomplishment, even in constitutional countries, I grieve to say, may
become much less than nothing. Have you at all computed how much less?
The human creature who has once given way to satisfying himself with
"appearances," to seeking his salvation in "appearances," the moral life
of such human creature is rapidly bleeding out of him. Depend upon it,
Beelzebub, Satan, or however you may name the too authentic Genius of
Eternal Death, has got that human creature in his claws. By and by you
will have a dead parliamentary bagpipe, and your living man fled away
without return!

Such parliamentary bagpipes I myself have heard play tunes, much to the
satisfaction of the people. Every tune lies within their compass; and
their mind (for they still call it _mind_) is ready as a hurdy-gurdy
on turning of the handle: "My Lords, this question now before the
House"--Ye Heavens, O ye divine Silences, was there in the womb of
Chaos, then, such a product, liable to be evoked by human art, as that
same? While the galleries were all applausive of heart, and the Fourth
Estate looked with eyes enlightened, as if you had touched its lips with
a staff dipped in honey,--I have sat with reflections too ghastly to
be uttered. A poor human creature and learned friend, once possessed of
many fine gifts, possessed of intellect, veracity, and manful conviction
on a variety of objects, has he now lost all that;--converted all that
into a glistering phosphorescence which can show itself on the outside;
while within, all is dead, chaotic, dark; a painted sepulchre full of
dead-men's bones! Discernment, knowledge, intellect, in the human sense
of the words, this man has now none. His opinion you do not ask on any
matter: on the _matter_ he has no opinion, judgment, or insight; only
on what may be said about the matter, how it may be argued of, what tune
may be played upon it to enlighten the eyes of the Fourth Estate.

Such a soul, though to the eye he still keeps tumbling about in the
Parliamentary element, and makes "motions," and passes bills, for aught
I know,--are we to define him as a _living_ one, or as a dead? Partridge
the Almanac-Maker, whose "Publications" still regularly appear, is known
to be dead! The dog that was drowned last summer, and that floats up and
down the Thames with ebb and flood ever since,--is it not dead? Alas,
in the hot months, you meet here and there such a floating dog; and at
length, if you often use the river steamers, get to know him by sight.
"There he is again, still astir there in his quasi-stygian element!"
you dejectedly exclaim (perhaps reading your Morning Newspaper at the
moment); and reflect, with a painful oppression of nose and imagination,
on certain completed professors of parliamentary eloquence in modern
times. Dead long since, but _not_ resting; daily doing motions in that
Westminster region still,--daily from Vauxhall to Blackfriars, and
back again; and cannot get away at all! Daily (from Newspaper or river
steamer) you may see him at some point of his fated course, hovering in
the eddies, stranded in the ooze, or rapidly progressing with flood or
ebb; and daily the odor of him is getting more intolerable: daily the
condition of him appeals more tragically to gods and men.


Nature admits no lie; most men profess to be aware of this, but few in
any measure lay it to heart. Except in the departments of mere material
manipulation, it seems to be taken practically as if this grand truth
were merely a polite flourish of rhetoric. What is a lie? The question
is worth asking, once and away, by the practical English mind.

A voluntary spoken divergence from the fact as it stands, as it has
occurred and will proceed to develop itself: this clearly, if adopted by
any man, will so far forth mislead him in all practical dealing with
the fact; till he cast that statement out of him, and reject it as an
unclean poisonous thing, he can have no success in dealing with the
fact. If such spoken divergence from the truth be involuntary, we lament
it as a misfortune; and are entitled, at least the speaker of it is,
to lament it extremely as the most palpable of all misfortunes, as the
indubitablest losing of his way, and turning aside from the goal instead
of pressing towards it, in the race set before him. If the divergence is
voluntary,--there superadds itself to our sorrow a just indignation: we
call the voluntary spoken divergence a lie, and justly abhor it as the
essence of human treason and baseness, the desertion of a man to the
Enemy of men against himself and his brethren. A lost deserter; who has
gone over to the Enemy, called Satan; and cannot _but_ be lost in the
adventure! Such is every liar with the tongue; and such in all nations
is he, at all epochs, considered. Men pull his nose, and kick him out
of doors; and by peremptory expressive methods signify that they can and
will have no trade with him. Such is spoken divergence from the fact; so
fares it with the practiser of that sad art.

But have we well considered a divergence _in thought_ from what is the
fact? Have we considered the man whose very thought is a lie to him and
to us! He too is a frightful man; repeating about this Universe on every
hand what is not, and driven to repeat it; the sure herald of ruin to
all that follow him, that know with _his_ knowledge! And would you learn
how to get a mendacious thought, there is no surer recipe than carrying
a loose tongue. The lying thought, you already either have it, or will
soon get it by that method. He who lies with his very tongue, _he_
clearly enough has long ceased to think truly in his mind. Does he, in
any sense, "think"? All his thoughts and imaginations, if they
extend beyond mere beaverisms, astucities and sensualisms, are false,
incomplete, perverse, untrue even to himself. He has become a false
mirror of this Universe; not a small mirror only, but a crooked,
bedimmed and utterly deranged one. But all loose tongues too are akin
to lying ones; are insincere at the best, and go rattling with little
meaning; the thought lying languid at a great distance behind them, if
thought there be behind them at all. Gradually there will be none or
little! How can the thought of such a man, what he calls thought, be
other than false?

Alas, the palpable liar with his tongue does at least know that he is
lying, and has or might have some faint vestige of remorse and chance
of amendment; but the impalpable liar, whose tongue articulates mere
accepted commonplaces, cants and babblement, which means only, "Admire
me, call me an excellent stump-orator!"--of him what hope is there?
His thought, what thought he had, lies dormant, inspired only to invent
vocables and plausibilities; while the tongue goes so glib, the thought
is absent, gone a wool-gathering; getting itself drugged with the
applausive "Hear, hear!"--what will become of such a man? His idle
thought has run all to seed, and grown false and the giver of falsities;
the inner light of his mind is gone out; all his light is mere putridity
and phosphorescence henceforth. Whosoever is in quest of ruin, let him
with assurance follow that man; he or no one is on the right road to it.

Good Heavens, from the wisest Thought of a man to the actual truth of
a Thing as it lies in Nature, there is, one would suppose, a sufficient
interval! Consider it,--and what other intervals we introduce! The
faithfulest, most glowing word of a man is but an imperfect image of the
thought, such as it is, that dwells within him; his best word will never
but with error convey his thought to other minds: and then between his
poor thought and Nature's Fact, which is the Thought of the Eternal,
there may be supposed to lie some discrepancies, some shortcomings!
Speak your sincerest, think your wisest, there is still a great gulf
between you and the fact. And now, do not speak your sincerest, and what
will inevitably follow out of that, do not think your wisest, but think
only your plausiblest, your showiest for parliamentary purposes, where
will you land with that guidance?--I invite the British Parliament, and
all the Parliamentary and other Electors of Great Britain, to reflect
on this till they have well understood it; and then to ask, each of
himself, What probably the horoscopes of the British Parliament, at this
epoch of World-History, may be?--

Fail, by any sin or any misfortune, to discover what the truth of the
fact is, you are lost so far as that fact goes! If your thought do not
image truly but do image falsely the fact, you will vainly try to work
upon the fact. The fact will not obey you, the fact will silently resist
you; and ever, with silent invincibility, will go on resisting you,
till you do get to image it truly instead of falsely. No help for you
whatever, except in attaining to a true image of the fact. Needless to
vote a false image true; vote it, revote it by overwhelming majorities,
by jubilant unanimities and universalities; read it thrice or three
hundred times, pass acts of parliament upon it till the Statute-book can
hold no more,--it helps not a whit: the thing is not so, the thing is
otherwise than so; and Adam's whole Posterity, voting daily on it till
the world finish, will not alter it a jot. Can the sublimest sanhedrim,
constitutional parliament, or other Collective Wisdom of the world,
persuade fire not to burn, sulphuric acid to be sweet milk, or the Moon
to become green cheese? The fact is much the reverse:--and even the
Constitutional British Parliament abstains from such arduous attempts
as these latter in the voting line; and leaves the multiplication-table,
the chemical, mechanical and other qualities of material substances
to take their own course; being aware that voting and perorating, and
reporting in Hansard, will not in the least alter any of these. Which is
indisputably wise of the British Parliament.

Unfortunately the British Parliament does not, at present, quite know
that all manner of things and relations of things, spiritual equally
with material, all manner of qualities, entities, existences whatsoever,
in this strange visible and invisible Universe, are equally inflexible
of nature; that, they will, one and all, with precisely the same
obstinacy, continue to obey their own law, not our law; deaf as the
adder to all charm of parliamentary eloquence, and of voting never so
often repeated; silently, but inflexibly and forevermore, declining to
change themselves, even as sulphuric acid declines to become sweet milk,
though you vote so to the end of the world. This, it sometimes seems
to me, is not quite sufficiently laid hold of by the British and other
Parliaments just at present. Which surely is a great misfortune to
said Parliaments! For, it would appear, the grand point, after all
constitutional improvements, and such wagging of wigs in Westminster as
there has been, is precisely what it was before any constitution was yet
heard of, or the first official wig had budded out of nothing: namely,
to ascertain what the truth of your question, in Nature, really is!
Verily so. In this time and place, as in all past and in all future
times and places. To-day in St. Stephen's, where constitutional,
philanthropical, and other great things lie in the mortar-kit; even as
on the Plain of Shinar long ago, where a certain Tower, likewise of a
very philanthropic nature, indeed one of the desirablest towers I ever
heard of, was to be built,--but couldn't! My friends, I do not laugh;
truly I am more inclined to weep.

Get, by six hundred and fifty-eight votes, or by no vote at all, by
the silent intimation of your own eyesight and understanding given you
direct out of Heaven, and more sacred to you than anything earthly, and
than all things earthly,--a correct image of the fact in question, as
God and Nature have made it: that is the one thing needful; with that it
shall be well with you in whatsoever you have to do with said fact. Get,
by the sublimest constitutional methods, belauded by all the world, an
incorrect image of the fact: so shall it be other than well with you; so
shall you have laud from able editors and vociferous masses of mistaken
human creatures; and from the Nature's Fact, continuing quite silently
the same as it was, contradiction, and that only. What else? Will Nature
change, or sulphuric acid become sweet milk, for the noise of vociferous
blockheads? Surely not. Nature, I assure you, has not the smallest
intention of doing so.

On the contrary, Nature keeps silently a most exact Savings-bank,
and official register correct to the most evanescent item, Debtor and
Creditor, in respect to one and all of us; silently marks down, Creditor
by such and such an unseen act of veracity and heroism; Debtor to such
a loud blustery blunder, twenty-seven million strong or one unit strong,
and to all acts and words and thoughts executed in consequence of
that,--Debtor, Debtor, Debtor, day after day, rigorously as Fate (for
this is Fate that is writing); and at the end of the account you
will have it all to pay, my friend; there is the rub! Not the
infinitesimalest fraction of a farthing but will be found marked there,
for you and against you; and with the due rate of interest you will have
to pay it, neatly, completely, as sure as you are alive. You will have
to pay it even in money if you live:--and, poor slave, do you think
there is no payment but in money? There is a payment which Nature
rigorously exacts of men, and also of Nations, and this I think when
her wrath is sternest, in the shape of dooming you to possess money. To
possess it; to have your bloated vanities fostered into monstrosity
by it, your foul passions blown into explosion by it, your heart and
perhaps your very stomach ruined with intoxication by it; your poor life
and all its manful activities stunned into frenzy and comatose sleep by
it,--in one word, as the old Prophets said, your soul forever lost by
it. Your soul; so that, through the Eternities, you shall have no
soul, or manful trace of ever having had a soul; but only, for certain
fleeting moments, shall have had a money-bag, and have given soul and
heart and (frightfuler still) stomach itself in fatal exchange for
the same. You wretched mortal, stumbling about in a God's Temple, and
thinking it a brutal Cookery-shop! Nature, when her scorn of a slave is
divinest, and blazes like the blinding lightning against his slavehood,
often enough flings him a bag of money, silently saying: "That! Away;
thy doom is that!"--

For no man, and for no body or biggest multitude of men, has Nature
favor, if they part company with her facts and her. Excellent
stump-orator; eloquent parliamentary dead-dog, making motions, passing
bills; reported in the Morning Newspapers, and reputed the "best speaker
going"? From the Universe of Fact he has turned himself away; he is gone
into partnership with the Universe of Phantasm; finds it profitablest
to deal in forged notes, while the foolish shopkeepers will accept
them. Nature for such a man, and for Nations that follow such, has her
patibulary forks, and prisons of death everlasting:--dost thou doubt
it? Unhappy mortal, Nature otherwise were herself a Chaos and no Cosmos.
Nature was not made by an Impostor; not she, I think, rife as they
are!--In fact, by money or otherwise, to the uttermost fraction of a
calculable and incalculable value, we have, each one of us, to settle
the exact balance in the above-said Savings-bank, or official register
kept by Nature: Creditor by the quantity of veracities we have done,
Debtor by the quantity of falsities and errors; there is not, by any
conceivable device, the faintest hope of escape from that issue for one
of us, nor for all of us.

This used to be a well-known fact; and daily still, in certain edifices,
steeple-houses, joss-houses, temples sacred or other, everywhere spread
over the world, we hear some dim mumblement of an assertion that such is
still, what it was always and will forever be, the fact: but meseems
it has terribly fallen out of memory nevertheless; and, from Dan to
Beersheba, one in vain looks out for a man that really in his heart
believes it. In his heart he believes, as we perceive, that scrip will
yield dividends: but that Heaven too has an office of account, and
unerringly marks down, against us or for us, whatsoever thing we do
or say or think, and treasures up the same in regard to every
creature,--this I do not so well perceive that he believes. Poor
blockhead, no: he reckons that all payment is in money, or approximately
representable by money; finds money go a strange course; disbelieves the
parson and his Day of Judgment; discerns not that there is any judgment
except in the small or big debt court; and lives (for the present) on
that strange footing in this Universe. The unhappy mortal, what is
the use of his "civilizations" and his "useful knowledges," if he have
forgotten that beginning of human knowledge; the earliest perception
of the awakened human soul in this world; the first dictate of Heaven's
inspiration to all men? I cannot account him a man any more; but only
a kind of human beaver, who has acquired the art of ciphering. He lives
without rushing hourly towards suicide, because his soul, with all
its noble aspirations and imaginations, is sunk at the bottom of his
stomach, and lies torpid there, unaspiring, unimagining, unconsidering,
as if it were the vital principle of a mere _four_-footed beaver. A soul
of a man, appointed for spinning cotton and making money, or, alas,
for merely shooting grouse and gathering rent; to whom Eternity and
Immortality, and all human Noblenesses and divine Facts that did not
tell upon the stock-exchange, were meaningless fables, empty as the
inarticulate wind. He will recover out of that persuasion one day, or be
ground to powder, I believe!--

To such a pass, by our beaverisms and our mammonisms; by canting of
"prevenient grace" everywhere, and so boarding and lodging our poor
souls upon supervenient moonshine everywhere, for centuries long; by our
sordid stupidities and our idle babblings; through faith in the divine
Stump-orator, and Constitutional Palaver, or august Sanhedrim of
Orators,--have men and Nations been reduced, in this sad epoch! I
cannot call them happy Nations; I must call them Nations like to perish;
Nations that will either begin to recover, or else soon die. Recovery is
to be hoped;--yes, since there is in Nature an Almighty Beneficence, and
His voice, divinely terrible, can be heard in the world-whirlwind now,
even as from of old and forevermore. Recovery, or else destruction and
annihilation, is very certain; and the crisis, too, comes rapidly on:
but by Stump-Orator and Constitutional Palaver, however perfected, my
hopes of _recovery_ have long vanished. Not by them, I should imagine,
but by something far the reverse of them, shall we return to truth and
God!--

I tell you, the ignoble intellect cannot think the _truth_, even
within its own limits, and when it seriously tries! And of the ignoble
intellect that does not seriously try, and has even reached the
"ignobleness" of seriously trying the reverse, and of lying with its
very tongue, what are we to expect? It is frightful to consider. Sincere
wise speech is but an imperfect corollary, and insignificant outer
manifestation, of sincere wise thought. He whose very tongue utters
falsities, what has his heart long been doing? The thought of his heart
is not its wisest, not even _its_ wisest; it is its foolishest;--and
even of that we have a false and foolish copy. And it is Nature's Fact,
or the Thought of the Eternal, which we want to arrive at in regard
to the matter,--which if we do _not_ arrive at, we shall not save the
matter, we shall drive the matter into shipwreck!

The practice of modern Parliaments, with reporters sitting among them,
and twenty-seven millions mostly fools listening to them, fills me with
amazement. In regard to no _thing_, or fact as God and Nature have made
it, can you get so much as the real thought of any honorable head,--even
so far as _it_, the said honorable head, still has capacity of thought.
What the honorable gentleman's wisest thought is or would have been,
had he led from birth a life of piety and earnest veracity and heroic
virtue, you, and he himself poor deep-sunk creature, vainly conjecture
as from immense dim distances far in the rear of what he is led to
_say_. And again, far in the rear of what his thought is,--surely long
infinitudes beyond all _he_ could ever think,--lies the Thought of God
Almighty, the Image itself of the Fact, the thing you are in quest of,
and must find or do worse! Even his, the honorable gentleman's, actual
bewildered, falsified, vague surmise or quasi-thought, even this is not
given you; but only some falsified copy of this, such as he fancies may
suit the reporters and twenty-seven millions mostly fools. And upon that
latter you are to act;--with what success, do you expect? That is the
thought you are to take for the Thought of the Eternal Mind,--that
double-distilled falsity of a blockheadism from one who is false even as
a blockhead!

Do I make myself plain to Mr. Peter's understanding? Perhaps it will
surprise him less that parliamentary eloquence excites more wonder than
admiration in me; that the fate of countries governed by that sublime
alchemy does not appear the hopefulest just now. Not by that method, I
should apprehend, will the Heavens be scaled and the Earth vanquished;
not by that, but by another.


A benevolent man once proposed to me, but without pointing out the
methods how, this plan of reform for our benighted world: To cut from
one generation, whether the current one or the next, all the tongues
away, prohibiting Literature too; and appoint at least one generation to
pass its life in silence. "There, thou one blessed generation, from the
vain jargon of babble thou art beneficently freed. Whatsoever of truth,
traditionary or original, thy own god-given intellect shall point out to
thee as true, that thou wilt go and do. In doing of it there will be a
verdict for thee; if a verdict of True, thou wilt hold by it, and ever
again do it; if of Untrue, thou wilt never try it more, but be eternally
delivered from it. To do aught because the vain hearsays order thee, and
the big clamors of the sanhedrim of fools, is not thy lot,--what worlds
of misery are spared thee! Nature's voice heard in thy own inner being,
and the sacred Commandment of thy Maker: these shall be thy guidances,
thou happy tongueless generation. What is good and beautiful thou shalt
know; not merely what is said to be so. Not to talk of thy doings, and
become the envy of surrounding flunkies, but to taste of the fruit of
thy doings themselves, is thine. What the Eternal Laws will sanction for
thee, do; what the Froth Gospels and multitudinous long-eared Hearsays
never so loudly bid, all this is already chaff for thee,--drifting
rapidly along, thou knowest whitherward, on the eternal winds."

Good Heavens, if such a plan were practicable, how the chaff might be
winnowed out of every man, and out of all human things; and ninety-nine
hundredths of our whole big Universe, spiritual and practical, might
blow itself away, as mere torrents of chaff whole trade-winds of chaff,
many miles deep, rushing continually with the voice of whirlwinds
towards a certain FIRE, which knows how to deal with it! Ninety-nine
hundredths blown away; all the lies blown away, and some skeleton of a
spiritual and practical Universe left standing for us which were true:
O Heavens, is it forever impossible, then? By a generation that had
no tongue it really might be done; but not so easily by one that had.
Tongues, platforms, parliaments, and fourth-estates; unfettered presses,
periodical and stationary literatures: we are nearly all gone to tongue,
I think; and our fate is very questionable.


Truly, it is little known at present, and ought forthwith to become
better known, what ruin to all nobleness and fruitfulness and
blessedness in the genius of a poor mortal you generally bring about, by
ordering him to speak, to do all things with a view to their being seen!
Few good and fruitful things ever were done, or could be done, on those
terms. Silence, silence; and be distant ye profane, with your
jargonings and superficial babblements, when a man has anything to do!
Eye-service,--dost thou know what that is, poor England?--eye-service
is all the man can do in these sad circumstances; grows to be all he has
the idea of doing, of his or any other man's ever doing, or ever having
done, in any circumstances. Sad, enough. Alas, it is our saddest woe of
all;--too sad for being spoken of at present, while all or nearly all
men consider it an imaginary sorrow on my part!

Let the young English soul, in whatever logic-shop and nonsense-verse
establishment of an Eton, Oxford, Edinburgh, Halle, Salamanca, or other
High Finishing-School, he may be getting his young idea taught how to
speak and spout, and print sermons and review-articles, and thereby show
himself and fond patrons that it _is_ an idea,--lay this solemnly to
heart; this is my deepest counsel to him! The idea you have once spoken,
if it even were an idea, is no longer yours; it is gone from you, so
much life and virtue is gone, and the vital circulations of your self
and your destiny and activity are henceforth deprived of it. If you
could not get it spoken, if you could still constrain it into silence,
so much the richer are you. Better keep your idea while you can: let
it still circulate in your blood, and there fructify; inarticulately
inciting you to good activities; giving to your whole spiritual life a
ruddier health. When the time does come for speaking it, you will speak
it all the more concisely, the more expressively, appropriately; and
if such a time should never come, have you not already acted it, and
uttered it as no words can? Think of this, my young friend; for there is
nothing truer, nothing more forgotten in these shabby gold-laced days.
Incontinence is half of all the sins of man. And among the many kinds of
that base vice, I know none baser, or at present half so fell and fatal,
as that same Incontinence of Tongue. "Public speaking," "parliamentary
eloquence:" it is a Moloch, before whom young souls are made to pass
through the fire. They enter, weeping or rejoicing, fond parents
consecrating them to the red-hot Idol, as to the Highest God: and they
come out spiritually _dead_. Dead enough; to live thenceforth a galvanic
life of mere Stump-Oratory; screeching and gibbering, words without
wisdom, without veracity, without conviction more than skin-deep. A
divine gift, that? It is a thing admired by the vulgar, and rewarded
with seats in the Cabinet and other preciosities; but to the wise, it is
a thing not admirable, not adorable; unmelodious rather, and ghastly and
bodeful, as the speech of sheeted spectres in the streets at midnight!

Be not a Public Orator, thou brave young British man, thou that art
now growing to be something: not a Stump-Orator, if thou canst help
it. Appeal not to the vulgar, with its long ears and its seats in the
Cabinet; not by spoken words to the vulgar; _hate_ the profane vulgar,
and bid it begone. Appeal by silent work, by silent suffering if there
be no work, to the gods, who have nobler than seats in the Cabinet for
thee! Talent for Literature, thou hast such a talent? Believe it not, be
slow to believe it! To speak, or to write, Nature did not peremptorily
order thee; but to work she did. And know this: there never was a talent
even for real Literature, not to speak of talents lost and damned
in doing sham Literature, but was primarily a talent for something
infinitely better of the silent kind. Of Literature, in all ways, be
shy rather than otherwise, at present! There where thou art, work, work;
whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it,--with the hand of a man, not
of a phantasm; be that thy unnoticed blessedness and exceeding great
reward. Thy words, let them be few, and well-ordered. Love silence
rather than speech in these tragic days, when, for very speaking, the
voice of man has fallen inarticulate to man; and hearts, in this loud
babbling, sit dark and dumb towards one another. Witty,--above all, oh
be not witty: none of us is bound to be witty, under penalties; to be
wise and true we all are, under the terriblest penalties!

Brave young friend, dear to me, and _known_ too in a sense, though never
seen, nor to be seen by me,--you are, what I am not, in the happy case
to learn to _be_ something and to _do_ something, instead of eloquently
talking about what has been and was done and may be! The old are what
they are, and will not alter; our hope is in you. England's hope, and
the world's, is that there may once more be millions such, instead
of units as now. _Macte; i fausto pede_. And may future generations,
acquainted again with the silences, and once more cognizant of what is
noble and faithful and divine, look back on us with pity and incredulous
astonishment!




Italicized text is represented in the etext with underscores _thusly_.
Greek text has been transliterated into English, with notation "[Gr.]"
appended to it. Otherwise the etext has been left as it was in the
printed text. Footnotes have been embedded directly into the text, with
the notation [Footnote: ...].

========================================
========================================

ON HEROES, HERO-WORSHIP, AND THE HEROIC IN HISTORY

By Thomas Carlyle


Transcriber's Note:

The text is taken from the printed "Sterling Edition" of Carlyle's
Complete Works, in 20 volumes, with the following modifications made
in the etext version: Italicized text is delimited by underscores,
_thusly_. The footnote (there is only one) has been embedded directly
into text, in brackets, [thusly]. Greek text has been transliterated
into Latin characters with the notation [Gr.] juxtaposed. Otherwise, the
punctuation and spelling of the print version have been retained.




CONTENTS.

  I.   THE HERO AS DIVINITY.  ODIN.  PAGANISM:  SCANDINAVIAN MYTHOLOGY.
  II.  THE HERO AS PROPHET.  MAHOMET:  ISLAM.
  III. THE HERO AS POET.  DANTE:  SHAKSPEARE.
  IV.  THE HERO AS PRIEST.  LUTHER; REFORMATION:  KNOX; PURITANISM.
  V.   THE HERO AS MAN OF LETTERS.  JOHNSON, ROUSSEAU, BURNS.
  VI.  THE HERO AS KING.  CROMWELL, NAPOLEON:  MODERN REVOLUTIONISM.





LECTURES ON HEROES.




LECTURE I. THE HERO AS DIVINITY. ODIN. PAGANISM: SCANDINAVIAN MYTHOLOGY.

[May 5, 1840.]

We have undertaken to discourse here for a little on Great Men, their
manner of appearance in our world's business, how they have shaped
themselves in the world's history, what ideas men formed of them,
what work they did;--on Heroes, namely, and on their reception and
performance; what I call Hero-worship and the Heroic in human affairs.
Too evidently this is a large topic; deserving quite other treatment
than we can expect to give it at present. A large topic; indeed, an
illimitable one; wide as Universal History itself. For, as I take it,
Universal History, the history of what man has accomplished in this
world, is at bottom the History of the Great Men who have worked here.
They were the leaders of men, these great ones; the modellers, patterns,
and in a wide sense creators, of whatsoever the general mass of
men contrived to do or to attain; all things that we see standing
accomplished in the world are properly the outer material result, the
practical realization and embodiment, of Thoughts that dwelt in the
Great Men sent into the world: the soul of the whole world's history, it
may justly be considered, were the history of these. Too clearly it is a
topic we shall do no justice to in this place!

One comfort is, that Great Men, taken up in any way, are profitable
company. We cannot look, however imperfectly, upon a great man, without
gaining something by him. He is the living light-fountain, which it
is good and pleasant to be near. The light which enlightens, which has
enlightened the darkness of the world; and this not as a kindled lamp
only, but rather as a natural luminary shining by the gift of Heaven; a
flowing light-fountain, as I say, of native original insight, of manhood
and heroic nobleness;--in whose radiance all souls feel that it is well
with them. On any terms whatsoever, you will not grudge to wander in
such neighborhood for a while. These Six classes of Heroes, chosen out
of widely distant countries and epochs, and in mere external figure
differing altogether, ought, if we look faithfully at them, to
illustrate several things for us. Could we see them well, we should get
some glimpses into the very marrow of the world's history. How happy,
could I but, in any measure, in such times as these, make manifest to
you the meanings of Heroism; the divine relation (for I may well call it
such) which in all times unites a Great Man to other men; and thus, as
it were, not exhaust my subject, but so much as break ground on it! At
all events, I must make the attempt.


It is well said, in every sense, that a man's religion is the chief fact
with regard to him. A man's, or a nation of men's. By religion I do not
mean here the church-creed which he professes, the articles of faith
which he will sign and, in words or otherwise, assert; not this wholly,
in many cases not this at all. We see men of all kinds of professed
creeds attain to almost all degrees of worth or worthlessness under each
or any of them. This is not what I call religion, this profession and
assertion; which is often only a profession and assertion from the
outworks of the man, from the mere argumentative region of him, if even
so deep as that. But the thing a man does practically believe (and this
is often enough _without_ asserting it even to himself, much less to
others); the thing a man does practically lay to heart, and know for
certain, concerning his vital relations to this mysterious Universe, and
his duty and destiny there, that is in all cases the primary thing for
him, and creatively determines all the rest. That is his _religion_; or,
it may be, his mere scepticism and _no-religion_: the manner it is in
which he feels himself to be spiritually related to the Unseen World or
No-World; and I say, if you tell me what that is, you tell me to a very
great extent what the man is, what the kind of things he will do is. Of
a man or of a nation we inquire, therefore, first of all, What
religion they had? Was it Heathenism,--plurality of gods, mere sensuous
representation of this Mystery of Life, and for chief recognized element
therein Physical Force? Was it Christianism; faith in an Invisible,
not as real only, but as the only reality; Time, through every meanest
moment of it, resting on Eternity; Pagan empire of Force displaced by a
nobler supremacy, that of Holiness? Was it Scepticism, uncertainty and
inquiry whether there was an Unseen World, any Mystery of Life except
a mad one;--doubt as to all this, or perhaps unbelief and flat denial?
Answering of this question is giving us the soul of the history of the
man or nation. The thoughts they had were the parents of the actions
they did; their feelings were parents of their thoughts: it was
the unseen and spiritual in them that determined the outward and
actual;--their religion, as I say, was the great fact about them. In
these Discourses, limited as we are, it will be good to direct our
survey chiefly to that religious phasis of the matter. That once known
well, all is known. We have chosen as the first Hero in our series Odin
the central figure of Scandinavian Paganism; an emblem to us of a most
extensive province of things. Let us look for a little at the Hero as
Divinity, the oldest primary form of Heroism.

Surely it seems a very strange-looking thing this Paganism; almost
inconceivable to us in these days. A bewildering, inextricable jungle of
delusions, confusions, falsehoods, and absurdities, covering the whole
field of Life! A thing that fills us with astonishment, almost, if it
were possible, with incredulity,--for truly it is not easy to understand
that sane men could ever calmly, with their eyes open, believe and live
by such a set of doctrines. That men should have worshipped their poor
fellow-man as a God, and not him only, but stocks and stones, and all
manner of animate and inanimate objects; and fashioned for themselves
such a distracted chaos of hallucinations by way of Theory of the
Universe: all this looks like an incredible fable. Nevertheless it is
a clear fact that they did it. Such hideous inextricable jungle of
misworships, misbeliefs, men, made as we are, did actually hold by,
and live at home in. This is strange. Yes, we may pause in sorrow and
silence over the depths of darkness that are in man; if we rejoice in
the heights of purer vision he has attained to. Such things were and are
in man; in all men; in us too.

Some speculators have a short way of accounting for the Pagan religion:
mere quackery, priestcraft, and dupery, say they; no sane man ever did
believe it,--merely contrived to persuade other men, not worthy of
the name of sane, to believe it! It will be often our duty to protest
against this sort of hypothesis about men's doings and history; and
I here, on the very threshold, protest against it in reference to
Paganism, and to all other _isms_ by which man has ever for a length of
time striven to walk in this world. They have all had a truth in them,
or men would not have taken them up. Quackery and dupery do abound; in
religions, above all in the more advanced decaying stages of religions,
they have fearfully abounded: but quackery was never the originating
influence in such things; it was not the health and life of such things,
but their disease, the sure precursor of their being about to die! Let
us never forget this. It seems to me a most mournful hypothesis, that
of quackery giving birth to any faith even in savage men. Quackery gives
birth to nothing; gives death to all things. We shall not see into the
true heart of anything, if we look merely at the quackeries of it; if we
do not reject the quackeries altogether; as mere diseases, corruptions,
with which our and all men's sole duty is to have done with them, to
sweep them out of our thoughts as out of our practice. Man everywhere
is the born enemy of lies. I find Grand Lamaism itself to have a kind
of truth in it. Read the candid, clear-sighted, rather sceptical Mr.
Turner's _Account of his Embassy_ to that country, and see. They have
their belief, these poor Thibet people, that Providence sends down
always an Incarnation of Himself into every generation. At bottom some
belief in a kind of Pope! At bottom still better, belief that there is
a _Greatest_ Man; that _he_ is discoverable; that, once discovered, we
ought to treat him with an obedience which knows no bounds! This is the
truth of Grand Lamaism; the "discoverability" is the only error here.
The Thibet priests have methods of their own of discovering what Man is
Greatest, fit to be supreme over them. Bad methods: but are they so
much worse than our methods,--of understanding him to be always the
eldest-born of a certain genealogy? Alas, it is a difficult thing to
find good methods for!--We shall begin to have a chance of understanding
Paganism, when we first admit that to its followers it was, at one time,
earnestly true. Let us consider it very certain that men did believe
in Paganism; men with open eyes, sound senses, men made altogether like
ourselves; that we, had we been there, should have believed in it. Ask
now, What Paganism could have been?

Another theory, somewhat more respectable, attributes such things
to Allegory. It was a play of poetic minds, say these theorists; a
shadowing forth, in allegorical fable, in personification and visual
form, of what such poetic minds had known and felt of this Universe.
Which agrees, add they, with a primary law of human nature, still
everywhere observably at work, though in less important things, That
what a man feels intensely, he struggles to speak out of him, to see
represented before him in visual shape, and as if with a kind of life
and historical reality in it. Now doubtless there is such a law, and it
is one of the deepest in human nature; neither need we doubt that it did
operate fundamentally in this business. The hypothesis which ascribes
Paganism wholly or mostly to this agency, I call a little more
respectable; but I cannot yet call it the true hypothesis. Think, would
_we_ believe, and take with us as our life-guidance, an allegory, a
poetic sport? Not sport but earnest is what we should require. It is a
most earnest thing to be alive in this world; to die is not sport for
a man. Man's life never was a sport to him; it was a stern reality,
altogether a serious matter to be alive!

I find, therefore, that though these Allegory theorists are on the way
towards truth in this matter, they have not reached it either. Pagan
Religion is indeed an Allegory, a Symbol of what men felt and knew about
the Universe; and all Religions are symbols of that, altering always
as that alters: but it seems to me a radical perversion, and even
inversion, of the business, to put that forward as the origin and moving
cause, when it was rather the result and termination. To get beautiful
allegories, a perfect poetic symbol, was not the want of men; but to
know what they were to believe about this Universe, what course they
were to steer in it; what, in this mysterious Life of theirs, they
had to hope and to fear, to do and to forbear doing. The _Pilgrim's
Progress_ is an Allegory, and a beautiful, just and serious one: but
consider whether Bunyan's Allegory could have _preceded_ the Faith it
symbolizes! The Faith had to be already there, standing believed by
everybody;--of which the Allegory could _then_ become a shadow; and,
with all its seriousness, we may say a _sportful_ shadow, a mere play of
the Fancy, in comparison with that awful Fact and scientific certainty
which it poetically strives to emblem. The Allegory is the product of
the certainty, not the producer of it; not in Bunyan's nor in any other
case. For Paganism, therefore, we have still to inquire, Whence came
that scientific certainty, the parent of such a bewildered heap of
allegories, errors and confusions? How was it, what was it?

Surely it were a foolish attempt to pretend "explaining," in this place,
or in any place, such a phenomenon as that far-distant distracted cloudy
imbroglio of Paganism,--more like a cloud-field than a distant continent
of firm land and facts! It is no longer a reality, yet it was one. We
ought to understand that this seeming cloud-field was once a reality;
that not poetic allegory, least of all that dupery and deception was
the origin of it. Men, I say, never did believe idle songs, never risked
their soul's life on allegories: men in all times, especially in early
earnest times, have had an instinct for detecting quacks, for detesting
quacks. Let us try if, leaving out both the quack theory and the
allegory one, and listening with affectionate attention to that far-off
confused rumor of the Pagan ages, we cannot ascertain so much as this at
least, That there was a kind of fact at the heart of them; that they too
were not mendacious and distracted, but in their own poor way true and
sane!


You remember that fancy of Plato's, of a man who had grown to maturity
in some dark distance, and was brought on a sudden into the upper air to
see the sun rise. What would his wonder be, his rapt astonishment at the
sight we daily witness with indifference! With the free open sense of
a child, yet with the ripe faculty of a man, his whole heart would be
kindled by that sight, he would discern it well to be Godlike, his
soul would fall down in worship before it. Now, just such a childlike
greatness was in the primitive nations. The first Pagan Thinker
among rude men, the first man that began to think, was precisely this
child-man of Plato's. Simple, open as a child, yet with the depth and
strength of a man. Nature had as yet no name to him; he had not yet
united under a name the infinite variety of sights, sounds, shapes
and motions, which we now collectively name Universe, Nature, or the
like,--and so with a name dismiss it from us. To the wild deep-hearted
man all was yet new, not veiled under names or formulas; it stood naked,
flashing in on him there, beautiful, awful, unspeakable. Nature was to
this man, what to the Thinker and Prophet it forever is, preternatural.
This green flowery rock-built earth, the trees, the mountains, rivers,
many-sounding seas;--that great deep sea of azure that swims overhead;
the winds sweeping through it; the black cloud fashioning itself
together, now pouring out fire, now hail and rain; what _is_ it? Ay,
what? At bottom we do not yet know; we can never know at all. It is
not by our superior insight that we escape the difficulty; it is by our
superior levity, our inattention, our _want_ of insight. It is by _not_
thinking that we cease to wonder at it. Hardened round us, encasing
wholly every notion we form, is a wrappage of traditions, hearsays, mere
_words_. We call that fire of the black thunder-cloud "electricity," and
lecture learnedly about it, and grind the like of it out of glass and
silk: but _what_ is it? What made it? Whence comes it? Whither goes it?
Science has done much for us; but it is a poor science that would hide
from us the great deep sacred infinitude of Nescience, whither we can
never penetrate, on which all science swims as a mere superficial film.
This world, after all our science and sciences, is still a miracle;
wonderful, inscrutable, _magical_ and more, to whosoever will _think_ of
it.

That great mystery of TIME, were there no other; the illimitable,
silent, never-resting thing called Time, rolling, rushing on, swift,
silent, like an all-embracing ocean-tide, on which we and all the
Universe swim like exhalations, like apparitions which are, and then are
_not_: this is forever very literally a miracle; a thing to strike us
dumb,--for we have no word to speak about it. This Universe, ah me--what
could the wild man know of it; what can we yet know? That it is a Force,
and thousand-fold Complexity of Forces; a Force which is _not_ we. That
is all; it is not we, it is altogether different from us. Force, Force,
everywhere Force; we ourselves a mysterious Force in the centre of that.
"There is not a leaf rotting on the highway but has Force in it; how
else could it rot?" Nay surely, to the Atheistic Thinker, if such a one
were possible, it must be a miracle too, this huge illimitable whirlwind
of Force, which envelops us here; never-resting whirlwind, high as
Immensity, old as Eternity. What is it? God's Creation, the religious
people answer; it is the Almighty God's! Atheistic science babbles
poorly of it, with scientific nomenclatures, experiments and what not,
as if it were a poor dead thing, to be bottled up in Leyden jars and
sold over counters: but the natural sense of man, in all times, if he
will honestly apply his sense, proclaims it to be a living thing,--ah,
an unspeakable, godlike thing; towards which the best attitude for us,
after never so much science, is awe, devout prostration and humility of
soul; worship if not in words, then in silence.

But now I remark farther: What in such a time as ours it requires a
Prophet or Poet to teach us, namely, the stripping-off of those poor
undevout wrappages, nomenclatures and scientific hearsays,--this, the
ancient earnest soul, as yet unencumbered with these things, did for
itself. The world, which is now divine only to the gifted, was then
divine to whosoever would turn his eye upon it. He stood bare before it
face to face. "All was Godlike or God:"--Jean Paul still finds it so;
the giant Jean Paul, who has power to escape out of hearsays: but there
then were no hearsays. Canopus shining down over the desert, with its
blue diamond brightness (that wild blue spirit-like brightness, far
brighter than we ever witness here), would pierce into the heart of the
wild Ishmaelitish man, whom it was guiding through the solitary waste
there. To his wild heart, with all feelings in it, with no _speech_ for
any feeling, it might seem a little eye, that Canopus, glancing out on
him from the great deep Eternity; revealing the inner Splendor to him.
Cannot we understand how these men _worshipped_ Canopus; became what
we call Sabeans, worshipping the stars? Such is to me the secret of
all forms of Paganism. Worship is transcendent wonder; wonder for which
there is now no limit or measure; that is worship. To these primeval
men, all things and everything they saw exist beside them were an emblem
of the Godlike, of some God.

And look what perennial fibre of truth was in that. To us also, through
every star, through every blade of grass, is not a God made visible, if
we will open our minds and eyes? We do not worship in that way now:
but is it not reckoned still a merit, proof of what we call a "poetic
nature," that we recognize how every object has a divine beauty in it;
how every object still verily is "a window through which we may look
into Infinitude itself"? He that can discern the loveliness of things,
we call him Poet! Painter, Man of Genius, gifted, lovable. These poor
Sabeans did even what he does,--in their own fashion. That they did
it, in what fashion soever, was a merit: better than what the entirely
stupid man did, what the horse and camel did,--namely, nothing!

But now if all things whatsoever that we look upon are emblems to us
of the Highest God, I add that more so than any of them is man such
an emblem. You have heard of St. Chrysostom's celebrated saying in
reference to the Shekinah, or Ark of Testimony, visible Revelation of
God, among the Hebrews: "The true Shekinah is Man!" Yes, it is even so:
this is no vain phrase; it is veritably so. The essence of our being,
the mystery in us that calls itself "I,"--ah, what words have we for
such things?--is a breath of Heaven; the Highest Being reveals himself
in man. This body, these faculties, this life of ours, is it not all as
a vesture for that Unnamed? "There is but one Temple in the Universe,"
says the devout Novalis, "and that is the Body of Man. Nothing is holier
shall that high form. Bending before men is a reverence done to this
Revelation in the Flesh. We touch Heaven when we lay our hand on a human
body!" This sounds much like a mere flourish of rhetoric; but it is not
so. If well meditated, it will turn out to be a scientific fact; the
expression, in such words as can be had, of the actual truth of the
thing. We are the miracle of miracles,--the great inscrutable mystery of
God. We cannot understand it, we know not how to speak of it; but we may
feel and know, if we like, that it is verily so.

Well; these truths were once more readily felt than now. The young
generations of the world, who had in them the freshness of young
children, and yet the depth of earnest men, who did not think that they
had finished off all things in Heaven and Earth by merely giving them
scientific names, but had to gaze direct at them there, with awe and
wonder: they felt better what of divinity is in man and Nature; they,
without being mad, could _worship_ Nature, and man more than anything
else in Nature. Worship, that is, as I said above, admire without limit:
this, in the full use of their faculties, with all sincerity of heart,
they could do. I consider Hero-worship to be the grand modifying element
in that ancient system of thought. What I called the perplexed jungle
of Paganism sprang, we may say, out of many roots: every admiration,
adoration of a star or natural object, was a root or fibre of a root;
but Hero-worship is the deepest root of all; the tap-root, from which in
a great degree all the rest were nourished and grown.

And now if worship even of a star had some meaning in it, how much more
might that of a Hero! Worship of a Hero is transcendent admiration of
a Great Man. I say great men are still admirable; I say there is,
at bottom, nothing else admirable! No nobler feeling than this of
admiration for one higher than himself dwells in the breast of man.
It is to this hour, and at all hours, the vivifying influence in man's
life. Religion I find stand upon it; not Paganism only, but far higher
and truer religions,--all religion hitherto known. Hero-worship,
heartfelt prostrate admiration, submission, burning, boundless, for
a noblest godlike Form of Man,--is not that the germ of Christianity
itself? The greatest of all Heroes is One--whom we do not name here!
Let sacred silence meditate that sacred matter; you will find it the
ultimate perfection of a principle extant throughout man's whole history
on earth.

Or coming into lower, less unspeakable provinces, is not all Loyalty
akin to religious Faith also? Faith is loyalty to some inspired
Teacher, some spiritual Hero. And what therefore is loyalty proper, the
life-breath of all society, but an effluence of Hero-worship, submissive
admiration for the truly great? Society is founded on Hero-worship. All
dignities of rank, on which human association rests, are what we may
call a _Hero_archy (Government of Heroes),--or a Hierarchy, for it
is "sacred" enough withal! The Duke means _Dux_, Leader; King is
_Kon-ning_, _Kan-ning_, Man that _knows_ or _cans_. Society everywhere
is some representation, not insupportably inaccurate, of a graduated
Worship of Heroes--reverence and obedience done to men really great and
wise. Not insupportably inaccurate, I say! They are all as bank-notes,
these social dignitaries, all representing gold;--and several of them,
alas, always are _forged_ notes. We can do with some forged false notes;
with a good many even; but not with all, or the most of them forged!
No: there have to come revolutions then; cries of Democracy, Liberty and
Equality, and I know not what:--the notes being all false, and no gold
to be had for _them_, people take to crying in their despair that
there is no gold, that there never was any! "Gold," Hero-worship, _is_
nevertheless, as it was always and everywhere, and cannot cease till man
himself ceases.

I am well aware that in these days Hero-worship, the thing I call
Hero-worship, professes to have gone out, and finally ceased. This, for
reasons which it will be worth while some time to inquire into, is
an age that as it were denies the existence of great men; denies the
desirableness of great men. Show our critics a great man, a Luther for
example, they begin to what they call "account" for him; not to worship
him, but take the dimensions of him,--and bring him out to be a little
kind of man! He was the "creature of the Time," they say; the Time
called him forth, the Time did everything, he nothing--but what we the
little critic could have done too! This seems to me but melancholy work.
The Time call forth? Alas, we have known Times _call_ loudly enough for
their great man; but not find him when they called! He was not there;
Providence had not sent him; the Time, _calling_ its loudest, had to go
down to confusion and wreck because he would not come when called.

For if we will think of it, no Time need have gone to ruin, could it
have _found_ a man great enough, a man wise and good enough: wisdom to
discern truly what the Time wanted, valor to lead it on the right road
thither; these are the salvation of any Time. But I liken common languid
Times, with their unbelief, distress, perplexity, with their languid
doubting characters and embarrassed circumstances, impotently crumbling
down into ever worse distress towards final ruin;--all this I liken to
dry dead fuel, waiting for the lightning out of Heaven that shall kindle
it. The great man, with his free force direct out of God's own hand, is
the lightning. His word is the wise healing word which all can believe
in. All blazes round him now, when he has once struck on it, into fire
like his own. The dry mouldering sticks are thought to have called him
forth. They did want him greatly; but as to calling him forth--! Those
are critics of small vision, I think, who cry: "See, is it not the
sticks that made the fire?" No sadder proof can be given by a man of his
own littleness than disbelief in great men. There is no sadder symptom
of a generation than such general blindness to the spiritual lightning,
with faith only in the heap of barren dead fuel. It is the last
consummation of unbelief. In all epochs of the world's history, we
shall find the Great Man to have been the indispensable savior of his
epoch;--the lightning, without which the fuel never would have burnt.
The History of the World, I said already, was the Biography of Great
Men.

Such small critics do what they can to promote unbelief and universal
spiritual paralysis: but happily they cannot always completely succeed.
In all times it is possible for a man to arise great enough to feel that
they and their doctrines are chimeras and cobwebs. And what is notable,
in no time whatever can they entirely eradicate out of living men's
hearts a certain altogether peculiar reverence for Great Men; genuine
admiration, loyalty, adoration, however dim and perverted it may be.
Hero-worship endures forever while man endures. Boswell venerates his
Johnson, right truly even in the Eighteenth century. The unbelieving
French believe in their Voltaire; and burst out round him into very
curious Hero-worship, in that last act of his life when they "stifle
him under roses." It has always seemed to me extremely curious this
of Voltaire. Truly, if Christianity be the highest instance of
Hero-worship, then we may find here in Voltaireism one of the lowest!
He whose life was that of a kind of Antichrist, does again on this
side exhibit a curious contrast. No people ever were so little prone
to admire at all as those French of Voltaire. _Persiflage_ was the
character of their whole mind; adoration had nowhere a place in it. Yet
see! The old man of Ferney comes up to Paris; an old, tottering, infirm
man of eighty-four years. They feel that he too is a kind of Hero;
that he has spent his life in opposing error and injustice, delivering
Calases, unmasking hypocrites in high places;--in short that _he_ too,
though in a strange way, has fought like a valiant man. They feel
withal that, if _persiflage_ be the great thing, there never was such a
_persifleur_. He is the realized ideal of every one of them; the thing
they are all wanting to be; of all Frenchmen the most French. He is
properly their god,--such god as they are fit for. Accordingly all
persons, from the Queen Antoinette to the Douanier at the Porte St.
Denis, do they not worship him? People of quality disguise themselves
as tavern-waiters. The Maitre de Poste, with a broad oath, orders his
Postilion, "_Va bon train_; thou art driving M. de Voltaire." At
Paris his carriage is "the nucleus of a comet, whose train fills whole
streets." The ladies pluck a hair or two from his fur, to keep it as a
sacred relic. There was nothing highest, beautifulest, noblest in all
France, that did not feel this man to be higher, beautifuler, nobler.

Yes, from Norse Odin to English Samuel Johnson, from the divine Founder
of Christianity to the withered Pontiff of Encyclopedism, in all times
and places, the Hero has been worshipped. It will ever be so. We all
love great men; love, venerate and bow down submissive before great men:
nay can we honestly bow down to anything else? Ah, does not every true
man feel that he is himself made higher by doing reverence to what is
really above him? No nobler or more blessed feeling dwells in man's
heart. And to me it is very cheering to consider that no sceptical
logic, or general triviality, insincerity and aridity of any Time and
its influences can destroy this noble inborn loyalty and worship that
is in man. In times of unbelief, which soon have to become times of
revolution, much down-rushing, sorrowful decay and ruin is visible
to everybody. For myself in these days, I seem to see in this
indestructibility of Hero-worship the everlasting adamant lower than
which the confused wreck of revolutionary things cannot fall. The
confused wreck of things crumbling and even crashing and tumbling
all round us in these revolutionary ages, will get down so far; _no_
farther. It is an eternal corner-stone, from which they can begin to
build themselves up again. That man, in some sense or other, worships
Heroes; that we all of us reverence and must ever reverence Great Men:
this is, to me, the living rock amid all rushings-down whatsoever;--the
one fixed point in modern revolutionary history, otherwise as if
bottomless and shoreless.


So much of truth, only under an ancient obsolete vesture, but the spirit
of it still true, do I find in the Paganism of old nations. Nature is
still divine, the revelation of the workings of God; the Hero is still
worshipable: this, under poor cramped incipient forms, is what all
Pagan religions have struggled, as they could, to set forth. I think
Scandinavian Paganism, to us here, is more interesting than any other.
It is, for one thing, the latest; it continued in these regions of
Europe till the eleventh century: eight hundred years ago the Norwegians
were still worshippers of Odin. It is interesting also as the creed of
our fathers; the men whose blood still runs in our veins, whom doubtless
we still resemble in so many ways. Strange: they did believe that,
while we believe so differently. Let us look a little at this poor Norse
creed, for many reasons. We have tolerable means to do it; for there is
another point of interest in these Scandinavian mythologies: that they
have been preserved so well.

In that strange island Iceland,--burst up, the geologists say, by
fire from the bottom of the sea; a wild land of barrenness and lava;
swallowed many months of every year in black tempests, yet with a wild
gleaming beauty in summertime; towering up there, stern and grim, in
the North Ocean with its snow jokuls, roaring geysers, sulphur-pools and
horrid volcanic chasms, like the waste chaotic battle-field of Frost
and Fire;--where of all places we least looked for Literature or written
memorials, the record of these things was written down. On the seabord
of this wild land is a rim of grassy country, where cattle can subsist,
and men by means of them and of what the sea yields; and it seems they
were poetic men these, men who had deep thoughts in them, and uttered
musically their thoughts. Much would be lost, had Iceland not been burst
up from the sea, not been discovered by the Northmen! The old Norse
Poets were many of them natives of Iceland.

Saemund, one of the early Christian Priests there, who perhaps had a
lingering fondness for Paganism, collected certain of their old Pagan
songs, just about becoming obsolete then,--Poems or Chants of a mythic,
prophetic, mostly all of a religious character: that is what Norse
critics call the _Elder_ or Poetic _Edda_. _Edda_, a word of uncertain
etymology, is thought to signify _Ancestress_. Snorro Sturleson, an
Iceland gentleman, an extremely notable personage, educated by this
Saemund's grandson, took in hand next, near a century afterwards, to put
together, among several other books he wrote, a kind of Prose Synopsis
of the whole Mythology; elucidated by new fragments of traditionary
verse. A work constructed really with great ingenuity, native talent,
what one might call unconscious art; altogether a perspicuous clear
work, pleasant reading still: this is the _Younger_ or Prose _Edda_.
By these and the numerous other _Sagas_, mostly Icelandic, with the
commentaries, Icelandic or not, which go on zealously in the North to
this day, it is possible to gain some direct insight even yet; and see
that old Norse system of Belief, as it were, face to face. Let us forget
that it is erroneous Religion; let us look at it as old Thought, and try
if we cannot sympathize with it somewhat.

The primary characteristic of this old Northland Mythology I find to
be Impersonation of the visible workings of Nature. Earnest simple
recognition of the workings of Physical Nature, as a thing wholly
miraculous, stupendous and divine. What we now lecture of as Science,
they wondered at, and fell down in awe before, as Religion The dark
hostile Powers of Nature they figure to themselves as "_Jotuns_,"
Giants, huge shaggy beings of a demonic character. Frost, Fire,
Sea-tempest; these are Jotuns. The friendly Powers again, as
Summer-heat, the Sun, are Gods. The empire of this Universe is divided
between these two; they dwell apart, in perennial internecine feud.
The Gods dwell above in Asgard, the Garden of the Asen, or Divinities;
Jotunheim, a distant dark chaotic land, is the home of the Jotuns.

Curious all this; and not idle or inane, if we will look at the
foundation of it! The power of _Fire_, or _Flame_, for instance,
which we designate by some trivial chemical name, thereby hiding from
ourselves the essential character of wonder that dwells in it as in all
things, is with these old Northmen, Loke, a most swift subtle _Demon_,
of the brood of the Jotuns. The savages of the Ladrones Islands too (say
some Spanish voyagers) thought Fire, which they never had seen before,
was a devil or god, that bit you sharply when you touched it, and that
lived upon dry wood. From us too no Chemistry, if it had not Stupidity
to help it, would hide that Flame is a wonder. What _is_ Flame?--_Frost_
the old Norse Seer discerns to be a monstrous hoary Jotun, the Giant
_Thrym_, _Hrym_; or _Rime_, the old word now nearly obsolete here, but
still used in Scotland to signify hoar-frost. _Rime_ was not then as now
a dead chemical thing, but a living Jotun or Devil; the monstrous Jotun
_Rime_ drove home his Horses at night, sat "combing their manes,"--which
Horses were _Hail-Clouds_, or fleet _Frost-Winds_. His Cows--No, not
his, but a kinsman's, the Giant Hymir's Cows are _Icebergs_: this Hymir
"looks at the rocks" with his devil-eye, and they _split_ in the glance
of it.

Thunder was not then mere Electricity, vitreous or resinous; it was the
God Donner (Thunder) or Thor,--God also of beneficent Summer-heat. The
thunder was his wrath: the gathering of the black clouds is the drawing
down of Thor's angry brows; the fire-bolt bursting out of Heaven is
the all-rending Hammer flung from the hand of Thor: he urges his loud
chariot over the mountain-tops,--that is the peal; wrathful he "blows
in his red beard,"--that is the rustling storm-blast before the thunder
begins. Balder again, the White God, the beautiful, the just and
benignant (whom the early Christian Missionaries found to resemble
Christ), is the Sun, beautifullest of visible things; wondrous too, and
divine still, after all our Astronomies and Almanacs! But perhaps
the notablest god we hear tell of is one of whom Grimm the German
Etymologist finds trace: the God _Wunsch_, or Wish. The God _Wish_; who
could give us all that we _wished_! Is not this the sincerest and yet
rudest voice of the spirit of man? The _rudest_ ideal that man ever
formed; which still shows itself in the latest forms of our spiritual
culture. Higher considerations have to teach us that the God _Wish_ is
not the true God.

Of the other Gods or Jotuns I will mention only for etymology's sake,
that Sea-tempest is the Jotun _Aegir_, a very dangerous Jotun;--and now
to this day, on our river Trent, as I learn, the Nottingham bargemen,
when the River is in a certain flooded state (a kind of backwater, or
eddying swirl it has, very dangerous to them), call it Eager; they cry
out, "Have a care, there is the _Eager_ coming!" Curious; that word
surviving, like the peak of a submerged world! The _oldest_ Nottingham
bargemen had believed in the God Aegir. Indeed our English blood too in
good part is Danish, Norse; or rather, at bottom, Danish and Norse and
Saxon have no distinction, except a superficial one,--as of Heathen and
Christian, or the like. But all over our Island we are mingled largely
with Danes proper,--from the incessant invasions there were: and this,
of course, in a greater proportion along the east coast; and greatest of
all, as I find, in the North Country. From the Humber upwards, all over
Scotland, the Speech of the common people is still in a singular degree
Icelandic; its Germanism has still a peculiar Norse tinge. They too are
"Normans," Northmen,--if that be any great beauty--!

Of the chief god, Odin, we shall speak by and by. Mark at present so
much; what the essence of Scandinavian and indeed of all Paganism is:
a recognition of the forces of Nature as godlike, stupendous, personal
Agencies,--as Gods and Demons. Not inconceivable to us. It is the
infant Thought of man opening itself, with awe and wonder, on this
ever-stupendous Universe. To me there is in the Norse system something
very genuine, very great and manlike. A broad simplicity, rusticity, so
very different from the light gracefulness of the old Greek Paganism,
distinguishes this Scandinavian System. It is Thought; the genuine
Thought of deep, rude, earnest minds, fairly opened to the things about
them; a face-to-face and heart-to-heart inspection of the things,--the
first characteristic of all good Thought in all times. Not graceful
lightness, half-sport, as in the Greek Paganism; a certain homely
truthfulness and rustic strength, a great rude sincerity, discloses
itself here. It is strange, after our beautiful Apollo statues and clear
smiling mythuses, to come down upon the Norse Gods "brewing ale" to
hold their feast with Aegir, the Sea-Jotun; sending out Thor to get
the caldron for them in the Jotun country; Thor, after many adventures,
clapping the Pot on his head, like a huge hat, and walking off with
it,--quite lost in it, the ears of the Pot reaching down to his heels!
A kind of vacant hugeness, large awkward gianthood, characterizes that
Norse system; enormous force, as yet altogether untutored, stalking
helpless with large uncertain strides. Consider only their primary
mythus of the Creation. The Gods, having got the Giant Ymer slain, a
Giant made by "warm wind," and much confused work, out of the conflict
of Frost and Fire,--determined on constructing a world with him. His
blood made the Sea; his flesh was the Land, the Rocks his bones; of
his eyebrows they formed Asgard their Gods'-dwelling; his skull was the
great blue vault of Immensity, and the brains of it became the Clouds.
What a Hyper-Brobdignagian business! Untamed Thought, great, giantlike,
enormous;--to be tamed in due time into the compact greatness, not
giantlike, but godlike and stronger than gianthood, of the Shakspeares,
the Goethes!--Spiritually as well as bodily these men are our
progenitors.

I like, too, that representation they have of the tree Igdrasil. All
Life is figured by them as a Tree. Igdrasil, the Ash-tree of Existence,
has its roots deep down in the kingdoms of Hela or Death; its trunk
reaches up heaven-high, spreads its boughs over the whole Universe: it
is the Tree of Existence. At the foot of it, in the Death-kingdom, sit
Three _Nornas_, Fates,--the Past, Present, Future; watering its
roots from the Sacred Well. Its "boughs," with their buddings
and disleafings?--events, things suffered, things done,
catastrophes,--stretch through all lands and times. Is not every leaf
of it a biography, every fibre there an act or word? Its boughs are
Histories of Nations. The rustle of it is the noise of Human Existence,
onwards from of old. It grows there, the breath of Human Passion
rustling through it;--or storm tost, the storm-wind howling through it
like the voice of all the gods. It is Igdrasil, the Tree of Existence.
It is the past, the present, and the future; what was done, what is
doing, what will be done; "the infinite conjugation of the verb _To
do_." Considering how human things circulate, each inextricably in
communion with all,--how the word I speak to you to-day is borrowed,
not from Ulfila the Moesogoth only, but from all men since the first
man began to speak,--I find no similitude so true as this of a Tree.
Beautiful; altogether beautiful and great. The "_Machine_ of the
Universe,"--alas, do but think of that in contrast!


Well, it is strange enough this old Norse view of Nature; different
enough from what we believe of Nature. Whence it specially came, one
would not like to be compelled to say very minutely! One thing we may
say: It came from the thoughts of Norse men;--from the thought, above
all, of the _first_ Norse man who had an original power of thinking. The
First Norse "man of genius," as we should call him! Innumerable men had
passed by, across this Universe, with a dumb vague wonder, such as the
very animals may feel; or with a painful, fruitlessly inquiring wonder,
such as men only feel;--till the great Thinker came, the _original_ man,
the Seer; whose shaped spoken Thought awakes the slumbering capability
of all into Thought. It is ever the way with the Thinker, the spiritual
Hero. What he says, all men were not far from saying, were longing to
say. The Thoughts of all start up, as from painful enchanted sleep,
round his Thought; answering to it, Yes, even so! Joyful to men as the
dawning of day from night;--_is_ it not, indeed, the awakening for them
from no-being into being, from death into life? We still honor such a
man; call him Poet, Genius, and so forth: but to these wild men he was
a very magician, a worker of miraculous unexpected blessing for them; a
Prophet, a God!--Thought once awakened does not again slumber; unfolds
itself into a System of Thought; grows, in man after man, generation
after generation,--till its full stature is reached, and _such_ System
of Thought can grow no farther; but must give place to another.

For the Norse people, the Man now named Odin, and Chief Norse God, we
fancy, was such a man. A Teacher, and Captain of soul and of body; a
Hero, of worth immeasurable; admiration for whom, transcending the known
bounds, became adoration. Has he not the power of articulate Thinking;
and many other powers, as yet miraculous? So, with boundless gratitude,
would the rude Norse heart feel. Has he not solved for them the
sphinx-enigma of this Universe; given assurance to them of their own
destiny there? By him they know now what they have to do here, what to
look for hereafter. Existence has become articulate, melodious by him;
he first has made Life alive!--We may call this Odin, the origin of
Norse Mythology: Odin, or whatever name the First Norse Thinker bore
while he was a man among men. His view of the Universe once promulgated,
a like view starts into being in all minds; grows, keeps ever growing,
while it continues credible there. In all minds it lay written, but
invisibly, as in sympathetic ink; at his word it starts into visibility
in all. Nay, in every epoch of the world, the great event, parent of all
others, is it not the arrival of a Thinker in the world--!

One other thing we must not forget; it will explain, a little, the
confusion of these Norse Eddas. They are not one coherent System of
Thought; but properly the _summation_ of several successive systems. All
this of the old Norse Belief which is flung out for us, in one level of
distance in the Edda, like a picture painted on the same canvas, does
not at all stand so in the reality. It stands rather at all manner of
distances and depths, of successive generations since the Belief first
began. All Scandinavian thinkers, since the first of them, contributed
to that Scandinavian System of Thought; in ever-new elaboration and
addition, it is the combined work of them all. What history it had,
how it changed from shape to shape, by one thinker's contribution after
another, till it got to the full final shape we see it under in the
Edda, no man will now ever know: _its_ Councils of Trebizond, Councils
of Trent, Athanasiuses, Dantes, Luthers, are sunk without echo in the
dark night! Only that it had such a history we can all know. Wheresover
a thinker appeared, there in the thing he thought of was a contribution,
accession, a change or revolution made. Alas, the grandest "revolution"
of all, the one made by the man Odin himself, is not this too sunk for
us like the rest! Of Odin what history? Strange rather to reflect that
he _had_ a history! That this Odin, in his wild Norse vesture, with his
wild beard and eyes, his rude Norse speech and ways, was a man like us;
with our sorrows, joys, with our limbs, features;--intrinsically all one
as we: and did such a work! But the work, much of it, has perished; the
worker, all to the name. "_Wednesday_," men will say to-morrow; Odin's
day! Of Odin there exists no history; no document of it; no guess about
it worth repeating.

Snorro indeed, in the quietest manner, almost in a brief business style,
writes down, in his _Heimskringla_, how Odin was a heroic Prince, in the
Black-Sea region, with Twelve Peers, and a great people straitened for
room. How he led these _Asen_ (Asiatics) of his out of Asia; settled
them in the North parts of Europe, by warlike conquest; invented
Letters, Poetry and so forth,--and came by and by to be worshipped as
Chief God by these Scandinavians, his Twelve Peers made into Twelve
Sons of his own, Gods like himself: Snorro has no doubt of this. Saxo
Grammaticus, a very curious Northman of that same century, is still
more unhesitating; scruples not to find out a historical fact in every
individual mythus, and writes it down as a terrestrial event in Denmark
or elsewhere. Torfaeus, learned and cautious, some centuries later,
assigns by calculation a _date_ for it: Odin, he says, came into Europe
about the Year 70 before Christ. Of all which, as grounded on mere
uncertainties, found to be untenable now, I need say nothing. Far,
very far beyond the Year 70! Odin's date, adventures, whole terrestrial
history, figure and environment are sunk from us forever into unknown
thousands of years.

Nay Grimm, the German Antiquary, goes so far as to deny that any man
Odin ever existed. He proves it by etymology. The word _Wuotan_, which
is the original form of _Odin_, a word spread, as name of their chief
Divinity, over all the Teutonic Nations everywhere; this word, which
connects itself, according to Grimm, with the Latin _vadere_, with
the English _wade_ and such like,--means primarily Movement, Source of
Movement, Power; and is the fit name of the highest god, not of any man.
The word signifies Divinity, he says, among the old Saxon, German and
all Teutonic Nations; the adjectives formed from it all signify divine,
supreme, or something pertaining to the chief god. Like enough! We must
bow to Grimm in matters etymological. Let us consider it fixed that
_Wuotan_ means _Wading_, force of _Movement_. And now still, what
hinders it from being the name of a Heroic Man and _Mover_, as well as
of a god? As for the adjectives, and words formed from it,--did not the
Spaniards in their universal admiration for Lope, get into the habit of
saying "a Lope flower," "a Lope _dama_," if the flower or woman were of
surpassing beauty? Had this lasted, _Lope_ would have grown, in Spain,
to be an adjective signifying _godlike_ also. Indeed, Adam Smith, in his
Essay on Language, surmises that all adjectives whatsoever were formed
precisely in that way: some very green thing, chiefly notable for its
greenness, got the appellative name _Green_, and then the next thing
remarkable for that quality, a tree for instance, was named the _green_
tree,--as we still say "the _steam_ coach," "four-horse coach," or the
like. All primary adjectives, according to Smith, were formed in this
way; were at first substantives and things. We cannot annihilate a man
for etymologies like that! Surely there was a First Teacher and Captain;
surely there must have been an Odin, palpable to the sense at one time;
no adjective, but a real Hero of flesh and blood! The voice of all
tradition, history or echo of history, agrees with all that thought will
teach one about it, to assure us of this.

How the man Odin came to be considered a _god_, the chief god?--that
surely is a question which nobody would wish to dogmatize upon. I have
said, his people knew no _limits_ to their admiration of him; they
had as yet no scale to measure admiration by. Fancy your own generous
heart's-love of some greatest man expanding till it _transcended_ all
bounds, till it filled and overflowed the whole field of your thought!
Or what if this man Odin,--since a great deep soul, with the afflatus
and mysterious tide of vision and impulse rushing on him he knows
not whence, is ever an enigma, a kind of terror and wonder to
himself,--should have felt that perhaps _he_ was divine; that _he_
was some effluence of the "Wuotan," "_Movement_", Supreme Power
and Divinity, of whom to his rapt vision all Nature was the awful
Flame-image; that some effluence of Wuotan dwelt here in him! He was not
necessarily false; he was but mistaken, speaking the truest he knew. A
great soul, any sincere soul, knows not what he is,--alternates between
the highest height and the lowest depth; can, of all things, the least
measure--Himself! What others take him for, and what he guesses that he
may be; these two items strangely act on one another, help to determine
one another. With all men reverently admiring him; with his own wild
soul full of noble ardors and affections, of whirlwind chaotic darkness
and glorious new light; a divine Universe bursting all into godlike
beauty round him, and no man to whom the like ever had befallen, what
could he think himself to be? "Wuotan?" All men answered, "Wuotan!"--

And then consider what mere Time will do in such cases; how if a man
was great while living, he becomes tenfold greater when dead. What an
enormous _camera-obscura_ magnifier is Tradition! How a thing grows in
the human Memory, in the human Imagination, when love, worship and
all that lies in the human Heart, is there to encourage it. And in the
darkness, in the entire ignorance; without date or document, no book, no
Arundel-marble; only here and there some dumb monumental cairn. Why,
in thirty or forty years, were there no books, any great man would grow
_mythic_, the contemporaries who had seen him, being once all dead.
And in three hundred years, and in three thousand years--! To attempt
_theorizing_ on such matters would profit little: they are matters which
refuse to be _theoremed_ and diagramed; which Logic ought to know that
she _cannot_ speak of. Enough for us to discern, far in the uttermost
distance, some gleam as of a small real light shining in the centre of
that enormous camera-obscure image; to discern that the centre of it all
was not a madness and nothing, but a sanity and something.

This light, kindled in the great dark vortex of the Norse Mind, dark but
living, waiting only for light; this is to me the centre of the whole.
How such light will then shine out, and with wondrous thousand-fold
expansion spread itself, in forms and colors, depends not on _it_, so
much as on the National Mind recipient of it. The colors and forms
of your light will be those of the _cut-glass_ it has to shine
through.--Curious to think how, for every man, any the truest fact is
modelled by the nature of the man! I said, The earnest man, speaking to
his brother men, must always have stated what seemed to him a _fact_, a
real Appearance of Nature. But the way in which such Appearance or
fact shaped itself,--what sort of _fact_ it became for him,--was and
is modified by his own laws of thinking; deep, subtle, but universal,
ever-operating laws. The world of Nature, for every man, is the Fantasy
of Himself. This world is the multiplex "Image of his own Dream." Who
knows to what unnamable subtleties of spiritual law all these Pagan
Fables owe their shape! The number Twelve, divisiblest of all, which
could be halved, quartered, parted into three, into six, the most
remarkable number,--this was enough to determine the _Signs of the
Zodiac_, the number of Odin's _Sons_, and innumerable other Twelves. Any
vague rumor of number had a tendency to settle itself into Twelve. So
with regard to every other matter. And quite unconsciously too,--with no
notion of building up "Allegories "! But the fresh clear glance of those
First Ages would be prompt in discerning the secret relations of things,
and wholly open to obey these. Schiller finds in the _Cestus of
Venus_ an everlasting aesthetic truth as to the nature of all Beauty;
curious:--but he is careful not to insinuate that the old Greek Mythists
had any notion of lecturing about the "Philosophy of Criticism"!--On the
whole, we must leave those boundless regions. Cannot we conceive that
Odin was a reality? Error indeed, error enough: but sheer falsehood,
idle fables, allegory aforethought,--we will not believe that our
Fathers believed in these.


Odin's _Runes_ are a significant feature of him. Runes, and the miracles
of "magic" he worked by them, make a great feature in tradition. Runes
are the Scandinavian Alphabet; suppose Odin to have been the inventor
of Letters, as well as "magic," among that people! It is the greatest
invention man has ever made! this of marking down the unseen thought
that is in him by written characters. It is a kind of second speech,
almost as miraculous as the first. You remember the astonishment and
incredulity of Atahualpa the Peruvian King; how he made the Spanish
Soldier who was guarding him scratch _Dios_ on his thumb-nail, that he
might try the next soldier with it, to ascertain whether such a miracle
was possible. If Odin brought Letters among his people, he might work
magic enough!

Writing by Runes has some air of being original among the Norsemen: not
a Phoenician Alphabet, but a native Scandinavian one. Snorro tells us
farther that Odin invented Poetry; the music of human speech, as well as
that miraculous runic marking of it. Transport yourselves into the early
childhood of nations; the first beautiful morning-light of our Europe,
when all yet lay in fresh young radiance as of a great sunrise, and
our Europe was first beginning to think, to be! Wonder, hope; infinite
radiance of hope and wonder, as of a young child's thoughts, in the
hearts of these strong men! Strong sons of Nature; and here was not only
a wild Captain and Fighter; discerning with his wild flashing eyes what
to do, with his wild lion-heart daring and doing it; but a Poet too, all
that we mean by a Poet, Prophet, great devout Thinker and Inventor,--as
the truly Great Man ever is. A Hero is a Hero at all points; in the soul
and thought of him first of all. This Odin, in his rude semi-articulate
way, had a word to speak. A great heart laid open to take in this great
Universe, and man's Life here, and utter a great word about it. A Hero,
as I say, in his own rude manner; a wise, gifted, noble-hearted man. And
now, if we still admire such a man beyond all others, what must these
wild Norse souls, first awakened into thinking, have made of him! To
them, as yet without names for it, he was noble and noblest; Hero,
Prophet, God; _Wuotan_, the greatest of all. Thought is Thought, however
it speak or spell itself. Intrinsically, I conjecture, this Odin must
have been of the same sort of stuff as the greatest kind of men. A great
thought in the wild deep heart of him! The rough words he articulated,
are they not the rudimental roots of those English words we still use?
He worked so, in that obscure element. But he was as a _light_ kindled
in it; a light of Intellect, rude Nobleness of heart, the only kind of
lights we have yet; a Hero, as I say: and he had to shine there, and
make his obscure element a little lighter,--as is still the task of us
all.

We will fancy him to be the Type Norseman; the finest Teuton whom that
race had yet produced. The rude Norse heart burst up into _boundless_
admiration round him; into adoration. He is as a root of so many great
things; the fruit of him is found growing from deep thousands of years,
over the whole field of Teutonic Life. Our own Wednesday, as I said, is
it not still Odin's Day? Wednesbury, Wansborough, Wanstead, Wandsworth:
Odin grew into England too, these are still leaves from that root!
He was the Chief God to all the Teutonic Peoples; their Pattern
Norseman;--in such way did _they_ admire their Pattern Norseman; that
was the fortune he had in the world.

Thus if the man Odin himself have vanished utterly, there is this huge
Shadow of him which still projects itself over the whole History of his
People. For this Odin once admitted to be God, we can understand well
that the whole Scandinavian Scheme of Nature, or dim No-scheme, whatever
it might before have been, would now begin to develop itself altogether
differently, and grow thenceforth in a new manner. What this Odin saw
into, and taught with his runes and his rhymes, the whole Teutonic
People laid to heart and carried forward. His way of thought became
their way of thought:--such, under new conditions, is the history of
every great thinker still. In gigantic confused lineaments, like some
enormous camera-obscure shadow thrown upwards from the dead deeps of the
Past, and covering the whole Northern Heaven, is not that Scandinavian
Mythology in some sort the Portraiture of this man Odin? The gigantic
image of _his_ natural face, legible or not legible there, expanded and
confused in that manner! Ah, Thought, I say, is always Thought. No great
man lives in vain. The History of the world is but the Biography of
great men.

To me there is something very touching in this primeval figure of
Heroism; in such artless, helpless, but hearty entire reception of a
Hero by his fellow-men. Never so helpless in shape, it is the noblest of
feelings, and a feeling in some shape or other perennial as man himself.
If I could show in any measure, what I feel deeply for a long time now,
That it is the vital element of manhood, the soul of man's history here
in our world,--it would be the chief use of this discoursing at present.
We do not now call our great men Gods, nor admire _without_ limit; ah
no, _with_ limit enough! But if we have no great men, or do not admire
at all,--that were a still worse case.

This poor Scandinavian Hero-worship, that whole Norse way of looking at
the Universe, and adjusting oneself there, has an indestructible merit
for us. A rude childlike way of recognizing the divineness of Nature,
the divineness of Man; most rude, yet heartfelt, robust, giantlike;
betokening what a giant of a man this child would yet grow to!--It was
a truth, and is none. Is it not as the half-dumb stifled voice of the
long-buried generations of our own Fathers, calling out of the depths of
ages to us, in whose veins their blood still runs: "This then, this is
what we made of the world: this is all the image and notion we could
form to ourselves of this great mystery of a Life and Universe. Despise
it not. You are raised high above it, to large free scope of vision; but
you too are not yet at the top. No, your notion too, so much enlarged,
is but a partial, imperfect one; that matter is a thing no man will
ever, in time or out of time, comprehend; after thousands of years of
ever-new expansion, man will find himself but struggling to comprehend
again a part of it: the thing is larger shall man, not to be
comprehended by him; an Infinite thing!"


The essence of the Scandinavian, as indeed of all Pagan Mythologies, we
found to be recognition of the divineness of Nature; sincere communion
of man with the mysterious invisible Powers visibly seen at work in
the world round him. This, I should say, is more sincerely done in
the Scandinavian than in any Mythology I know. Sincerity is the great
characteristic of it. Superior sincerity (far superior) consoles us for
the total want of old Grecian grace. Sincerity, I think, is better than
grace. I feel that these old Northmen wore looking into Nature with open
eye and soul: most earnest, honest; childlike, and yet manlike; with
a great-hearted simplicity and depth and freshness, in a true, loving,
admiring, unfearing way. A right valiant, true old race of men. Such
recognition of Nature one finds to be the chief element of Paganism;
recognition of Man, and his Moral Duty, though this too is not wanting,
comes to be the chief element only in purer forms of religion. Here,
indeed, is a great distinction and epoch in Human Beliefs; a great
landmark in the religious development of Mankind. Man first puts himself
in relation with Nature and her Powers, wonders and worships over those;
not till a later epoch does he discern that all Power is Moral, that the
grand point is the distinction for him of Good and Evil, of _Thou shalt_
and _Thou shalt not_.

With regard to all these fabulous delineations in the _Edda_, I will
remark, moreover, as indeed was already hinted, that most probably they
must have been of much newer date; most probably, even from the first,
were comparatively idle for the old Norsemen, and as it were a kind of
Poetic sport. Allegory and Poetic Delineation, as I said above, cannot
be religious Faith; the Faith itself must first be there, then Allegory
enough will gather round it, as the fit body round its soul. The Norse
Faith, I can well suppose, like other Faiths, was most active while
it lay mainly in the silent state, and had not yet much to say about
itself, still less to sing.

Among those shadowy _Edda_ matters, amid all that fantastic congeries
of assertions, and traditions, in their musical Mythologies, the main
practical belief a man could have was probably not much more than this:
of the _Valkyrs_ and the _Hall of Odin_; of an inflexible _Destiny_; and
that the one thing needful for a man was _to be brave_. The _Valkyrs_
are Choosers of the Slain: a Destiny inexorable, which it is useless
trying to bend or soften, has appointed who is to be slain; this was
a fundamental point for the Norse believer;--as indeed it is for all
earnest men everywhere, for a Mahomet, a Luther, for a Napoleon too. It
lies at the basis this for every such man; it is the woof out of which
his whole system of thought is woven. The _Valkyrs_; and then that these
_Choosers_ lead the brave to a heavenly _Hall of Odin_; only the base
and slavish being thrust elsewhither, into the realms of Hela the
Death-goddess: I take this to have been the soul of the whole Norse
Belief. They understood in their heart that it was indispensable to be
brave; that Odin would have no favor for them, but despise and thrust
them out, if they were not brave. Consider too whether there is not
something in this! It is an everlasting duty, valid in our day as in
that, the duty of being brave. _Valor_ is still _value_. The first duty
for a man is still that of subduing _Fear_. We must get rid of Fear;
we cannot act at all till then. A man's acts are slavish, not true but
specious; his very thoughts are false, he thinks too as a slave and
coward, till he have got Fear under his feet. Odin's creed, if we
disentangle the real kernel of it, is true to this hour. A man shall
and must be valiant; he must march forward, and quit himself like a
man,--trusting imperturbably in the appointment and _choice_ of the
upper Powers; and, on the whole, not fear at all. Now and always, the
completeness of his victory over Fear will determine how much of a man
he is.

It is doubtless very savage that kind of valor of the old Northmen.
Snorro tells us they thought it a shame and misery not to die in battle;
and if natural death seemed to be coming on, they would cut wounds in
their flesh, that Odin might receive them as warriors slain. Old kings,
about to die, had their body laid into a ship; the ship sent forth,
with sails set and slow fire burning it; that, once out at sea, it might
blaze up in flame, and in such manner bury worthily the old hero, at
once in the sky and in the ocean! Wild bloody valor; yet valor of
its kind; better, I say, than none. In the old Sea-kings too, what an
indomitable rugged energy! Silent, with closed lips, as I fancy them,
unconscious that they were specially brave; defying the wild ocean with
its monsters, and all men and things;--progenitors of our own Blakes
and Nelsons! No Homer sang these Norse Sea-kings; but Agamemnon's was
a small audacity, and of small fruit in the world, to some of them;--to
Hrolf's of Normandy, for instance! Hrolf, or Rollo Duke of Normandy, the
wild Sea-king, has a share in governing England at this hour.

Nor was it altogether nothing, even that wild sea-roving and battling,
through so many generations. It needed to be ascertained which was
the _strongest_ kind of men; who were to be ruler over whom. Among the
Northland Sovereigns, too, I find some who got the title _Wood-cutter_;
Forest-felling Kings. Much lies in that. I suppose at bottom many of
them were forest-fellers as well as fighters, though the Skalds talk
mainly of the latter,--misleading certain critics not a little; for no
nation of men could ever live by fighting alone; there could not produce
enough come out of that! I suppose the right good fighter was oftenest
also the right good forest-feller,--the right good improver, discerner,
doer and worker in every kind; for true valor, different enough from
ferocity, is the basis of all. A more legitimate kind of valor that;
showing itself against the untamed Forests and dark brute Powers of
Nature, to conquer Nature for us. In the same direction have not we
their descendants since carried it far? May such valor last forever with
us!

That the man Odin, speaking with a Hero's voice and heart, as with an
impressiveness out of Heaven, told his People the infinite importance
of Valor, how man thereby became a god; and that his People, feeling a
response to it in their own hearts, believed this message of his, and
thought it a message out of Heaven, and him a Divinity for telling it
them: this seems to me the primary seed-grain of the Norse Religion,
from which all manner of mythologies, symbolic practices, speculations,
allegories, songs and sagas would naturally grow. Grow,--how strangely!
I called it a small light shining and shaping in the huge vortex of
Norse darkness. Yet the darkness itself was _alive_; consider that. It
was the eager inarticulate uninstructed Mind of the whole Norse People,
longing only to become articulate, to go on articulating ever farther!
The living doctrine grows, grows;--like a Banyan-tree; the first _seed_
is the essential thing: any branch strikes itself down into the earth,
becomes a new root; and so, in endless complexity, we have a whole wood,
a whole jungle, one seed the parent of it all. Was not the whole Norse
Religion, accordingly, in some sense, what we called "the enormous
shadow of this man's likeness"? Critics trace some affinity in some
Norse mythuses, of the Creation and such like, with those of the
Hindoos. The Cow Adumbla, "licking the rime from the rocks," has a
kind of Hindoo look. A Hindoo Cow, transported into frosty countries.
Probably enough; indeed we may say undoubtedly, these things will have
a kindred with the remotest lands, with the earliest times. Thought does
not die, but only is changed. The first man that began to think in this
Planet of ours, he was the beginner of all. And then the second man, and
the third man;--nay, every true Thinker to this hour is a kind of Odin,
teaches men _his_ way of thought, spreads a shadow of his own likeness
over sections of the History of the World.


Of the distinctive poetic character or merit of this Norse Mythology
I have not room to speak; nor does it concern us much. Some wild
Prophecies we have, as the _Voluspa_ in the _Elder Edda_; of a rapt,
earnest, sibylline sort. But they were comparatively an idle adjunct of
the matter, men who as it were but toyed with the matter, these
later Skalds; and it is _their_ songs chiefly that survive. In later
centuries, I suppose, they would go on singing, poetically symbolizing,
as our modern Painters paint, when it was no longer from the innermost
heart, or not from the heart at all. This is everywhere to be well kept
in mind.

Gray's fragments of Norse Lore, at any rate, will give one no notion
of it;--any more than Pope will of Homer. It is no square-built gloomy
palace of black ashlar marble, shrouded in awe and horror, as Gray gives
it us: no; rough as the North rocks, as the Iceland deserts, it is; with
a heartiness, homeliness, even a tint of good humor and robust mirth in
the middle of these fearful things. The strong old Norse heart did not
go upon theatrical sublimities; they had not time to tremble. I like
much their robust simplicity; their veracity, directness of conception.
Thor "draws down his brows" in a veritable Norse rage; "grasps his
hammer till the _knuckles grow white_." Beautiful traits of pity too, an
honest pity. Balder "the white God" dies; the beautiful, benignant; he
is the Sungod. They try all Nature for a remedy; but he is dead. Frigga,
his mother, sends Hermoder to seek or see him: nine days and nine nights
he rides through gloomy deep valleys, a labyrinth of gloom; arrives at
the Bridge with its gold roof: the Keeper says, "Yes, Balder did pass
here; but the Kingdom of the Dead is down yonder, far towards the
North." Hermoder rides on; leaps Hell-gate, Hela's gate; does see
Balder, and speak with him: Balder cannot be delivered. Inexorable! Hela
will not, for Odin or any God, give him up. The beautiful and gentle has
to remain there. His Wife had volunteered to go with him, to die with
him. They shall forever remain there. He sends his ring to Odin; Nanna
his wife sends her _thimble_ to Frigga, as a remembrance.--Ah me--!

For indeed Valor is the fountain of Pity too;--of Truth, and all that
is great and good in man. The robust homely vigor of the Norse heart
attaches one much, in these delineations. Is it not a trait of right
honest strength, says Uhland, who has written a fine _Essay_ on Thor,
that the old Norse heart finds its friend in the Thunder-god? That it
is not frightened away by his thunder; but finds that Summer-heat, the
beautiful noble summer, must and will have thunder withal! The Norse
heart _loves_ this Thor and his hammer-bolt; sports with him. Thor is
Summer-heat: the god of Peaceable Industry as well as Thunder. He is the
Peasant's friend; his true henchman and attendant is Thialfi, _Manual
Labor_. Thor himself engages in all manner of rough manual work, scorns
no business for its plebeianism; is ever and anon travelling to the
country of the Jotuns, harrying those chaotic Frost-monsters, subduing
them, at least straitening and damaging them. There is a great broad
humor in some of these things.

Thor, as we saw above, goes to Jotun-land, to seek Hymir's Caldron, that
the Gods may brew beer. Hymir the huge Giant enters, his gray beard
all full of hoar-frost; splits pillars with the very glance of his eye;
Thor, after much rough tumult, snatches the Pot, claps it on his head;
the "handles of it reach down to his heels." The Norse Skald has a kind
of loving sport with Thor. This is the Hymir whose cattle, the
critics have discovered, are Icebergs. Huge untutored Brobdignag
genius,--needing only to be tamed down; into Shakspeares, Dantes,
Goethes! It is all gone now, that old Norse work,--Thor the Thunder-god
changed into Jack the Giant-killer: but the mind that made it is here
yet. How strangely things grow, and die, and do not die! There are twigs
of that great world-tree of Norse Belief still curiously traceable. This
poor Jack of the Nursery, with his miraculous shoes of swiftness, coat
of darkness, sword of sharpness, he is one. _Hynde Etin_, and still more
decisively _Red Etin of Ireland_, _in_ the Scottish Ballads, these
are both derived from Norseland; _Etin_ is evidently a _Jotun_. Nay,
Shakspeare's _Hamlet_ is a twig too of this same world-tree; there seems
no doubt of that. Hamlet, _Amleth_ I find, is really a mythic personage;
and his Tragedy, of the poisoned Father, poisoned asleep by drops in his
ear, and the rest, is a Norse mythus! Old Saxo, as his wont was, made it
a Danish history; Shakspeare, out of Saxo, made it what we see. That
is a twig of the world-tree that has _grown_, I think;--by nature or
accident that one has grown!

In fact, these old Norse songs have a _truth_ in them, an inward
perennial truth and greatness,--as, indeed, all must have that can very
long preserve itself by tradition alone. It is a greatness not of mere
body and gigantic bulk, but a rude greatness of soul. There is a sublime
uncomplaining melancholy traceable in these old hearts. A great free
glance into the very deeps of thought. They seem to have seen, these
brave old Northmen, what Meditation has taught all men in all ages, That
this world is after all but a show,--a phenomenon or appearance, no real
thing. All deep souls see into that,--the Hindoo Mythologist, the German
Philosopher,--the Shakspeare, the earnest Thinker, wherever he may be:

     "We are such stuff as Dreams are made of!"

One of Thor's expeditions, to Utgard (the _Outer_ Garden, central seat
of Jotun-land), is remarkable in this respect. Thialfi was with him, and
Loke. After various adventures, they entered upon Giant-land; wandered
over plains, wild uncultivated places, among stones and trees. At
nightfall they noticed a house; and as the door, which indeed formed
one whole side of the house, was open, they entered. It was a simple
habitation; one large hall, altogether empty. They stayed there.
Suddenly in the dead of the night loud noises alarmed them. Thor grasped
his hammer; stood in the door, prepared for fight. His companions within
ran hither and thither in their terror, seeking some outlet in that rude
hall; they found a little closet at last, and took refuge there. Neither
had Thor any battle: for, lo, in the morning it turned out that the
noise had been only the _snoring_ of a certain enormous but peaceable
Giant, the Giant Skrymir, who lay peaceably sleeping near by; and this
that they took for a house was merely his _Glove_, thrown aside there;
the door was the Glove-wrist; the little closet they had fled into was
the Thumb! Such a glove;--I remark too that it had not fingers as ours
have, but only a thumb, and the rest undivided: a most ancient, rustic
glove!

Skrymir now carried their portmanteau all day; Thor, however, had his
own suspicions, did not like the ways of Skrymir; determined at night to
put an end to him as he slept. Raising his hammer, he struck down into
the Giant's face a right thunder-bolt blow, of force to rend rocks. The
Giant merely awoke; rubbed his cheek, and said, Did a leaf fall? Again
Thor struck, so soon as Skrymir again slept; a better blow than before;
but the Giant only murmured, Was that a grain of sand? Thor's third
stroke was with both his hands (the "knuckles white" I suppose), and
seemed to dint deep into Skrymir's visage; but he merely checked his
snore, and remarked, There must be sparrows roosting in this tree, I
think; what is that they have dropt?--At the gate of Utgard, a place so
high that you had to "strain your neck bending back to see the top
of it," Skrymir went his ways. Thor and his companions were admitted;
invited to take share in the games going on. To Thor, for his part, they
handed a Drinking-horn; it was a common feat, they told him, to drink
this dry at one draught. Long and fiercely, three times over, Thor
drank; but made hardly any impression. He was a weak child, they told
him: could he lift that Cat he saw there? Small as the feat seemed, Thor
with his whole godlike strength could not; he bent up the creature's
back, could not raise its feet off the ground, could at the utmost raise
one foot. Why, you are no man, said the Utgard people; there is an Old
Woman that will wrestle you! Thor, heartily ashamed, seized this haggard
Old Woman; but could not throw her.

And now, on their quitting Utgard, the chief Jotun, escorting them
politely a little way, said to Thor: "You are beaten then:--yet be not
so much ashamed; there was deception of appearance in it. That Horn you
tried to drink was the _Sea_; you did make it ebb; but who could drink
that, the bottomless! The Cat you would have lifted,--why, that is the
_Midgard-snake_, the Great World-serpent, which, tail in mouth, girds
and keeps up the whole created world; had you torn that up, the world
must have rushed to ruin! As for the Old Woman, she was _Time_, Old Age,
Duration: with her what can wrestle? No man nor no god with her; gods
or men, she prevails over all! And then those three strokes you
struck,--look at these _three valleys_; your three strokes made these!"
Thor looked at his attendant Jotun: it was Skrymir;--it was, say Norse
critics, the old chaotic rocky _Earth_ in person, and that glove-_house_
was some Earth-cavern! But Skrymir had vanished; Utgard with its
sky-high gates, when Thor grasped his hammer to smite them, had gone to
air; only the Giant's voice was heard mocking: "Better come no more to
Jotunheim!"--

This is of the allegoric period, as we see, and half play, not of the
prophetic and entirely devout: but as a mythus is there not real antique
Norse gold in it? More true metal, rough from the Mimer-stithy, than in
many a famed Greek Mythus _shaped_ far better! A great broad Brobdignag
grin of true humor is in this Skrymir; mirth resting on earnestness and
sadness, as the rainbow on black tempest: only a right valiant heart is
capable of that. It is the grim humor of our own Ben Jonson, rare old
Ben; runs in the blood of us, I fancy; for one catches tones of it,
under a still other shape, out of the American Backwoods.

That is also a very striking conception that of the _Ragnarok_,
Consummation, or _Twilight of the Gods_. It is in the _Voluspa_ Song;
seemingly a very old, prophetic idea. The Gods and Jotuns, the divine
Powers and the chaotic brute ones, after long contest and partial
victory by the former, meet at last in universal world-embracing
wrestle and duel; World-serpent against Thor, strength against strength;
mutually extinctive; and ruin, "twilight" sinking into darkness,
swallows the created Universe. The old Universe with its Gods is sunk;
but it is not final death: there is to be a new Heaven and a new Earth;
a higher supreme God, and Justice to reign among men. Curious: this law
of mutation, which also is a law written in man's inmost thought, had
been deciphered by these old earnest Thinkers in their rude style; and
how, though all dies, and even gods die, yet all death is but a phoenix
fire-death, and new-birth into the Greater and the Better! It is the
fundamental Law of Being for a creature made of Time, living in this
Place of Hope. All earnest men have seen into it; may still see into it.

And now, connected with this, let us glance at the _last_ mythus of the
appearance of Thor; and end there. I fancy it to be the latest in
date of all these fables; a sorrowing protest against the advance of
Christianity,--set forth reproachfully by some Conservative Pagan.
King Olaf has been harshly blamed for his over-zeal in introducing
Christianity; surely I should have blamed him far more for an under-zeal
in that! He paid dear enough for it; he died by the revolt of his
Pagan people, in battle, in the year 1033, at Stickelstad, near that
Drontheim, where the chief Cathedral of the North has now stood for
many centuries, dedicated gratefully to his memory as _Saint_ Olaf. The
mythus about Thor is to this effect. King Olaf, the Christian Reform
King, is sailing with fit escort along the shore of Norway, from haven
to haven; dispensing justice, or doing other royal work: on leaving a
certain haven, it is found that a stranger, of grave eyes and aspect,
red beard, of stately robust figure, has stept in. The courtiers address
him; his answers surprise by their pertinency and depth: at length he
is brought to the King. The stranger's conversation here is not less
remarkable, as they sail along the beautiful shore; but after some time,
he addresses King Olaf thus: "Yes, King Olaf, it is all beautiful, with
the sun shining on it there; green, fruitful, a right fair home for you;
and many a sore day had Thor, many a wild fight with the rock Jotuns,
before he could make it so. And now you seem minded to put away Thor.
King Olaf, have a care!" said the stranger, drawing down his brows;--and
when they looked again, he was nowhere to be found.--This is the last
appearance of Thor on the stage of this world!

Do we not see well enough how the Fable might arise, without unveracity
on the part of any one? It is the way most Gods have come to appear
among men: thus, if in Pindar's time "Neptune was seen once at the
Nemean Games," what was this Neptune too but a "stranger of noble grave
aspect,"--fit to be "seen"! There is something pathetic, tragic for me
in this last voice of Paganism. Thor is vanished, the whole Norse world
has vanished; and will not return ever again. In like fashion to that,
pass away the highest things. All things that have been in this world,
all things that are or will be in it, have to vanish: we have our sad
farewell to give them.

That Norse Religion, a rude but earnest, sternly impressive
_Consecration of Valor_ (so we may define it), sufficed for these old
valiant Northmen. Consecration of Valor is not a bad thing! We will take
it for good, so far as it goes. Neither is there no use in _knowing_
something about this old Paganism of our Fathers. Unconsciously, and
combined with higher things, it is in us yet, that old Faith withal! To
know it consciously, brings us into closer and clearer relation with the
Past,--with our own possessions in the Past. For the whole Past, as I
keep repeating, is the possession of the Present; the Past had always
something _true_, and is a precious possession. In a different time, in
a different place, it is always some other _side_ of our common Human
Nature that has been developing itself. The actual True is the sum
of all these; not any one of them by itself constitutes what of Human
Nature is hitherto developed. Better to know them all than misknow them.
"To which of these Three Religions do you specially adhere?" inquires
Meister of his Teacher. "To all the Three!" answers the other: "To all
the Three; for they by their union first constitute the True Religion."





LECTURE II. THE HERO AS PROPHET. MAHOMET: ISLAM.

[May 8, 1840.]

From the first rude times of Paganism among the Scandinavians in the
North, we advance to a very different epoch of religion, among a very
different people: Mahometanism among the Arabs. A great change; what a
change and progress is indicated here, in the universal condition and
thoughts of men!

The Hero is not now regarded as a God among his fellowmen; but as one
God-inspired, as a Prophet. It is the second phasis of Hero-worship:
the first or oldest, we may say, has passed away without return; in the
history of the world there will not again be any man, never so great,
whom his fellowmen will take for a god. Nay we might rationally ask,
Did any set of human beings ever really think the man they _saw_ there
standing beside them a god, the maker of this world? Perhaps not: it was
usually some man they remembered, or _had_ seen. But neither can this
any more be. The Great Man is not recognized henceforth as a god any
more.

It was a rude gross error, that of counting the Great Man a god. Yet let
us say that it is at all times difficult to know _what_ he is, or how
to account of him and receive him! The most significant feature in the
history of an epoch is the manner it has of welcoming a Great Man. Ever,
to the true instincts of men, there is something godlike in him. Whether
they shall take him to be a god, to be a prophet, or what they shall
take him to be? that is ever a grand question; by their way of answering
that, we shall see, as through a little window, into the very heart
of these men's spiritual condition. For at bottom the Great Man, as he
comes from the hand of Nature, is ever the same kind of thing: Odin,
Luther, Johnson, Burns; I hope to make it appear that these are all
originally of one stuff; that only by the world's reception of them, and
the shapes they assume, are they so immeasurably diverse. The worship
of Odin astonishes us,--to fall prostrate before the Great Man, into
_deliquium_ of love and wonder over him, and feel in their hearts that
he was a denizen of the skies, a god! This was imperfect enough: but
to welcome, for example, a Burns as we did, was that what we can call
perfect? The most precious gift that Heaven can give to the Earth; a man
of "genius" as we call it; the Soul of a Man actually sent down from
the skies with a God's-message to us,--this we waste away as an idle
artificial firework, sent to amuse us a little, and sink it into ashes,
wreck and ineffectuality: _such_ reception of a Great Man I do not
call very perfect either! Looking into the heart of the thing, one may
perhaps call that of Burns a still uglier phenomenon, betokening still
sadder imperfections in mankind's ways, than the Scandinavian
method itself! To fall into mere unreasoning _deliquium_ of love
and admiration, was not good; but such unreasoning, nay irrational
supercilious no-love at all is perhaps still worse!--It is a thing
forever changing, this of Hero-worship: different in each age, difficult
to do well in any age. Indeed, the heart of the whole business of the
age, one may say, is to do it well.

We have chosen Mahomet not as the most eminent Prophet; but as the one
we are freest to speak of. He is by no means the truest of Prophets;
but I do esteem him a true one. Farther, as there is no danger of our
becoming, any of us, Mahometans, I mean to say all the good of him I
justly can. It is the way to get at his secret: let us try to understand
what _he_ meant with the world; what the world meant and means with him,
will then be a more answerable question. Our current hypothesis about
Mahomet, that he was a scheming Impostor, a Falsehood incarnate, that
his religion is a mere mass of quackery and fatuity, begins really to be
now untenable to any one. The lies, which well-meaning zeal has heaped
round this man, are disgraceful to ourselves only. When Pococke inquired
of Grotius, Where the proof was of that story of the pigeon, trained to
pick peas from Mahomet's ear, and pass for an angel dictating to him?
Grotius answered that there was no proof! It is really time to dismiss
all that. The word this man spoke has been the life-guidance now of a
hundred and eighty millions of men these twelve hundred years. These
hundred and eighty millions were made by God as well as we. A greater
number of God's creatures believe in Mahomet's word at this hour, than
in any other word whatever. Are we to suppose that it was a miserable
piece of spiritual legerdemain, this which so many creatures of the
Almighty have lived by and died by? I, for my part, cannot form any such
supposition. I will believe most things sooner than that. One would be
entirely at a loss what to think of this world at all, if quackery so
grew and were sanctioned here.

Alas, such theories are very lamentable. If we would attain to knowledge
of anything in God's true Creation, let us disbelieve them wholly!
They are the product of an Age of Scepticism: they indicate the saddest
spiritual paralysis, and mere death-life of the souls of men: more
godless theory, I think, was never promulgated in this Earth. A false
man found a religion? Why, a false man cannot build a brick house! If
he do not know and follow truly the properties of mortar, burnt clay and
what else be works in, it is no house that he makes, but a rubbish-heap.
It will not stand for twelve centuries, to lodge a hundred and eighty
millions; it will fall straightway. A man must conform himself to
Nature's laws, _be_ verily in communion with Nature and the truth of
things, or Nature will answer him, No, not at all! Speciosities
are specious--ah me!--a Cagliostro, many Cagliostros, prominent
world-leaders, do prosper by their quackery, for a day. It is like a
forged bank-note; they get it passed out of _their_ worthless hands:
others, not they, have to smart for it. Nature bursts up in fire-flames,
French Revolutions and such like, proclaiming with terrible veracity
that forged notes are forged.

But of a Great Man especially, of him I will venture to assert that it
is incredible he should have been other than true. It seems to me the
primary foundation of him, and of all that can lie in him, this. No
Mirabeau, Napoleon, Burns, Cromwell, no man adequate to do anything, but
is first of all in right earnest about it; what I call a sincere man. I
should say _sincerity_, a deep, great, genuine sincerity, is the first
characteristic of all men in any way heroic. Not the sincerity that
calls itself sincere; ah no, that is a very poor matter indeed;--a
shallow braggart conscious sincerity; oftenest self-conceit mainly.
The Great Man's sincerity is of the kind he cannot speak of, is not
conscious of: nay, I suppose, he is conscious rather of insincerity; for
what man can walk accurately by the law of truth for one day? No, the
Great Man does not boast himself sincere, far from that; perhaps does
not ask himself if he is so: I would say rather, his sincerity does
not depend on himself; he cannot help being sincere! The great Fact
of Existence is great to him. Fly as he will, he cannot get out of the
awful presence of this Reality. His mind is so made; he is great by
that, first of all. Fearful and wonderful, real as Life, real as Death,
is this Universe to him. Though all men should forget its truth, and
walk in a vain show, he cannot. At all moments the Flame-image glares
in upon him; undeniable, there, there!--I wish you to take this as my
primary definition of a Great Man. A little man may have this, it
is competent to all men that God has made: but a Great Man cannot be
without it.

Such a man is what we call an _original_ man; he comes to us at
first-hand. A messenger he, sent from the Infinite Unknown with tidings
to us. We may call him Poet, Prophet, God;--in one way or other, we all
feel that the words he utters are as no other man's words. Direct from
the Inner Fact of things;--he lives, and has to live, in daily communion
with that. Hearsays cannot hide it from him; he is blind, homeless,
miserable, following hearsays; _it_ glares in upon him. Really his
utterances, are they not a kind of "revelation;"--what we must call such
for want of some other name? It is from the heart of the world that he
comes; he is portion of the primal reality of things. God has made many
revelations: but this man too, has not God made him, the latest
and newest of all? The "inspiration of the Almighty giveth him
understanding:" we must listen before all to him.


This Mahomet, then, we will in no wise consider as an Inanity and
Theatricality, a poor conscious ambitious schemer; we cannot conceive
him so. The rude message he delivered was a real one withal; an earnest
confused voice from the unknown Deep. The man's words were not false,
nor his workings here below; no Inanity and Simulacrum; a fiery mass
of Life cast up from the great bosom of Nature herself. To _kindle_
the world; the world's Maker had ordered it so. Neither can the faults,
imperfections, insincerities even, of Mahomet, if such were never so
well proved against him, shake this primary fact about him.

On the whole, we make too much of faults; the details of the business
hide the real centre of it. Faults? The greatest of faults, I should
say, is to be conscious of none. Readers of the Bible above all, one
would think, might know better. Who is called there "the man according
to God's own heart"? David, the Hebrew King, had fallen into sins
enough; blackest crimes; there was no want of sins. And thereupon the
unbelievers sneer and ask, Is this your man according to God's heart?
The sneer, I must say, seems to me but a shallow one. What are faults,
what are the outward details of a life; if the inner secret of it, the
remorse, temptations, true, often-baffled, never-ended struggle of it,
be forgotten? "It is not in man that walketh to direct his steps." Of
all acts, is not, for a man, _repentance_ the most divine? The deadliest
sin, I say, were that same supercilious consciousness of no sin;--that
is death; the heart so conscious is divorced from sincerity, humility
and fact; is dead: it is "pure" as dead dry sand is pure. David's life
and history, as written for us in those Psalms of his, I consider to be
the truest emblem ever given of a man's moral progress and warfare here
below. All earnest souls will ever discern in it the faithful struggle
of an earnest human soul towards what is good and best. Struggle often
baffled, sore baffled, down as into entire wreck; yet a struggle never
ended; ever, with tears, repentance, true unconquerable purpose, begun
anew. Poor human nature! Is not a man's walking, in truth, always that:
"a succession of falls"? Man can do no other. In this wild element of
a Life, he has to struggle onwards; now fallen, deep-abased; and ever,
with tears, repentance, with bleeding heart, he has to rise again,
struggle again still onwards. That his struggle _be_ a faithful
unconquerable one: that is the question of questions. We will put
up with many sad details, if the soul of it were true. Details by
themselves will never teach us what it is. I believe we misestimate
Mahomet's faults even as faults: but the secret of him will never be
got by dwelling there. We will leave all this behind us; and assuring
ourselves that he did mean some true thing, ask candidly what it was or
might be.


These Arabs Mahomet was born among are certainly a notable people. Their
country itself is notable; the fit habitation for such a race. Savage
inaccessible rock-mountains, great grim deserts, alternating with
beautiful strips of verdure: wherever water is, there is greenness,
beauty; odoriferous balm-shrubs, date-trees, frankincense-trees.
Consider that wide waste horizon of sand, empty, silent, like a
sand-sea, dividing habitable place from habitable. You are all alone
there, left alone with the Universe; by day a fierce sun blazing down
on it with intolerable radiance; by night the great deep Heaven with its
stars. Such a country is fit for a swift-handed, deep-hearted race of
men. There is something most agile, active, and yet most meditative,
enthusiastic in the Arab character. The Persians are called the French
of the East; we will call the Arabs Oriental Italians. A gifted noble
people; a people of wild strong feelings, and of iron restraint over
these: the characteristic of noble-mindedness, of genius. The wild
Bedouin welcomes the stranger to his tent, as one having right to all
that is there; were it his worst enemy, he will slay his foal to treat
him, will serve him with sacred hospitality for three days, will set him
fairly on his way;--and then, by another law as sacred, kill him if
he can. In words too as in action. They are not a loquacious people,
taciturn rather; but eloquent, gifted when they do speak. An earnest,
truthful kind of men. They are, as we know, of Jewish kindred: but
with that deadly terrible earnestness of the Jews they seem to combine
something graceful, brilliant, which is not Jewish. They had "Poetic
contests" among them before the time of Mahomet. Sale says, at Ocadh,
in the South of Arabia, there were yearly fairs, and there, when the
merchandising was done, Poets sang for prizes:--the wild people gathered
to hear that.

One Jewish quality these Arabs manifest; the outcome of many or of all
high qualities: what we may call religiosity. From of old they had
been zealous worshippers, according to their light. They worshipped the
stars, as Sabeans; worshipped many natural objects,--recognized them as
symbols, immediate manifestations, of the Maker of Nature. It was wrong;
and yet not wholly wrong. All God's works are still in a sense symbols
of God. Do we not, as I urged, still account it a merit to recognize a
certain inexhaustible significance, "poetic beauty" as we name it, in
all natural objects whatsoever? A man is a poet, and honored, for doing
that, and speaking or singing it,--a kind of diluted worship. They had
many Prophets, these Arabs; Teachers each to his tribe, each according
to the light he had. But indeed, have we not from of old the noblest
of proofs, still palpable to every one of us, of what devoutness and
noble-mindedness had dwelt in these rustic thoughtful peoples? Biblical
critics seem agreed that our own _Book of Job_ was written in that
region of the world. I call that, apart from all theories about it, one
of the grandest things ever written with pen. One feels, indeed, as
if it were not Hebrew; such a noble universality, different from noble
patriotism or sectarianism, reigns in it. A noble Book; all men's Book!
It is our first, oldest statement of the never-ending Problem,--man's
destiny, and God's ways with him here in this earth. And all in such
free flowing outlines; grand in its sincerity, in its simplicity; in its
epic melody, and repose of reconcilement. There is the seeing eye,
the mildly understanding heart. So _true_ every way; true eyesight
and vision for all things; material things no less than spiritual: the
Horse,--"hast thou clothed his neck with _thunder_?"--he "_laughs_
at the shaking of the spear!" Such living likenesses were never since
drawn. Sublime sorrow, sublime reconciliation; oldest choral melody as
of the heart of mankind;--so soft, and great; as the summer midnight, as
the world with its seas and stars! There is nothing written, I think, in
the Bible or out of it, of equal literary merit.--

To the idolatrous Arabs one of the most ancient universal objects of
worship was that Black Stone, still kept in the building called Caabah,
at Mecca. Diodorus Siculus mentions this Caabah in a way not to be
mistaken, as the oldest, most honored temple in his time; that is,
some half-century before our Era. Silvestre de Sacy says there is some
likelihood that the Black Stone is an aerolite. In that case, some man
might _see_ it fall out of Heaven! It stands now beside the Well Zemzem;
the Caabah is built over both. A Well is in all places a beautiful
affecting object, gushing out like life from the hard earth;--still more
so in those hot dry countries, where it is the first condition of being.
The Well Zemzem has its name from the bubbling sound of the waters,
_zem-zem_; they think it is the Well which Hagar found with her little
Ishmael in the wilderness: the aerolite and it have been sacred now, and
had a Caabah over them, for thousands of years. A curious object, that
Caabah! There it stands at this hour, in the black cloth-covering the
Sultan sends it yearly; "twenty-seven cubits high;" with circuit,
with double circuit of pillars, with festoon-rows of lamps and quaint
ornaments: the lamps will be lighted again _this_ night,--to glitter
again under the stars. An authentic fragment of the oldest Past. It is
the _Keblah_ of all Moslem: from Delhi all onwards to Morocco, the eyes
of innumerable praying men are turned towards it, five times, this day
and all days: one of the notablest centres in the Habitation of Men.

It had been from the sacredness attached to this Caabah Stone and
Hagar's Well, from the pilgrimings of all tribes of Arabs thither, that
Mecca took its rise as a Town. A great town once, though much decayed
now. It has no natural advantage for a town; stands in a sandy hollow
amid bare barren hills, at a distance from the sea; its provisions, its
very bread, have to be imported. But so many pilgrims needed lodgings:
and then all places of pilgrimage do, from the first, become places of
trade. The first day pilgrims meet, merchants have also met: where
men see themselves assembled for one object, they find that they can
accomplish other objects which depend on meeting together. Mecca
became the Fair of all Arabia. And thereby indeed the chief staple and
warehouse of whatever Commerce there was between the Indian and the
Western countries, Syria, Egypt, even Italy. It had at one time a
population of 100,000; buyers, forwarders of those Eastern and Western
products; importers for their own behoof of provisions and corn. The
government was a kind of irregular aristocratic republic, not without a
touch of theocracy. Ten Men of a chief tribe, chosen in some rough way,
were Governors of Mecca, and Keepers of the Caabah. The Koreish were
the chief tribe in Mahomet's time; his own family was of that tribe. The
rest of the Nation, fractioned and cut asunder by deserts, lived under
similar rude patriarchal governments by one or several: herdsmen,
carriers, traders, generally robbers too; being oftenest at war one with
another, or with all: held together by no open bond, if it were not this
meeting at the Caabah, where all forms of Arab Idolatry assembled in
common adoration;--held mainly by the _inward_ indissoluble bond of
a common blood and language. In this way had the Arabs lived for long
ages, unnoticed by the world; a people of great qualities, unconsciously
waiting for the day when they should become notable to all the world.
Their Idolatries appear to have been in a tottering state; much was
getting into confusion and fermentation among them. Obscure tidings of
the most important Event ever transacted in this world, the Life and
Death of the Divine Man in Judea, at once the symptom and cause of
immeasurable change to all people in the world, had in the course of
centuries reached into Arabia too; and could not but, of itself, have
produced fermentation there.


It was among this Arab people, so circumstanced, in the year 570 of our
Era, that the man Mahomet was born. He was of the family of Hashem,
of the Koreish tribe as we said; though poor, connected with the chief
persons of his country. Almost at his birth he lost his Father; at the
age of six years his Mother too, a woman noted for her beauty, her
worth and sense: he fell to the charge of his Grandfather, an old man, a
hundred years old. A good old man: Mahomet's Father, Abdallah, had been
his youngest favorite son. He saw in Mahomet, with his old life-worn
eyes, a century old, the lost Abdallah come back again, all that was
left of Abdallah. He loved the little orphan Boy greatly; used to say,
They must take care of that beautiful little Boy, nothing in their
kindred was more precious than he. At his death, while the boy was still
but two years old, he left him in charge to Abu Thaleb the eldest of the
Uncles, as to him that now was head of the house. By this Uncle, a just
and rational man as everything betokens, Mahomet was brought up in the
best Arab way.

Mahomet, as he grew up, accompanied his Uncle on trading journeys and
such like; in his eighteenth year one finds him a fighter following his
Uncle in war. But perhaps the most significant of all his journeys is
one we find noted as of some years' earlier date: a journey to the Fairs
of Syria. The young man here first came in contact with a quite foreign
world,--with one foreign element of endless moment to him: the Christian
Religion. I know not what to make of that "Sergius, the Nestorian Monk,"
whom Abu Thaleb and he are said to have lodged with; or how much any
monk could have taught one still so young. Probably enough it is greatly
exaggerated, this of the Nestorian Monk. Mahomet was only fourteen;
had no language but his own: much in Syria must have been a strange
unintelligible whirlpool to him. But the eyes of the lad were open;
glimpses of many things would doubtless be taken in, and lie very
enigmatic as yet, which were to ripen in a strange way into views, into
beliefs and insights one day. These journeys to Syria were probably the
beginning of much to Mahomet.

One other circumstance we must not forget: that he had no
school-learning; of the thing we call school-learning none at all. The
art of writing was but just introduced into Arabia; it seems to be the
true opinion that Mahomet never could write! Life in the Desert, with
its experiences, was all his education. What of this infinite Universe
he, from his dim place, with his own eyes and thoughts, could take in,
so much and no more of it was he to know. Curious, if we will reflect on
it, this of having no books. Except by what he could see for himself, or
hear of by uncertain rumor of speech in the obscure Arabian Desert, he
could know nothing. The wisdom that had been before him or at a distance
from him in the world, was in a manner as good as not there for him. Of
the great brother souls, flame-beacons through so many lands and times,
no one directly communicates with this great soul. He is alone there,
deep down in the bosom of the Wilderness; has to grow up so,--alone with
Nature and his own Thoughts.

But, from an early age, he had been remarked as a thoughtful man. His
companions named him "_Al Amin_, The Faithful." A man of truth and
fidelity; true in what he did, in what he spake and thought. They noted
that _he_ always meant something. A man rather taciturn in speech;
silent when there was nothing to be said; but pertinent, wise, sincere,
when he did speak; always throwing light on the matter. This is the only
sort of speech _worth_ speaking! Through life we find him to have been
regarded as an altogether solid, brotherly, genuine man. A serious,
sincere character; yet amiable, cordial, companionable, jocose even;--a
good laugh in him withal: there are men whose laugh is as untrue as
anything about them; who cannot laugh. One hears of Mahomet's beauty:
his fine sagacious honest face, brown florid complexion, beaming black
eyes;--I somehow like too that vein on the brow, which swelled up
black when he was in anger: like the "_horseshoe_ vein" in Scott's
_Redgauntlet_. It was a kind of feature in the Hashem family, this black
swelling vein in the brow; Mahomet had it prominent, as would appear.
A spontaneous, passionate, yet just, true-meaning man! Full of wild
faculty, fire and light; of wild worth, all uncultured; working out his
life-task in the depths of the Desert there.

How he was placed with Kadijah, a rich Widow, as her Steward, and
travelled in her business, again to the Fairs of Syria; how he managed
all, as one can well understand, with fidelity, adroitness; how her
gratitude, her regard for him grew: the story of their marriage is
altogether a graceful intelligible one, as told us by the Arab authors.
He was twenty-five; she forty, though still beautiful. He seems to have
lived in a most affectionate, peaceable, wholesome way with this wedded
benefactress; loving her truly, and her alone. It goes greatly
against the impostor theory, the fact that he lived in this entirely
unexceptionable, entirely quiet and commonplace way, till the heat of
his years was done. He was forty before he talked of any mission from
Heaven. All his irregularities, real and supposed, date from after
his fiftieth year, when the good Kadijah died. All his "ambition,"
seemingly, had been, hitherto, to live an honest life; his "fame,"
the mere good opinion of neighbors that knew him, had been sufficient
hitherto. Not till he was already getting old, the prurient heat of his
life all burnt out, and _peace_ growing to be the chief thing this world
could give him, did he start on the "career of ambition;" and, belying
all his past character and existence, set up as a wretched empty
charlatan to acquire what he could now no longer enjoy! For my share, I
have no faith whatever in that.

Ah no: this deep-hearted Son of the Wilderness, with his beaming black
eyes and open social deep soul, had other thoughts in him than ambition.
A silent great soul; he was one of those who cannot _but_ be in earnest;
whom Nature herself has appointed to be sincere. While others walk in
formulas and hearsays, contented enough to dwell there, this man could
not screen himself in formulas; he was alone with his own soul and the
reality of things. The great Mystery of Existence, as I said, glared in
upon him, with its terrors, with its splendors; no hearsays could hide
that unspeakable fact, "Here am I!" Such _sincerity_, as we named it,
has in very truth something of divine. The word of such a man is a Voice
direct from Nature's own Heart. Men do and must listen to that as to
nothing else;--all else is wind in comparison. From of old, a thousand
thoughts, in his pilgrimings and wanderings, had been in this man:
What am I? What _is_ this unfathomable Thing I live in, which men name
Universe? What is Life; what is Death? What am I to believe? What am
I to do? The grim rocks of Mount Hara, of Mount Sinai, the stern sandy
solitudes answered not. The great Heaven rolling silent overhead, with
its blue-glancing stars, answered not. There was no answer. The man's
own soul, and what of God's inspiration dwelt there, had to answer!

It is the thing which all men have to ask themselves; which we too have
to ask, and answer. This wild man felt it to be of _infinite_ moment;
all other things of no moment whatever in comparison. The jargon of
argumentative Greek Sects, vague traditions of Jews, the stupid routine
of Arab Idolatry: there was no answer in these. A Hero, as I repeat,
has this first distinction, which indeed we may call first and last, the
Alpha and Omega of his whole Heroism, That he looks through the shows
of things into _things_. Use and wont, respectable hearsay, respectable
formula: all these are good, or are not good. There is something behind
and beyond all these, which all these must correspond with, be the image
of, or they are--_Idolatries_; "bits of black wood pretending to be
God;" to the earnest soul a mockery and abomination. Idolatries never so
gilded, waited on by heads of the Koreish, will do nothing for this man.
Though all men walk by them, what good is it? The great Reality
stands glaring there upon _him_. He there has to answer it, or perish
miserably. Now, even now, or else through all Eternity never! Answer it;
_thou_ must find an answer.--Ambition? What could all Arabia do for this
man; with the crown of Greek Heraclius, of Persian Chosroes, and all
crowns in the Earth;--what could they all do for him? It was not of the
Earth he wanted to hear tell; it was of the Heaven above and of the Hell
beneath. All crowns and sovereignties whatsoever, where would _they_ in
a few brief years be? To be Sheik of Mecca or Arabia, and have a bit of
gilt wood put into your hand,--will that be one's salvation? I decidedly
think, not. We will leave it altogether, this impostor hypothesis, as
not credible; not very tolerable even, worthy chiefly of dismissal by
us.

Mahomet had been wont to retire yearly, during the month Ramadhan, into
solitude and silence; as indeed was the Arab custom; a praiseworthy
custom, which such a man, above all, would find natural and useful.
Communing with his own heart, in the silence of the mountains; himself
silent; open to the "small still voices:" it was a right natural custom!
Mahomet was in his fortieth year, when having withdrawn to a cavern
in Mount Hara, near Mecca, during this Ramadhan, to pass the month in
prayer, and meditation on those great questions, he one day told his
wife Kadijah, who with his household was with him or near him this year,
That by the unspeakable special favor of Heaven he had now found it all
out; was in doubt and darkness no longer, but saw it all. That all these
Idols and Formulas were nothing, miserable bits of wood; that there was
One God in and over all; and we must leave all Idols, and look to Him.
That God is great; and that there is nothing else great! He is the
Reality. Wooden Idols are not real; He is real. He made us at first,
sustains us yet; we and all things are but the shadow of Him; a
transitory garment veiling the Eternal Splendor. "_Allah akbar_, God is
great;"--and then also "_Islam_," That we must submit to God. That our
whole strength lies in resigned submission to Him, whatsoever He do to
us. For this world, and for the other! The thing He sends to us, were
it death and worse than death, shall be good, shall be best; we resign
ourselves to God.--"If this be _Islam_," says Goethe, "do we not all
live in _Islam_?" Yes, all of us that have any moral life; we all live
so. It has ever been held the highest wisdom for a man not merely to
submit to Necessity,--Necessity will make him submit,--but to know and
believe well that the stern thing which Necessity had ordered was
the wisest, the best, the thing wanted there. To cease his frantic
pretension of scanning this great God's-World in his small fraction of a
brain; to know that it _had_ verily, though deep beyond his soundings,
a Just Law, that the soul of it was Good;--that his part in it was to
conform to the Law of the Whole, and in devout silence follow that; not
questioning it, obeying it as unquestionable.

I say, this is yet the only true morality known. A man is right and
invincible, virtuous and on the road towards sure conquest, precisely
while he joins himself to the great deep Law of the World, in spite
of all superficial laws, temporary appearances, profit-and-loss
calculations; he is victorious while he co-operates with that great
central Law, not victorious otherwise:--and surely his first chance of
co-operating with it, or getting into the course of it, is to know with
his whole soul that it is; that it is good, and alone good! This is the
soul of Islam; it is properly the soul of Christianity;--for Islam is
definable as a confused form of Christianity; had Christianity not been,
neither had it been. Christianity also commands us, before all, to be
resigned to God. We are to take no counsel with flesh and blood; give
ear to no vain cavils, vain sorrows and wishes: to know that we know
nothing; that the worst and cruelest to our eyes is not what it seems;
that we have to receive whatsoever befalls us as sent from God above,
and say, It is good and wise, God is great! "Though He slay me, yet will
I trust in Him." Islam means in its way Denial of Self, Annihilation
of Self. This is yet the highest Wisdom that Heaven has revealed to our
Earth.

Such light had come, as it could, to illuminate the darkness of this
wild Arab soul. A confused dazzling splendor as of life and Heaven, in
the great darkness which threatened to be death: he called it revelation
and the angel Gabriel;--who of us yet can know what to call it? It
is the "inspiration of the Almighty" that giveth us understanding. To
_know_; to get into the truth of anything, is ever a mystic act,--of
which the best Logics can but babble on the surface. "Is not Belief the
true god-announcing Miracle?" says Novalis.--That Mahomet's whole soul,
set in flame with this grand Truth vouchsafed him, should feel as if
it were important and the only important thing, was very natural. That
Providence had unspeakably honored him by revealing it, saving him from
death and darkness; that he therefore was bound to make known the same
to all creatures: this is what was meant by "Mahomet is the Prophet of
God;" this too is not without its true meaning.--

The good Kadijah, we can fancy, listened to him with wonder, with doubt:
at length she answered: Yes, it was true this that he said. One can
fancy too the boundless gratitude of Mahomet; and how of all the
kindnesses she had done him, this of believing the earnest struggling
word he now spoke was the greatest. "It is certain," says Novalis, "my
Conviction gains infinitely, the moment another soul will believe in
it." It is a boundless favor.--He never forgot this good Kadijah.
Long afterwards, Ayesha his young favorite wife, a woman who indeed
distinguished herself among the Moslem, by all manner of qualities,
through her whole long life; this young brilliant Ayesha was, one day,
questioning him: "Now am not I better than Kadijah? She was a widow;
old, and had lost her looks: you love me better than you did
her?"--"No, by Allah!" answered Mahomet: "No, by Allah! She believed
in me when none else would believe. In the whole world I had but one
friend, and she was that!"--Seid, his Slave, also believed in him;
these with his young Cousin Ali, Abu Thaleb's son, were his first
converts.

He spoke of his Doctrine to this man and that; but the most treated it
with ridicule, with indifference; in three years, I think, he had gained
but thirteen followers. His progress was slow enough. His encouragement
to go on, was altogether the usual encouragement that such a man in such
a case meets. After some three years of small success, he invited forty
of his chief kindred to an entertainment; and there stood up and told
them what his pretension was: that he had this thing to promulgate
abroad to all men; that it was the highest thing, the one thing: which
of them would second him in that? Amid the doubt and silence of all,
young Ali, as yet a lad of sixteen, impatient of the silence, started
up, and exclaimed in passionate fierce language, That he would!
The assembly, among whom was Abu Thaleb, Ali's Father, could not be
unfriendly to Mahomet; yet the sight there, of one unlettered elderly
man, with a lad of sixteen, deciding on such an enterprise against all
mankind, appeared ridiculous to them; the assembly broke up in laughter.
Nevertheless it proved not a laughable thing; it was a very serious
thing! As for this young Ali, one cannot but like him. A noble-minded
creature, as he shows himself, now and always afterwards; full of
affection, of fiery daring. Something chivalrous in him; brave as
a lion; yet with a grace, a truth and affection worthy of Christian
knighthood. He died by assassination in the Mosque at Bagdad; a death
occasioned by his own generous fairness, confidence in the fairness of
others: he said, If the wound proved not unto death, they must pardon
the Assassin; but if it did, then they must slay him straightway, that
so they two in the same hour might appear before God, and see which side
of that quarrel was the just one!

Mahomet naturally gave offence to the Koreish, Keepers of the Caabah,
superintendents of the Idols. One or two men of influence had joined
him: the thing spread slowly, but it was spreading. Naturally he gave
offence to everybody: Who is this that pretends to be wiser than we all;
that rebukes us all, as mere fools and worshippers of wood! Abu Thaleb
the good Uncle spoke with him: Could he not be silent about all that;
believe it all for himself, and not trouble others, anger the chief men,
endanger himself and them all, talking of it? Mahomet answered: If the
Sun stood on his right hand and the Moon on his left, ordering him to
hold his peace, he could not obey! No: there was something in this Truth
he had got which was of Nature herself; equal in rank to Sun, or Moon,
or whatsoever thing Nature had made. It would speak itself there, so
long as the Almighty allowed it, in spite of Sun and Moon, and all
Koreish and all men and things. It must do that, and could do no other.
Mahomet answered so; and, they say, "burst into tears." Burst into
tears: he felt that Abu Thaleb was good to him; that the task he had got
was no soft, but a stern and great one.

He went on speaking to who would listen to him; publishing his Doctrine
among the pilgrims as they came to Mecca; gaining adherents in this
place and that. Continual contradiction, hatred, open or secret danger
attended him. His powerful relations protected Mahomet himself; but by
and by, on his own advice, all his adherents had to quit Mecca, and seek
refuge in Abyssinia over the sea. The Koreish grew ever angrier; laid
plots, and swore oaths among them, to put Mahomet to death with their
own hands. Abu Thaleb was dead, the good Kadijah was dead. Mahomet is
not solicitous of sympathy from us; but his outlook at this time was
one of the dismalest. He had to hide in caverns, escape in disguise; fly
hither and thither; homeless, in continual peril of his life. More than
once it seemed all over with him; more than once it turned on a straw,
some rider's horse taking fright or the like, whether Mahomet and his
Doctrine had not ended there, and not been heard of at all. But it was
not to end so.

In the thirteenth year of his mission, finding his enemies all banded
against him, forty sworn men, one out of every tribe, waiting to take
his life, and no continuance possible at Mecca for him any longer,
Mahomet fled to the place then called Yathreb, where he had gained some
adherents; the place they now call Medina, or "_Medinat al Nabi_, the
City of the Prophet," from that circumstance. It lay some two hundred
miles off, through rocks and deserts; not without great difficulty, in
such mood as we may fancy, he escaped thither, and found welcome. The
whole East dates its era from this Flight, _hegira_ as they name it: the
Year 1 of this Hegira is 622 of our Era, the fifty-third of Mahomet's
life. He was now becoming an old man; his friends sinking round him one
by one; his path desolate, encompassed with danger: unless he could find
hope in his own heart, the outward face of things was but hopeless
for him. It is so with all men in the like case. Hitherto Mahomet had
professed to publish his Religion by the way of preaching and persuasion
alone. But now, driven foully out of his native country, since unjust
men had not only given no ear to his earnest Heaven's-message, the deep
cry of his heart, but would not even let him live if he kept speaking
it,--the wild Son of the Desert resolved to defend himself, like a man
and Arab. If the Koreish will have it so, they shall have it. Tidings,
felt to be of infinite moment to them and all men, they would not listen
to these; would trample them down by sheer violence, steel and murder:
well, let steel try it then! Ten years more this Mahomet had; all of
fighting of breathless impetuous toil and struggle; with what result we
know.

Much has been said of Mahomet's propagating his Religion by the sword.
It is no doubt far nobler what we have to boast of the Christian
Religion, that it propagated itself peaceably in the way of preaching
and conviction. Yet withal, if we take this for an argument of the truth
or falsehood of a religion, there is a radical mistake in it. The sword
indeed: but where will you get your sword! Every new opinion, at its
starting, is precisely in a _minority of one_. In one man's head alone,
there it dwells as yet. One man alone of the whole world believes it;
there is one man against all men. That _he_ take a sword, and try to
propagate with that, will do little for him. You must first get your
sword! On the whole, a thing will propagate itself as it can. We do not
find, of the Christian Religion either, that it always disdained the
sword, when once it had got one. Charlemagne's conversion of the Saxons
was not by preaching. I care little about the sword: I will allow a
thing to struggle for itself in this world, with any sword or tongue
or implement it has, or can lay hold of. We will let it preach, and
pamphleteer, and fight, and to the uttermost bestir itself, and do, beak
and claws, whatsoever is in it; very sure that it will, in the long-run,
conquer nothing which does not deserve to be conquered. What is better
than itself, it cannot put away, but only what is worse. In this great
Duel, Nature herself is umpire, and can do no wrong: the thing which is
deepest-rooted in Nature, what we call _truest_, that thing and not the
other will be found growing at last.

Here however, in reference to much that there is in Mahomet and his
success, we are to remember what an umpire Nature is; what a greatness,
composure of depth and tolerance there is in her. You take wheat to
cast into the Earth's bosom; your wheat may be mixed with chaff, chopped
straw, barn-sweepings, dust and all imaginable rubbish; no matter:
you cast it into the kind just Earth; she grows the wheat,--the whole
rubbish she silently absorbs, shrouds _it_ in, says nothing of the
rubbish. The yellow wheat is growing there; the good Earth is silent
about all the rest,--has silently turned all the rest to some benefit
too, and makes no complaint about it! So everywhere in Nature! She is
true and not a lie; and yet so great, and just, and motherly in her
truth. She requires of a thing only that it _be_ genuine of heart; she
will protect it if so; will not, if not so. There is a soul of truth in
all the things she ever gave harbor to. Alas, is not this the history of
all highest Truth that comes or ever came into the world? The _body_ of
them all is imperfection, an element of light in darkness: to us they
have to come embodied in mere Logic, in some merely _scientific_ Theorem
of the Universe; which _cannot_ be complete; which cannot but be found,
one day, incomplete, erroneous, and so die and disappear. The body of
all Truth dies; and yet in all, I say, there is a soul which never dies;
which in new and ever-nobler embodiment lives immortal as man himself!
It is the way with Nature. The genuine essence of Truth never dies. That
it be genuine, a voice from the great Deep of Nature, there is the point
at Nature's judgment-seat. What _we_ call pure or impure, is not with
her the final question. Not how much chaff is in you; but whether you
have any wheat. Pure? I might say to many a man: Yes, you are pure; pure
enough; but you are chaff,--insincere hypothesis, hearsay, formality;
you never were in contact with the great heart of the Universe at all;
you are properly neither pure nor impure; you _are_ nothing, Nature has
no business with you.

Mahomet's Creed we called a kind of Christianity; and really, if we
look at the wild rapt earnestness with which it was believed and laid
to heart, I should say a better kind than that of those miserable Syrian
Sects, with their vain janglings about _Homoiousion_ and _Homoousion_,
the head full of worthless noise, the heart empty and dead! The truth
of it is embedded in portentous error and falsehood; but the truth of
it makes it be believed, not the falsehood: it succeeded by its truth.
A bastard kind of Christianity, but a living kind; with a heart-life in
it; not dead, chopping barren logic merely! Out of all that rubbish
of Arab idolatries, argumentative theologies, traditions, subtleties,
rumors and hypotheses of Greeks and Jews, with their idle wire-drawings,
this wild man of the Desert, with his wild sincere heart, earnest as
death and life, with his great flashing natural eyesight, had seen into
the kernel of the matter. Idolatry is nothing: these Wooden Idols
of yours, "ye rub them with oil and wax, and the flies stick on
them,"--these are wood, I tell you! They can do nothing for you; they
are an impotent blasphemous presence; a horror and abomination, if ye
knew them. God alone is; God alone has power; He made us, He can kill
us and keep us alive: "_Allah akbar_, God is great." Understand that His
will is the best for you; that howsoever sore to flesh and blood, you
will find it the wisest, best: you are bound to take it so; in this
world and in the next, you have no other thing that you can do!

And now if the wild idolatrous men did believe this, and with their
fiery hearts lay hold of it to do it, in what form soever it came to
them, I say it was well worthy of being believed. In one form or the
other, I say it is still the one thing worthy of being believed by all
men. Man does hereby become the high-priest of this Temple of a
World. He is in harmony with the Decrees of the Author of this World;
cooperating with them, not vainly withstanding them: I know, to this
day, no better definition of Duty than that same. All that is _right_
includes itself in this of co-operating with the real Tendency of the
World: you succeed by this (the World's Tendency will succeed), you are
good, and in the right course there. _Homoiousion_, _Homoousion_, vain
logical jangle, then or before or at any time, may jangle itself out,
and go whither and how it likes: this is the _thing_ it all struggles to
mean, if it would mean anything. If it do not succeed in meaning this,
it means nothing. Not that Abstractions, logical Propositions, be
correctly worded or incorrectly; but that living concrete Sons of Adam
do lay this to heart: that is the important point. Islam devoured all
these vain jangling Sects; and I think had right to do so. It was
a Reality, direct from the great Heart of Nature once more. Arab
idolatries, Syrian formulas, whatsoever was not equally real, had to go
up in flame,--mere dead _fuel_, in various senses, for this which was
_fire_.


It was during these wild warfarings and strugglings, especially after
the Flight to Mecca, that Mahomet dictated at intervals his Sacred Book,
which they name _Koran_, or _Reading_, "Thing to be read." This is the
Work he and his disciples made so much of, asking all the world, Is not
that a miracle? The Mahometans regard their Koran with a reverence which
few Christians pay even to their Bible. It is admitted every where as
the standard of all law and all practice; the thing to be gone upon in
speculation and life; the message sent direct out of Heaven, which this
Earth has to conform to, and walk by; the thing to be read. Their Judges
decide by it; all Moslem are bound to study it, seek in it for the light
of their life. They have mosques where it is all read daily; thirty
relays of priests take it up in succession, get through the whole each
day. There, for twelve hundred years, has the voice of this Book, at all
moments, kept sounding through the ears and the hearts of so many men.
We hear of Mahometan Doctors that had read it seventy thousand times!

Very curious: if one sought for "discrepancies of national taste," here
surely were the most eminent instance of that! We also can read the
Koran; our Translation of it, by Sale, is known to be a very fair one.
I must say, it is as toilsome reading as I ever undertook. A wearisome
confused jumble, crude, incondite; endless iterations, long-windedness,
entanglement; most crude, incondite;--insupportable stupidity, in short!
Nothing but a sense of duty could carry any European through the Koran.
We read in it, as we might in the State-Paper Office, unreadable masses
of lumber, that perhaps we may get some glimpses of a remarkable man. It
is true we have it under disadvantages: the Arabs see more method in it
than we. Mahomet's followers found the Koran lying all in fractions, as
it had been written down at first promulgation; much of it, they say,
on shoulder-blades of mutton, flung pell-mell into a chest: and
they published it, without any discoverable order as to time or
otherwise;--merely trying, as would seem, and this not very strictly, to
put the longest chapters first. The real beginning of it, in that way,
lies almost at the end: for the earliest portions were the shortest.
Read in its historical sequence it perhaps would not be so bad. Much
of it, too, they say, is rhythmic; a kind of wild chanting song, in the
original. This may be a great point; much perhaps has been lost in the
Translation here. Yet with every allowance, one feels it difficult to
see how any mortal ever could consider this Koran as a Book written in
Heaven, too good for the Earth; as a well-written book, or indeed as
a _book_ at all; and not a bewildered rhapsody; _written_, so far as
writing goes, as badly as almost any book ever was! So much for national
discrepancies, and the standard of taste.

Yet I should say, it was not unintelligible how the Arabs might so love
it. When once you get this confused coil of a Koran fairly off your
hands, and have it behind you at a distance, the essential type of it
begins to disclose itself; and in this there is a merit quite other than
the literary one. If a book come from the heart, it will contrive to
reach other hearts; all art and author-craft are of small amount to
that. One would say the primary character of the Koran is this of its
_genuineness_, of its being a _bona-fide_ book. Prideaux, I know, and
others have represented it as a mere bundle of juggleries; chapter
after chapter got up to excuse and varnish the author's successive sins,
forward his ambitions and quackeries: but really it is time to dismiss
all that. I do not assert Mahomet's continual sincerity: who is
continually sincere? But I confess I can make nothing of the critic,
in these times, who would accuse him of deceit _prepense_; of conscious
deceit generally, or perhaps at all;--still more, of living in a mere
element of conscious deceit, and writing this Koran as a forger and
juggler would have done! Every candid eye, I think, will read the Koran
far otherwise than so. It is the confused ferment of a great rude human
soul; rude, untutored, that cannot even read; but fervent, earnest,
struggling vehemently to utter itself in words. With a kind of
breathless intensity he strives to utter himself; the thoughts crowd on
him pell-mell: for very multitude of things to say, he can get
nothing said. The meaning that is in him shapes itself into no form of
composition, is stated in no sequence, method, or coherence;--they are
not _shaped_ at all, these thoughts of his; flung out unshaped, as they
struggle and tumble there, in their chaotic inarticulate state. We
said "stupid:" yet natural stupidity is by no means the character of
Mahomet's Book; it is natural uncultivation rather. The man has not
studied speaking; in the haste and pressure of continual fighting, has
not time to mature himself into fit speech. The panting breathless haste
and vehemence of a man struggling in the thick of battle for life
and salvation; this is the mood he is in! A headlong haste; for very
magnitude of meaning, he cannot get himself articulated into words. The
successive utterances of a soul in that mood, colored by the various
vicissitudes of three-and-twenty years; now well uttered, now worse:
this is the Koran.

For we are to consider Mahomet, through these three-and-twenty years, as
the centre of a world wholly in conflict. Battles with the Koreish and
Heathen, quarrels among his own people, backslidings of his own wild
heart; all this kept him in a perpetual whirl, his soul knowing rest
no more. In wakeful nights, as one may fancy, the wild soul of the man,
tossing amid these vortices, would hail any light of a decision for
them as a veritable light from Heaven; _any_ making-up of his mind, so
blessed, indispensable for him there, would seem the inspiration of a
Gabriel. Forger and juggler? No, no! This great fiery heart, seething,
simmering like a great furnace of thoughts, was not a juggler's. His
Life was a Fact to him; this God's Universe an awful Fact and Reality.
He has faults enough. The man was an uncultured semi-barbarous Son of
Nature, much of the Bedouin still clinging to him: we must take him for
that. But for a wretched Simulacrum, a hungry Impostor without eyes
or heart, practicing for a mess of pottage such blasphemous swindlery,
forgery of celestial documents, continual high-treason against his Maker
and Self, we will not and cannot take him.

Sincerity, in all senses, seems to me the merit of the Koran; what had
rendered it precious to the wild Arab men. It is, after all, the first
and last merit in a book; gives rise to merits of all kinds,--nay, at
bottom, it alone can give rise to merit of any kind. Curiously,
through these incondite masses of tradition, vituperation, complaint,
ejaculation in the Koran, a vein of true direct insight, of what we
might almost call poetry, is found straggling. The body of the Book
is made up of mere tradition, and as it were vehement enthusiastic
extempore preaching. He returns forever to the old stories of the
Prophets as they went current in the Arab memory: how Prophet after
Prophet, the Prophet Abraham, the Prophet Hud, the Prophet Moses,
Christian and other real and fabulous Prophets, had come to this Tribe
and to that, warning men of their sin; and been received by them even as
he Mahomet was,--which is a great solace to him. These things he
repeats ten, perhaps twenty times; again and ever again, with wearisome
iteration; has never done repeating them. A brave Samuel Johnson, in his
forlorn garret, might con over the Biographies of Authors in that way!
This is the great staple of the Koran. But curiously, through all this,
comes ever and anon some glance as of the real thinker and seer. He has
actually an eye for the world, this Mahomet: with a certain directness
and rugged vigor, he brings home still, to our heart, the thing his own
heart has been opened to. I make but little of his praises of Allah,
which many praise; they are borrowed I suppose mainly from the Hebrew,
at least they are far surpassed there. But the eye that flashes direct
into the heart of things, and _sees_ the truth of them; this is to me a
highly interesting object. Great Nature's own gift; which she bestows on
all; but which only one in the thousand does not cast sorrowfully away:
it is what I call sincerity of vision; the test of a sincere heart.

Mahomet can work no miracles; he often answers impatiently: I can work
no miracles. I? "I am a Public Preacher;" appointed to preach this
doctrine to all creatures. Yet the world, as we can see, had really from
of old been all one great miracle to him. Look over the world, says he;
is it not wonderful, the work of Allah; wholly "a sign to you," if your
eyes were open! This Earth, God made it for you; "appointed paths in
it;" you can live in it, go to and fro on it.--The clouds in the dry
country of Arabia, to Mahomet they are very wonderful: Great clouds, he
says, born in the deep bosom of the Upper Immensity, where do they
come from! They hang there, the great black monsters; pour down their
rain-deluges "to revive a dead earth," and grass springs, and "tall
leafy palm-trees with their date-clusters hanging round. Is not that a
sign?" Your cattle too,--Allah made them; serviceable dumb creatures;
they change the grass into milk; you have your clothing from them, very
strange creatures; they come ranking home at evening-time, "and," adds
he, "and are a credit to you!" Ships also,--he talks often about ships:
Huge moving mountains, they spread out their cloth wings, go bounding
through the water there, Heaven's wind driving them; anon they lie
motionless, God has withdrawn the wind, they lie dead, and cannot stir!
Miracles? cries he: What miracle would you have? Are not you yourselves
there? God made you, "shaped you out of a little clay." Ye were small
once; a few years ago ye were not at all. Ye have beauty, strength,
thoughts, "ye have compassion on one another." Old age comes on you, and
gray hairs; your strength fades into feebleness; ye sink down, and again
are not. "Ye have compassion on one another:" this struck me much: Allah
might have made you having no compassion on one another,--how had it
been then! This is a great direct thought, a glance at first-hand into
the very fact of things. Rude vestiges of poetic genius, of whatsoever
is best and truest, are visible in this man. A strong untutored
intellect; eyesight, heart: a strong wild man,--might have shaped
himself into Poet, King, Priest, any kind of Hero.

To his eyes it is forever clear that this world wholly is miraculous.
He sees what, as we said once before, all great thinkers, the rude
Scandinavians themselves, in one way or other, have contrived to see:
That this so solid-looking material world is, at bottom, in very deed,
Nothing; is a visual and factual Manifestation of God's power and
presence,--a shadow hung out by Him on the bosom of the void Infinite;
nothing more. The mountains, he says, these great rock-mountains, they
shall dissipate themselves "like clouds;" melt into the Blue as clouds
do, and not be! He figures the Earth, in the Arab fashion, Sale tells
us, as an immense Plain or flat Plate of ground, the mountains are
set on that to _steady_ it. At the Last Day they shall disappear "like
clouds;" the whole Earth shall go spinning, whirl itself off into wreck,
and as dust and vapor vanish in the Inane. Allah withdraws his hand
from it, and it ceases to be. The universal empire of Allah, presence
everywhere of an unspeakable Power, a Splendor, and a Terror not to be
named, as the true force, essence and reality, in all things whatsoever,
was continually clear to this man. What a modern talks of by the name,
Forces of Nature, Laws of Nature; and does not figure as a divine
thing; not even as one thing at all, but as a set of things, undivine
enough,--salable, curious, good for propelling steamships! With our
Sciences and Cyclopaedias, we are apt to forget the _divineness_, in
those laboratories of ours. We ought not to forget it! That once well
forgotten, I know not what else were worth remembering. Most sciences,
I think were then a very dead thing; withered, contentious, empty;--a
thistle in late autumn. The best science, without this, is but as the
dead _timber_; it is not the growing tree and forest,--which gives
ever-new timber, among other things! Man cannot _know_ either, unless
he can _worship_ in some way. His knowledge is a pedantry, and dead
thistle, otherwise.

Much has been said and written about the sensuality of Mahomet's
Religion; more than was just. The indulgences, criminal to us, which
he permitted, were not of his appointment; he found them practiced,
unquestioned from immemorial time in Arabia; what he did was to curtail
them, restrict them, not on one but on many sides. His Religion is not
an easy one: with rigorous fasts, lavations, strict complex formulas,
prayers five times a day, and abstinence from wine, it did not "succeed
by being an easy religion." As if indeed any religion, or cause holding
of religion, could succeed by that! It is a calumny on men to say
that they are roused to heroic action by ease, hope of pleasure,
recompense,--sugar-plums of any kind, in this world or the next! In the
meanest mortal there lies something nobler. The poor swearing soldier,
hired to be shot, has his "honor of a soldier," different from
drill-regulations and the shilling a day. It is not to taste sweet
things, but to do noble and true things, and vindicate himself under
God's Heaven as a god-made Man, that the poorest son of Adam dimly
longs. Show him the way of doing that, the dullest day-drudge kindles
into a hero. They wrong man greatly who say he is to be seduced by ease.
Difficulty, abnegation, martyrdom, death are the _allurements_ that act
on the heart of man. Kindle the inner genial life of him, you have
a flame that burns up all lower considerations. Not happiness, but
something higher: one sees this even in the frivolous classes, with
their "point of honor" and the like. Not by flattering our appetites;
no, by awakening the Heroic that slumbers in every heart, can any
Religion gain followers.

Mahomet himself, after all that can be said about him, was not a sensual
man. We shall err widely if we consider this man as a common voluptuary,
intent mainly on base enjoyments,--nay on enjoyments of any kind. His
household was of the frugalest; his common diet barley-bread and water:
sometimes for months there was not a fire once lighted on his hearth.
They record with just pride that he would mend his own shoes, patch
his own cloak. A poor, hard-toiling, ill-provided man; careless of what
vulgar men toil for. Not a bad man, I should say; something better in
him than _hunger_ of any sort,--or these wild Arab men, fighting and
jostling three-and-twenty years at his hand, in close contact with him
always, would not have reverenced him so! They were wild men, bursting
ever and anon into quarrel, into all kinds of fierce sincerity; without
right worth and manhood, no man could have commanded them. They called
him Prophet, you say? Why, he stood there face to face with them; bare,
not enshrined in any mystery; visibly clouting his own cloak, cobbling
his own shoes; fighting, counselling, ordering in the midst of them:
they must have seen what kind of a man he _was_, let him be _called_
what you like! No emperor with his tiaras was obeyed as this man in a
cloak of his own clouting. During three-and-twenty years of rough actual
trial. I find something of a veritable Hero necessary for that, of
itself.

His last words are a prayer; broken ejaculations of a heart struggling
up, in trembling hope, towards its Maker. We cannot say that his
religion made him _worse_; it made him better; good, not bad. Generous
things are recorded of him: when he lost his Daughter, the thing he
answers is, in his own dialect, every way sincere, and yet equivalent to
that of Christians, "The Lord giveth, and the Lord taketh away; blessed
be the name of the Lord." He answered in like manner of Seid, his
emancipated well-beloved Slave, the second of the believers. Seid had
fallen in the War of Tabuc, the first of Mahomet's fightings with the
Greeks. Mahomet said, It was well; Seid had done his Master's work,
Seid had now gone to his Master: it was all well with Seid. Yet Seid's
daughter found him weeping over the body;--the old gray-haired man
melting in tears! "What do I see?" said she.--"You see a friend weeping
over his friend."--He went out for the last time into the mosque, two
days before his death; asked, If he had injured any man? Let his own
back bear the stripes. If he owed any man? A voice answered, "Yes, me
three drachms," borrowed on such an occasion. Mahomet ordered them to
be paid: "Better be in shame now," said he, "than at the Day of
Judgment."--You remember Kadijah, and the "No, by Allah!" Traits of that
kind show us the genuine man, the brother of us all, brought visible
through twelve centuries,--the veritable Son of our common Mother.

Withal I like Mahomet for his total freedom from cant. He is a rough
self-helping son of the wilderness; does not pretend to be what he is
not. There is no ostentatious pride in him; but neither does he go much
upon humility: he is there as he can be, in cloak and shoes of his own
clouting; speaks plainly to all manner of Persian Kings, Greek Emperors,
what it is they are bound to do; knows well enough, about himself, "the
respect due unto thee." In a life-and-death war with Bedouins, cruel
things could not fail; but neither are acts of mercy, of noble natural
pity and generosity wanting. Mahomet makes no apology for the one, no
boast of the other. They were each the free dictate of his heart; each
called for, there and then. Not a mealy-mouthed man! A candid ferocity,
if the case call for it, is in him; he does not mince matters! The War
of Tabuc is a thing he often speaks of: his men refused, many of them,
to march on that occasion; pleaded the heat of the weather, the harvest,
and so forth; he can never forget that. Your harvest? It lasts for a
day. What will become of your harvest through all Eternity? Hot weather?
Yes, it was hot; "but Hell will be hotter!" Sometimes a rough sarcasm
turns up: He says to the unbelievers, Ye shall have the just measure of
your deeds at that Great Day. They will be weighed out to you; ye shall
not have short weight!--Everywhere he fixes the matter in his eye;
he _sees_ it: his heart, now and then, is as if struck dumb by the
greatness of it. "Assuredly," he says: that word, in the Koran, is
written down sometimes as a sentence by itself: "Assuredly."

No _Dilettantism_ in this Mahomet; it is a business of Reprobation and
Salvation with him, of Time and Eternity: he is in deadly earnest about
it! Dilettantism, hypothesis, speculation, a kind of amateur-search for
Truth, toying and coquetting with Truth: this is the sorest sin. The
root of all other imaginable sins. It consists in the heart and soul
of the man never having been _open_ to Truth;--"living in a vain show."
Such a man not only utters and produces falsehoods, but is himself a
falsehood. The rational moral principle, spark of the Divinity, is sunk
deep in him, in quiet paralysis of life-death. The very falsehoods of
Mahomet are truer than the truths of such a man. He is the insincere
man: smooth-polished, respectable in some times and places; inoffensive,
says nothing harsh to anybody; most _cleanly_,--just as carbonic acid
is, which is death and poison.

We will not praise Mahomet's moral precepts as always of the superfinest
sort; yet it can be said that there is always a tendency to good in
them; that they are the true dictates of a heart aiming towards what is
just and true. The sublime forgiveness of Christianity, turning of the
other cheek when the one has been smitten, is not here: you _are_ to
revenge yourself, but it is to be in measure, not overmuch, or beyond
justice. On the other hand, Islam, like any great Faith, and insight
into the essence of man, is a perfect equalizer of men: the soul of one
believer outweighs all earthly kingships; all men, according to Islam
too, are equal. Mahomet insists not on the propriety of giving alms, but
on the necessity of it: he marks down by law how much you are to give,
and it is at your peril if you neglect. The tenth part of a man's annual
income, whatever that may be, is the _property_ of the poor, of those
that are afflicted and need help. Good all this: the natural voice of
humanity, of pity and equity dwelling in the heart of this wild Son of
Nature speaks _so_.

Mahomet's Paradise is sensual, his Hell sensual: true; in the one and
the other there is enough that shocks all spiritual feeling in us. But
we are to recollect that the Arabs already had it so; that Mahomet, in
whatever he changed of it, softened and diminished all this. The worst
sensualities, too, are the work of doctors, followers of his, not his
work. In the Koran there is really very little said about the joys
of Paradise; they are intimated rather than insisted on. Nor is it
forgotten that the highest joys even there shall be spiritual; the pure
Presence of the Highest, this shall infinitely transcend all other joys.
He says, "Your salutation shall be, Peace." _Salam_, Have Peace!--the
thing that all rational souls long for, and seek, vainly here below,
as the one blessing. "Ye shall sit on seats, facing one another: all
grudges shall be taken away out of your hearts." All grudges! Ye shall
love one another freely; for each of you, in the eyes of his brothers,
there will be Heaven enough!

In reference to this of the sensual Paradise and Mahomet's sensuality,
the sorest chapter of all for us, there were many things to be said;
which it is not convenient to enter upon here. Two remarks only I shall
make, and therewith leave it to your candor. The first is furnished me
by Goethe; it is a casual hint of his which seems well worth taking note
of. In one of his Delineations, in _Meister's Travels_ it is, the hero
comes upon a Society of men with very strange ways, one of which was
this: "We require," says the Master, "that each of our people shall
restrict himself in one direction," shall go right against his desire in
one matter, and _make_ himself do the thing he does not wish, "should we
allow him the greater latitude on all other sides." There seems to me a
great justness in this. Enjoying things which are pleasant; that is not
the evil: it is the reducing of our moral self to slavery by them that
is. Let a man assert withal that he is king over his habitudes; that
he could and would shake them off, on cause shown: this is an excellent
law. The Month Ramadhan for the Moslem, much in Mahomet's Religion,
much in his own Life, bears in that direction; if not by forethought,
or clear purpose of moral improvement on his part, then by a certain
healthy manful instinct, which is as good.

But there is another thing to be said about the Mahometan Heaven and
Hell. This namely, that, however gross and material they may be, they
are an emblem of an everlasting truth, not always so well remembered
elsewhere. That gross sensual Paradise of his; that horrible flaming
Hell; the great enormous Day of Judgment he perpetually insists on: what
is all this but a rude shadow, in the rude Bedouin imagination, of that
grand spiritual Fact, and Beginning of Facts, which it is ill for us too
if we do not all know and feel: the Infinite Nature of Duty? That man's
actions here are of _infinite_ moment to him, and never die or end at
all; that man, with his little life, reaches upwards high as Heaven,
downwards low as Hell, and in his threescore years of Time holds an
Eternity fearfully and wonderfully hidden: all this had burnt itself, as
in flame-characters, into the wild Arab soul. As in flame and lightning,
it stands written there; awful, unspeakable, ever present to him. With
bursting earnestness, with a fierce savage sincerity, half-articulating,
not able to articulate, he strives to speak it, bodies it forth in that
Heaven and that Hell. Bodied forth in what way you will, it is the first
of all truths. It is venerable under all embodiments. What is the chief
end of man here below? Mahomet has answered this question, in a way that
might put some of us to shame! He does not, like a Bentham, a Paley,
take Right and Wrong, and calculate the profit and loss, ultimate
pleasure of the one and of the other; and summing all up by addition and
subtraction into a net result, ask you, Whether on the whole the Right
does not preponderate considerably? No; it is not _better_ to do the one
than the other; the one is to the other as life is to death,--as Heaven
is to Hell. The one must in nowise be done, the other in nowise left
undone. You shall not measure them; they are incommensurable: the one
is death eternal to a man, the other is life eternal. Benthamee Utility,
virtue by Profit and Loss; reducing this God's-world to a dead
brute Steam-engine, the infinite celestial Soul of Man to a kind of
Hay-balance for weighing hay and thistles on, pleasures and pains
on:--If you ask me which gives, Mahomet or they, the beggarlier and
falser view of Man and his Destinies in this Universe, I will answer, it
is not Mahomet--!

On the whole, we will repeat that this Religion of Mahomet's is a kind
of Christianity; has a genuine element of what is spiritually highest
looking through it, not to be hidden by all its imperfections. The
Scandinavian God _Wish_, the god of all rude men,--this has been
enlarged into a Heaven by Mahomet; but a Heaven symbolical of sacred
Duty, and to be earned by faith and well-doing, by valiant action, and
a divine patience which is still more valiant. It is Scandinavian
Paganism, and a truly celestial element superadded to that. Call it not
false; look not at the falsehood of it, look at the truth of it. For
these twelve centuries, it has been the religion and life-guidance of
the fifth part of the whole kindred of Mankind. Above all things, it has
been a religion heartily _believed_. These Arabs believe their religion,
and try to live by it! No Christians, since the early ages, or only
perhaps the English Puritans in modern times, have ever stood by their
Faith as the Moslem do by theirs,--believing it wholly, fronting Time
with it, and Eternity with it. This night the watchman on the streets
of Cairo when he cries, "Who goes?" will hear from the passenger, along
with his answer, "There is no God but God." _Allah akbar_, _Islam_,
sounds through the souls, and whole daily existence, of these dusky
millions. Zealous missionaries preach it abroad among Malays, black
Papuans, brutal Idolaters;--displacing what is worse, nothing that is
better or good.

To the Arab Nation it was as a birth from darkness into light; Arabia
first became alive by means of it. A poor shepherd people, roaming
unnoticed in its deserts since the creation of the world: a Hero-Prophet
was sent down to them with a word they could believe: see, the unnoticed
becomes world-notable, the small has grown world-great; within one
century afterwards, Arabia is at Grenada on this hand, at Delhi on
that;--glancing in valor and splendor and the light of genius, Arabia
shines through long ages over a great section of the world. Belief
is great, life-giving. The history of a Nation becomes fruitful,
soul-elevating, great, so soon as it believes. These Arabs, the man
Mahomet, and that one century,--is it not as if a spark had fallen, one
spark, on a world of what seemed black unnoticeable sand; but lo, the
sand proves explosive powder, blazes heaven-high from Delhi to Grenada!
I said, the Great Man was always as lightning out of Heaven; the rest of
men waited for him like fuel, and then they too would flame.





LECTURE III. THE HERO AS POET. DANTE: SHAKSPEARE.

[May 12, 1840.]

The Hero as Divinity, the Hero as Prophet, are productions of old ages;
not to be repeated in the new. They presuppose a certain rudeness of
conception, which the progress of mere scientific knowledge puts an end
to. There needs to be, as it were, a world vacant, or almost vacant
of scientific forms, if men in their loving wonder are to fancy their
fellow-man either a god or one speaking with the voice of a god.
Divinity and Prophet are past. We are now to see our Hero in the less
ambitious, but also less questionable, character of Poet; a character
which does not pass. The Poet is a heroic figure belonging to all ages;
whom all ages possess, when once he is produced, whom the newest age as
the oldest may produce;--and will produce, always when Nature pleases.
Let Nature send a Hero-soul; in no age is it other than possible that he
may be shaped into a Poet.

Hero, Prophet, Poet,--many different names, in different times, and
places, do we give to Great Men; according to varieties we note in them,
according to the sphere in which they have displayed themselves! We
might give many more names, on this same principle. I will remark again,
however, as a fact not unimportant to be understood, that the different
_sphere_ constitutes the grand origin of such distinction; that the Hero
can be Poet, Prophet, King, Priest or what you will, according to the
kind of world he finds himself born into. I confess, I have no notion
of a truly great man that could not be _all_ sorts of men. The Poet who
could merely sit on a chair, and compose stanzas, would never make
a stanza worth much. He could not sing the Heroic warrior, unless he
himself were at least a Heroic warrior too. I fancy there is in him the
Politician, the Thinker, Legislator, Philosopher;--in one or the other
degree, he could have been, he is all these. So too I cannot understand
how a Mirabeau, with that great glowing heart, with the fire that was
in it, with the bursting tears that were in it, could not have written
verses, tragedies, poems, and touched all hearts in that way, had his
course of life and education led him thitherward. The grand fundamental
character is that of Great Man; that the man be great. Napoleon has
words in him which are like Austerlitz Battles. Louis Fourteenth's
Marshals are a kind of poetical men withal; the things Turenne says
are full of sagacity and geniality, like sayings of Samuel Johnson. The
great heart, the clear deep-seeing eye: there it lies; no man whatever,
in what province soever, can prosper at all without these. Petrarch and
Boccaccio did diplomatic messages, it seems, quite well: one can easily
believe it; they had done things a little harder than these! Burns,
a gifted song-writer, might have made a still better Mirabeau.
Shakspeare,--one knows not what _he_ could not have made, in the supreme
degree.

True, there are aptitudes of Nature too. Nature does not make all great
men, more than all other men, in the self-same mould. Varieties of
aptitude doubtless; but infinitely more of circumstance; and far
oftenest it is the _latter_ only that are looked to. But it is as with
common men in the learning of trades. You take any man, as yet a vague
capability of a man, who could be any kind of craftsman; and make him
into a smith, a carpenter, a mason: he is then and thenceforth that
and nothing else. And if, as Addison complains, you sometimes see a
street-porter, staggering under his load on spindle-shanks, and near
at hand a tailor with the frame of a Samson handling a bit of cloth
and small Whitechapel needle,--it cannot be considered that aptitude
of Nature alone has been consulted here either!--The Great Man also,
to what shall he be bound apprentice? Given your Hero, is he to become
Conqueror, King, Philosopher, Poet? It is an inexplicably complex
controversial-calculation between the world and him! He will read the
world and its laws; the world with its laws will be there to be read.
What the world, on _this_ matter, shall permit and bid is, as we said,
the most important fact about the world.--


Poet and Prophet differ greatly in our loose modern notions of them. In
some old languages, again, the titles are synonymous; _Vates_ means
both Prophet and Poet: and indeed at all times, Prophet and Poet, well
understood, have much kindred of meaning. Fundamentally indeed they are
still the same; in this most important respect especially, That they
have penetrated both of them into the sacred mystery of the Universe;
what Goethe calls "the open secret." "Which is the great secret?" asks
one.--"The _open_ secret,"--open to all, seen by almost none! That
divine mystery, which lies everywhere in all Beings, "the Divine Idea
of the World, that which lies at the bottom of Appearance," as Fichte
styles it; of which all Appearance, from the starry sky to the grass of
the field, but especially the Appearance of Man and his work, is but the
_vesture_, the embodiment that renders it visible. This divine mystery
_is_ in all times and in all places; veritably is. In most times and
places it is greatly overlooked; and the Universe, definable always in
one or the other dialect, as the realized Thought of God, is considered
a trivial, inert, commonplace matter,--as if, says the Satirist, it were
a dead thing, which some upholsterer had put together! It could do no
good, at present, to _speak_ much about this; but it is a pity for every
one of us if we do not know it, live ever in the knowledge of it. Really
a most mournful pity;--a failure to live at all, if we live otherwise!

But now, I say, whoever may forget this divine mystery, the _Vates_,
whether Prophet or Poet, has penetrated into it; is a man sent hither to
make it more impressively known to us. That always is his message; he
is to reveal that to us,--that sacred mystery which he more than others
lives ever present with. While others forget it, he knows it;--I might
say, he has been driven to know it; without consent asked of him, he
finds himself living in it, bound to live in it. Once more, here is no
Hearsay, but a direct Insight and Belief; this man too could not help
being a sincere man! Whosoever may live in the shows of things, it is
for him a necessity of nature to live in the very fact of things. A
man once more, in earnest with the Universe, though all others were
but toying with it. He is a _Vates_, first of all, in virtue of being
sincere. So far Poet and Prophet, participators in the "open secret,"
are one.

With respect to their distinction again: The _Vates_ Prophet, we might
say, has seized that sacred mystery rather on the moral side, as Good
and Evil, Duty and Prohibition; the _Vates_ Poet on what the Germans
call the aesthetic side, as Beautiful, and the like. The one we may call
a revealer of what we are to do, the other of what we are to love.
But indeed these two provinces run into one another, and cannot be
disjoined. The Prophet too has his eye on what we are to love: how else
shall he know what it is we are to do? The highest Voice ever heard on
this earth said withal, "Consider the lilies of the field; they toil
not, neither do they spin: yet Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed
like one of these." A glance, that, into the deepest deep of Beauty.
"The lilies of the field,"--dressed finer than earthly princes,
springing up there in the humble furrow-field; a beautiful _eye_ looking
out on you, from the great inner Sea of Beauty! How could the rude
Earth make these, if her Essence, rugged as she looks and is, were not
inwardly Beauty? In this point of view, too, a saying of Goethe's, which
has staggered several, may have meaning: "The Beautiful," he intimates,
"is higher than the Good; the Beautiful includes in it the Good." The
_true_ Beautiful; which however, I have said somewhere, "differs from
the _false_ as Heaven does from Vauxhall!" So much for the distinction
and identity of Poet and Prophet.--

In ancient and also in modern periods we find a few Poets who are
accounted perfect; whom it were a kind of treason to find fault with.
This is noteworthy; this is right: yet in strictness it is only an
illusion. At bottom, clearly enough, there is no perfect Poet! A vein
of Poetry exists in the hearts of all men; no man is made altogether of
Poetry. We are all poets when we _read_ a poem well. The "imagination
that shudders at the Hell of Dante," is not that the same faculty,
weaker in degree, as Dante's own? No one but Shakspeare can embody,
out of _Saxo Grammaticus_, the story of _Hamlet_ as Shakspeare did: but
every one models some kind of story out of it; every one embodies it
better or worse. We need not spend time in defining. Where there is no
specific difference, as between round and square, all definition must
be more or less arbitrary. A man that has _so_ much more of the poetic
element developed in him as to have become noticeable, will be called
Poet by his neighbors. World-Poets too, those whom we are to take for
perfect Poets, are settled by critics in the same way. One who rises
_so_ far above the general level of Poets will, to such and such
critics, seem a Universal Poet; as he ought to do. And yet it is, and
must be, an arbitrary distinction. All Poets, all men, have some touches
of the Universal; no man is wholly made of that. Most Poets are very
soon forgotten: but not the noblest Shakspeare or Homer of them can be
remembered _forever_;--a day comes when he too is not!

Nevertheless, you will say, there must be a difference between true
Poetry and true Speech not poetical: what is the difference? On this
point many things have been written, especially by late German Critics,
some of which are not very intelligible at first. They say, for
example, that the Poet has an _infinitude_ in him; communicates an
_Unendlichkeit_, a certain character of "infinitude," to whatsoever he
delineates. This, though not very precise, yet on so vague a matter is
worth remembering: if well meditated, some meaning will gradually be
found in it. For my own part, I find considerable meaning in the old
vulgar distinction of Poetry being _metrical_, having music in it, being
a Song. Truly, if pressed to give a definition, one might say this as
soon as anything else: If your delineation be authentically _musical_,
musical not in word only, but in heart and substance, in all the
thoughts and utterances of it, in the whole conception of it, then
it will be poetical; if not, not.--Musical: how much lies in that! A
_musical_ thought is one spoken by a mind that has penetrated into the
inmost heart of the thing; detected the inmost mystery of it, namely the
_melody_ that lies hidden in it; the inward harmony of coherence which
is its soul, whereby it exists, and has a right to be, here in this
world. All inmost things, we may say, are melodious; naturally utter
themselves in Song. The meaning of Song goes deep. Who is there that,
in logical words, can express the effect music has on us? A kind of
inarticulate unfathomable speech, which leads us to the edge of the
Infinite, and lets us for moments gaze into that!

Nay all speech, even the commonest speech, has something of song in
it: not a parish in the world but has its parish-accent;--the rhythm or
_tune_ to which the people there _sing_ what they have to say! Accent is
a kind of chanting; all men have accent of their own,--though they only
_notice_ that of others. Observe too how all passionate language does
of itself become musical,--with a finer music than the mere accent; the
speech of a man even in zealous anger becomes a chant, a song. All deep
things are Song. It seems somehow the very central essence of us, Song;
as if all the rest were but wrappages and hulls! The primal element of
us; of us, and of all things. The Greeks fabled of Sphere-Harmonies: it
was the feeling they had of the inner structure of Nature; that the soul
of all her voices and utterances was perfect music. Poetry, therefore,
we will call _musical Thought_. The Poet is he who _thinks_ in that
manner. At bottom, it turns still on power of intellect; it is a man's
sincerity and depth of vision that makes him a Poet. See deep enough,
and you see musically; the heart of Nature _being_ everywhere music, if
you can only reach it.

The _Vates_ Poet, with his melodious Apocalypse of Nature, seems to
hold a poor rank among us, in comparison with the _Vates_ Prophet; his
function, and our esteem of him for his function, alike slight. The Hero
taken as Divinity; the Hero taken as Prophet; then next the Hero taken
only as Poet: does it not look as if our estimate of the Great Man,
epoch after epoch, were continually diminishing? We take him first for
a god, then for one god-inspired; and now in the next stage of it, his
most miraculous word gains from us only the recognition that he is a
Poet, beautiful verse-maker, man of genius, or such like!--It looks so;
but I persuade myself that intrinsically it is not so. If we consider
well, it will perhaps appear that in man still there is the _same_
altogether peculiar admiration for the Heroic Gift, by what name soever
called, that there at any time was.

I should say, if we do not now reckon a Great Man literally divine,
it is that our notions of God, of the supreme unattainable Fountain of
Splendor, Wisdom and Heroism, are ever rising _higher_; not altogether
that our reverence for these qualities, as manifested in our like, is
getting lower. This is worth taking thought of. Sceptical Dilettantism,
the curse of these ages, a curse which will not last forever, does
indeed in this the highest province of human things, as in all
provinces, make sad work; and our reverence for great men, all
crippled, blinded, paralytic as it is, comes out in poor plight, hardly
recognizable. Men worship the shows of great men; the most disbelieve
that there is any reality of great men to worship. The dreariest,
fatalest faith; believing which, one would literally despair of
human things. Nevertheless look, for example, at Napoleon! A Corsican
lieutenant of artillery; that is the show of _him_: yet is he not
obeyed, worshipped after his sort, as all the Tiaraed and Diademed of
the world put together could not be? High Duchesses, and ostlers of
inns, gather round the Scottish rustic, Burns;--a strange feeling
dwelling in each that they never heard a man like this; that, on the
whole, this is the man! In the secret heart of these people it still
dimly reveals itself, though there is no accredited way of uttering
it at present, that this rustic, with his black brows and flashing
sun-eyes, and strange words moving laughter and tears, is of a dignity
far beyond all others, incommensurable with all others. Do not we feel
it so? But now, were Dilettantism, Scepticism, Triviality, and all that
sorrowful brood, cast out of us,--as, by God's blessing, they shall one
day be; were faith in the shows of things entirely swept out, replaced
by clear faith in the _things_, so that a man acted on the impulse of
that only, and counted the other non-extant; what a new livelier feeling
towards this Burns were it!

Nay here in these ages, such as they are, have we not two mere Poets, if
not deified, yet we may say beatified? Shakspeare and Dante are Saints
of Poetry; really, if we will think of it, _canonized_, so that it is
impiety to meddle with them. The unguided instinct of the world, working
across all these perverse impediments, has arrived at such result. Dante
and Shakspeare are a peculiar Two. They dwell apart, in a kind of royal
solitude; none equal, none second to them: in the general feeling of the
world, a certain transcendentalism, a glory as of complete perfection,
invests these two. They _are_ canonized, though no Pope or Cardinals
took hand in doing it! Such, in spite of every perverting influence,
in the most unheroic times, is still our indestructible reverence for
heroism.--We will look a little at these Two, the Poet Dante and the
Poet Shakspeare: what little it is permitted us to say here of the Hero
as Poet will most fitly arrange itself in that fashion.


Many volumes have been written by way of commentary on Dante and his
Book; yet, on the whole, with no great result. His Biography is, as
it were, irrecoverably lost for us. An unimportant, wandering,
sorrow-stricken man, not much note was taken of him while he lived; and
the most of that has vanished, in the long space that now intervenes.
It is five centuries since he ceased writing and living here. After
all commentaries, the Book itself is mainly what we know of him. The
Book;--and one might add that Portrait commonly attributed to Giotto,
which, looking on it, you cannot help inclining to think genuine,
whoever did it. To me it is a most touching face; perhaps of all faces
that I know, the most so. Lonely there, painted as on vacancy, with the
simple laurel wound round it; the deathless sorrow and pain, the known
victory which is also deathless;--significant of the whole history of
Dante! I think it is the mournfulest face that ever was painted from
reality; an altogether tragic, heart-affecting face. There is in it,
as foundation of it, the softness, tenderness, gentle affection as of
a child; but all this is as if congealed into sharp contradiction, into
abnegation, isolation, proud hopeless pain. A soft ethereal soul looking
out so stern, implacable, grim-trenchant, as from imprisonment of
thick-ribbed ice! Withal it is a silent pain too, a silent scornful
one: the lip is curled in a kind of godlike disdain of the thing that is
eating out his heart,--as if it were withal a mean insignificant thing,
as if he whom it had power to torture and strangle were greater than it.
The face of one wholly in protest, and lifelong unsurrendering battle,
against the world. Affection all converted into indignation: an
implacable indignation; slow, equable, silent, like that of a god! The
eye too, it looks out as in a kind of _surprise_, a kind of inquiry, Why
the world was of such a sort? This is Dante: so he looks, this "voice of
ten silent centuries," and sings us "his mystic unfathomable song."

The little that we know of Dante's Life corresponds well enough with
this Portrait and this Book. He was born at Florence, in the upper class
of society, in the year 1265. His education was the best then going;
much school-divinity, Aristotelean logic, some Latin classics,--no
inconsiderable insight into certain provinces of things: and Dante, with
his earnest intelligent nature, we need not doubt, learned better than
most all that was learnable. He has a clear cultivated understanding,
and of great subtlety; this best fruit of education he had contrived to
realize from these scholastics. He knows accurately and well what
lies close to him; but, in such a time, without printed books or free
intercourse, he could not know well what was distant: the small clear
light, most luminous for what is near, breaks itself into singular
_chiaroscuro_ striking on what is far off. This was Dante's learning
from the schools. In life, he had gone through the usual destinies; been
twice out campaigning as a soldier for the Florentine State, been on
embassy; had in his thirty-fifth year, by natural gradation of talent
and service, become one of the Chief Magistrates of Florence. He had met
in boyhood a certain Beatrice Portinari, a beautiful little girl of his
own age and rank, and grown up thenceforth in partial sight of her,
in some distant intercourse with her. All readers know his graceful
affecting account of this; and then of their being parted; of her being
wedded to another, and of her death soon after. She makes a great figure
in Dante's Poem; seems to have made a great figure in his life. Of all
beings it might seem as if she, held apart from him, far apart at
last in the dim Eternity, were the only one he had ever with his whole
strength of affection loved. She died: Dante himself was wedded; but it
seems not happily, far from happily. I fancy, the rigorous earnest man,
with his keen excitabilities, was not altogether easy to make happy.

We will not complain of Dante's miseries: had all gone right with him as
he wished it, he might have been Prior, Podesta, or whatsoever they
call it, of Florence, well accepted among neighbors,--and the world had
wanted one of the most notable words ever spoken or sung. Florence
would have had another prosperous Lord Mayor; and the ten dumb centuries
continued voiceless, and the ten other listening centuries (for there
will be ten of them and more) had no _Divina Commedia_ to hear! We will
complain of nothing. A nobler destiny was appointed for this Dante; and
he, struggling like a man led towards death and crucifixion, could not
help fulfilling it. Give _him_ the choice of his happiness! He knew not,
more than we do, what was really happy, what was really miserable.

In Dante's Priorship, the Guelf-Ghibelline, Bianchi-Neri, or some other
confused disturbances rose to such a height, that Dante, whose party had
seemed the stronger, was with his friends cast unexpectedly forth into
banishment; doomed thenceforth to a life of woe and wandering. His
property was all confiscated and more; he had the fiercest feeling that
it was entirely unjust, nefarious in the sight of God and man. He tried
what was in him to get reinstated; tried even by warlike surprisal, with
arms in his hand: but it would not do; bad only had become worse. There
is a record, I believe, still extant in the Florence Archives, dooming
this Dante, wheresoever caught, to be burnt alive. Burnt alive; so
it stands, they say: a very curious civic document. Another curious
document, some considerable number of years later, is a Letter of
Dante's to the Florentine Magistrates, written in answer to a milder
proposal of theirs, that he should return on condition of apologizing
and paying a fine. He answers, with fixed stern pride: "If I cannot
return without calling myself guilty, I will never return, _nunquam
revertar_."

For Dante there was now no home in this world. He wandered from patron
to patron, from place to place; proving, in his own bitter words, "How
hard is the path, _Come e duro calle_." The wretched are not cheerful
company. Dante, poor and banished, with his proud earnest nature, with
his moody humors, was not a man to conciliate men. Petrarch reports of
him that being at Can della Scala's court, and blamed one day for his
gloom and taciturnity, he answered in no courtier-like way. Della
Scala stood among his courtiers, with mimes and buffoons (_nebulones ac
histriones_) making him heartily merry; when turning to Dante, he said:
"Is it not strange, now, that this poor fool should make himself so
entertaining; while you, a wise man, sit there day after day, and have
nothing to amuse us with at all?" Dante answered bitterly: "No,
not strange; your Highness is to recollect the Proverb, _Like to
Like_;"--given the amuser, the amusee must also be given! Such a man,
with his proud silent ways, with his sarcasms and sorrows, was not made
to succeed at court. By degrees, it came to be evident to him that he
had no longer any resting-place, or hope of benefit, in this earth. The
earthly world had cast him forth, to wander, wander; no living heart to
love him now; for his sore miseries there was no solace here.

The deeper naturally would the Eternal World impress itself on him; that
awful reality over which, after all, this Time-world, with its Florences
and banishments, only flutters as an unreal shadow. Florence thou shalt
never see: but Hell and Purgatory and Heaven thou shalt surely see!
What is Florence, Can della Scala, and the World and Life altogether?
ETERNITY: thither, of a truth, not elsewhither, art thou and all things
bound! The great soul of Dante, homeless on earth, made its home more
and more in that awful other world. Naturally his thoughts brooded on
that, as on the one fact important for him. Bodied or bodiless, it is
the one fact important for all men:--but to Dante, in that age, it was
bodied in fixed certainty of scientific shape; he no more doubted of
that _Malebolge_ Pool, that it all lay there with its gloomy circles,
with its _alti guai_, and that he himself should see it, than we doubt
that we should see Constantinople if we went thither. Dante's heart,
long filled with this, brooding over it in speechless thought and awe,
bursts forth at length into "mystic unfathomable song;" and this his
_Divine Comedy_, the most remarkable of all modern Books, is the result.

It must have been a great solacement to Dante, and was, as we can see,
a proud thought for him at times, That he, here in exile, could do this
work; that no Florence, nor no man or men, could hinder him from doing
it, or even much help him in doing it. He knew too, partly, that it was
great; the greatest a man could do. "If thou follow thy star, _Se tu
segui tua stella_,"--so could the Hero, in his forsakenness, in his
extreme need, still say to himself: "Follow thou thy star, thou shalt
not fail of a glorious haven!" The labor of writing, we find, and indeed
could know otherwise, was great and painful for him; he says, This Book,
"which has made me lean for many years." Ah yes, it was won, all of it,
with pain and sore toil,--not in sport, but in grim earnest. His Book,
as indeed most good Books are, has been written, in many senses, with
his heart's blood. It is his whole history, this Book. He died after
finishing it; not yet very old, at the age of fifty-six;--broken-hearted
rather, as is said. He lies buried in his death-city Ravenna: _Hic
claudor Dantes patriis extorris ab oris_. The Florentines begged back
his body, in a century after; the Ravenna people would not give it.
"Here am I Dante laid, shut out from my native shores."

I said, Dante's Poem was a Song: it is Tieck who calls it "a mystic
unfathomable Song;" and such is literally the character of it. Coleridge
remarks very pertinently somewhere, that wherever you find a sentence
musically worded, of true rhythm and melody in the words, there is
something deep and good in the meaning too. For body and soul, word and
idea, go strangely together here as everywhere. Song: we said before,
it was the Heroic of Speech! All _old_ Poems, Homer's and the rest, are
authentically Songs. I would say, in strictness, that all right Poems
are; that whatsoever is not _sung_ is properly no Poem, but a piece of
Prose cramped into jingling lines,--to the great injury of the grammar,
to the great grief of the reader, for most part! What we wants to get at
is the _thought_ the man had, if he had any: why should he twist it into
jingle, if he _could_ speak it out plainly? It is only when the heart
of him is rapt into true passion of melody, and the very tones of him,
according to Coleridge's remark, become musical by the greatness, depth
and music of his thoughts, that we can give him right to rhyme and
sing; that we call him a Poet, and listen to him as the Heroic of
Speakers,--whose speech is Song. Pretenders to this are many; and to an
earnest reader, I doubt, it is for most part a very melancholy, not to
say an insupportable business, that of reading rhyme! Rhyme that had
no inward necessity to be rhymed;--it ought to have told us plainly,
without any jingle, what it was aiming at. I would advise all men who
_can_ speak their thought, not to sing it; to understand that, in
a serious time, among serious men, there is no vocation in them for
singing it. Precisely as we love the true song, and are charmed by it as
by something divine, so shall we hate the false song, and account it a
mere wooden noise, a thing hollow, superfluous, altogether an insincere
and offensive thing.

I give Dante my highest praise when I say of his _Divine Comedy_ that it
is, in all senses, genuinely a Song. In the very sound of it there is
a _canto fermo_; it proceeds as by a chant. The language, his simple
_terza rima_, doubtless helped him in this. One reads along naturally
with a sort of _lilt_. But I add, that it could not be otherwise; for
the essence and material of the work are themselves rhythmic. Its depth,
and rapt passion and sincerity, makes it musical;--go _deep_ enough,
there is music everywhere. A true inward symmetry, what one calls
an architectural harmony, reigns in it, proportionates it all:
architectural; which also partakes of the character of music. The three
kingdoms, _Inferno_, _Purgatorio_, _Paradiso_, look out on one
another like compartments of a great edifice; a great supernatural
world-cathedral, piled up there, stern, solemn, awful; Dante's World of
Souls! It is, at bottom, the _sincerest_ of all Poems; sincerity,
here too, we find to be the measure of worth. It came deep out of
the author's heart of hearts; and it goes deep, and through long
generations, into ours. The people of Verona, when they saw him on the
streets, used to say, "_Eccovi l' uom ch' e stato all' Inferno_, See,
there is the man that was in Hell!" Ah yes, he had been in Hell;--in
Hell enough, in long severe sorrow and struggle; as the like of him
is pretty sure to have been. Commedias that come out _divine_ are not
accomplished otherwise. Thought, true labor of any kind, highest
virtue itself, is it not the daughter of Pain? Born as out of the black
whirlwind;--true _effort_, in fact, as of a captive struggling to free
himself: that is Thought. In all ways we are "to become perfect through
_suffering_."--_But_, as I say, no work known to me is so elaborated as
this of Dante's. It has all been as if molten, in the hottest furnace of
his soul. It had made him "lean" for many years. Not the general whole
only; every compartment of it is worked out, with intense earnestness,
into truth, into clear visuality. Each answers to the other; each fits
in its place, like a marble stone accurately hewn and polished. It is
the soul of Dante, and in this the soul of the middle ages, rendered
forever rhythmically visible there. No light task; a right intense one:
but a task which is _done_.

Perhaps one would say, _intensity_, with the much that depends on it, is
the prevailing character of Dante's genius. Dante does not come before
us as a large catholic mind; rather as a narrow, and even sectarian
mind: it is partly the fruit of his age and position, but partly too of
his own nature. His greatness has, in all senses, concentred itself into
fiery emphasis and depth. He is world-great not because he is worldwide,
but because he is world-deep. Through all objects he pierces as it
were down into the heart of Being. I know nothing so intense as Dante.
Consider, for example, to begin with the outermost development of his
intensity, consider how he paints. He has a great power of vision;
seizes the very type of a thing; presents that and nothing more. You
remember that first view he gets of the Hall of Dite: _red_ pinnacle,
red-hot cone of iron glowing through the dim immensity of gloom;--so
vivid, so distinct, visible at once and forever! It is as an emblem of
the whole genius of Dante. There is a brevity, an abrupt precision in
him: Tacitus is not briefer, more condensed; and then in Dante it seems
a natural condensation, spontaneous to the man. One smiting word; and
then there is silence, nothing more said. His silence is more eloquent
than words. It is strange with what a sharp decisive grace he snatches
the true likeness of a matter: cuts into the matter as with a pen of
fire. Plutus, the blustering giant, collapses at Virgil's rebuke; it
is "as the sails sink, the mast being suddenly broken." Or that poor
Brunetto Latini, with the _cotto aspetto_, "face _baked_," parched brown
and lean; and the "fiery snow" that falls on them there, a "fiery snow
without wind," slow, deliberate, never-ending! Or the lids of those
Tombs; square sarcophaguses, in that silent dim-burning Hall, each with
its Soul in torment; the lids laid open there; they are to be shut at
the Day of Judgment, through Eternity. And how Farinata rises; and how
Cavalcante falls--at hearing of his Son, and the past tense "_fue_"! The
very movements in Dante have something brief; swift, decisive, almost
military. It is of the inmost essence of his genius this sort of
painting. The fiery, swift Italian nature of the man, so silent,
passionate, with its quick abrupt movements, its silent "pale rages,"
speaks itself in these things.

For though this of painting is one of the outermost developments of a
man, it comes like all else from the essential faculty of him; it is
physiognomical of the whole man. Find a man whose words paint you a
likeness, you have found a man worth something; mark his manner of doing
it, as very characteristic of him. In the first place, he could not have
discerned the object at all, or seen the vital type of it, unless he
had, what we may call, _sympathized_ with it,--had sympathy in him to
bestow on objects. He must have been _sincere_ about it too; sincere
and sympathetic: a man without worth cannot give you the likeness of
any object; he dwells in vague outwardness, fallacy and trivial hearsay,
about all objects. And indeed may we not say that intellect altogether
expresses itself in this power of discerning what an object is?
Whatsoever of faculty a man's mind may have will come out here. Is it
even of business, a matter to be done? The gifted man is he who _sees_
the essential point, and leaves all the rest aside as surplusage: it is
his faculty too, the man of business's faculty, that he discern the true
_likeness_, not the false superficial one, of the thing he has got to
work in. And how much of _morality_ is in the kind of insight we get
of anything; "the eye seeing in all things what it brought with it the
faculty of seeing"! To the mean eye all things are trivial, as certainly
as to the jaundiced they are yellow. Raphael, the Painters tell us, is
the best of all Portrait-painters withal. No most gifted eye can exhaust
the significance of any object. In the commonest human face there lies
more than Raphael will take away with him.

Dante's painting is not graphic only, brief, true, and of a vividness as
of fire in dark night; taken on the wider scale, it is every way noble,
and the outcome of a great soul. Francesca and her Lover, what qualities
in that! A thing woven as out of rainbows, on a ground of eternal black.
A small flute-voice of infinite wail speaks there, into our very heart
of hearts. A touch of womanhood in it too: _della bella persona, che
mi fu tolta_; and how, even in the Pit of woe, it is a solace that _he_
will never part from her! Saddest tragedy in these _alti guai_. And
the racking winds, in that _aer bruno_, whirl them away again, to
wail forever!--Strange to think: Dante was the friend of this poor
Francesca's father; Francesca herself may have sat upon the Poet's knee,
as a bright innocent little child. Infinite pity, yet also infinite
rigor of law: it is so Nature is made; it is so Dante discerned that she
was made. What a paltry notion is that of his _Divine Comedy's_ being a
poor splenetic impotent terrestrial libel; putting those into Hell whom
he could not be avenged upon on earth! I suppose if ever pity, tender
as a mother's, was in the heart of any man, it was in Dante's. But a
man who does not know rigor cannot pity either. His very pity will be
cowardly, egoistic,--sentimentality, or little better. I know not in
the world an affection equal to that of Dante. It is a tenderness, a
trembling, longing, pitying love: like the wail of AEolian harps, soft,
soft; like a child's young heart;--and then that stern, sore-saddened
heart! These longings of his towards his Beatrice; their meeting
together in the _Paradiso_; his gazing in her pure transfigured eyes,
her that had been purified by death so long, separated from him so
far:--one likens it to the song of angels; it is among the purest
utterances of affection, perhaps the very purest, that ever came out of
a human soul.

For the _intense_ Dante is intense in all things; he has got into the
essence of all. His intellectual insight as painter, on occasion too
as reasoner, is but the result of all other sorts of intensity. Morally
great, above all, we must call him; it is the beginning of all. His
scorn, his grief are as transcendent as his love;--as indeed, what are
they but the _inverse_ or _converse_ of his love? "_A Dio spiacenti ed
a' nemici sui_, Hateful to God and to the enemies of God:" lofty scorn,
unappeasable silent reprobation and aversion; "_Non ragionam di lor_, We
will not speak of _them_, look only and pass." Or think of this; "They
have not the _hope_ to die, _Non han speranza di morte_." One day,
it had risen sternly benign on the scathed heart of Dante, that he,
wretched, never-resting, worn as he was, would full surely _die_; "that
Destiny itself could not doom him not to die." Such words are in this
man. For rigor, earnestness and depth, he is not to be paralleled in the
modern world; to seek his parallel we must go into the Hebrew Bible, and
live with the antique Prophets there.

I do not agree with much modern criticism, in greatly preferring
the _Inferno_ to the two other parts of the Divine _Commedia_. Such
preference belongs, I imagine, to our general Byronism of taste, and
is like to be a transient feeling. The _Purgatorio_ and _Paradiso_,
especially the former, one would almost say, is even more excellent than
it. It is a noble thing that _Purgatorio_, "Mountain of Purification;"
an emblem of the noblest conception of that age. If sin is so fatal,
and Hell is and must be so rigorous, awful, yet in Repentance too is
man purified; Repentance is the grand Christian act. It is beautiful how
Dante works it out. The _tremolar dell' onde_, that "trembling" of the
ocean-waves, under the first pure gleam of morning, dawning afar on the
wandering Two, is as the type of an altered mood. Hope has now dawned;
never-dying Hope, if in company still with heavy sorrow. The obscure
sojourn of demons and reprobate is underfoot; a soft breathing of
penitence mounts higher and higher, to the Throne of Mercy itself. "Pray
for me," the denizens of that Mount of Pain all say to him. "Tell my
Giovanna to pray for me," my daughter Giovanna; "I think her mother
loves me no more!" They toil painfully up by that winding steep, "bent
down like corbels of a building," some of them,--crushed together so
"for the sin of pride;" yet nevertheless in years, in ages and aeons,
they shall have reached the top, which is heaven's gate, and by Mercy
shall have been admitted in. The joy too of all, when one has prevailed;
the whole Mountain shakes with joy, and a psalm of praise rises, when
one soul has perfected repentance and got its sin and misery left
behind! I call all this a noble embodiment of a true noble thought.

But indeed the Three compartments mutually support one another, are
indispensable to one another. The _Paradiso_, a kind of inarticulate
music to me, is the redeeming side of the _Inferno_; the _Inferno_
without it were untrue. All three make up the true Unseen World,
as figured in the Christianity of the Middle Ages; a thing forever
memorable, forever true in the essence of it, to all men. It was perhaps
delineated in no human soul with such depth of veracity as in this
of Dante's; a man _sent_ to sing it, to keep it long memorable. Very
notable with what brief simplicity he passes out of the every-day
reality, into the Invisible one; and in the second or third stanza, we
find ourselves in the World of Spirits; and dwell there, as among things
palpable, indubitable! To Dante they _were_ so; the real world, as it
is called, and its facts, was but the threshold to an infinitely higher
Fact of a World. At bottom, the one was as _preternatural_ as the other.
Has not each man a soul? He will not only be a spirit, but is one. To
the earnest Dante it is all one visible Fact; he believes it, sees it;
is the Poet of it in virtue of that. Sincerity, I say again, is the
saving merit, now as always.

Dante's Hell, Purgatory, Paradise, are a symbol withal, an emblematic
representation of his Belief about this Universe:--some Critic in a
future age, like those Scandinavian ones the other day, who has ceased
altogether to think as Dante did, may find this too all an "Allegory,"
perhaps an idle Allegory! It is a sublime embodiment, or sublimest,
of the soul of Christianity. It expresses, as in huge world-wide
architectural emblems, how the Christian Dante felt Good and Evil to
be the two polar elements of this Creation, on which it all turns;
that these two differ not by preferability of one to the other, but by
incompatibility absolute and infinite; that the one is excellent and
high as light and Heaven, the other hideous, black as Gehenna and the
Pit of Hell! Everlasting Justice, yet with Penitence, with everlasting
Pity,--all Christianism, as Dante and the Middle Ages had it, is
emblemed here. Emblemed: and yet, as I urged the other day, with
what entire truth of purpose; how unconscious of any embleming! Hell,
Purgatory, Paradise: these things were not fashioned as emblems; was
there, in our Modern European Mind, any thought at all of their being
emblems! Were they not indubitable awful facts; the whole heart of man
taking them for practically true, all Nature everywhere confirming them?
So is it always in these things. Men do not believe an Allegory. The
future Critic, whatever his new thought may be, who considers this
of Dante to have been all got up as an Allegory, will commit one sore
mistake!--Paganism we recognized as a veracious expression of the
earnest awe-struck feeling of man towards the Universe; veracious, true
once, and still not without worth for us. But mark here the difference
of Paganism and Christianism; one great difference. Paganism emblemed
chiefly the Operations of Nature; the destinies, efforts, combinations,
vicissitudes of things and men in this world; Christianism emblemed
the Law of Human Duty, the Moral Law of Man. One was for the sensuous
nature: a rude helpless utterance of the first Thought of men,--the
chief recognized virtue, Courage, Superiority to Fear. The other was not
for the sensuous nature, but for the moral. What a progress is here, if
in that one respect only--!

And so in this Dante, as we said, had ten silent centuries, in a very
strange way, found a voice. The _Divina Commedia_ is of Dante's writing;
yet in truth it belongs to ten Christian centuries, only the finishing
of it is Dante's. So always. The craftsman there, the smith with that
metal of his, with these tools, with these cunning methods,--how little
of all he does is properly _his_ work! All past inventive men work
there with him;--as indeed with all of us, in all things. Dante is the
spokesman of the Middle Ages; the Thought they lived by stands here, in
everlasting music. These sublime ideas of his, terrible and beautiful,
are the fruit of the Christian Meditation of all the good men who had
gone before him. Precious they; but also is not he precious? Much, had
not he spoken, would have been dumb; not dead, yet living voiceless.

On the whole, is it not an utterance, this mystic Song, at once of one
of the greatest human souls, and of the highest thing that Europe
had hitherto realized for itself? Christianism, as Dante sings it, is
another than Paganism in the rude Norse mind; another than "Bastard
Christianism" half-articulately spoken in the Arab Desert, seven hundred
years before!--The noblest _idea_ made _real_ hitherto among men, is
sung, and emblemed forth abidingly, by one of the noblest men. In the
one sense and in the other, are we not right glad to possess it? As I
calculate, it may last yet for long thousands of years. For the
thing that is uttered from the inmost parts of a man's soul, differs
altogether from what is uttered by the outer part. The outer is of the
day, under the empire of mode; the outer passes away, in swift endless
changes; the inmost is the same yesterday, to-day and forever. True
souls, in all generations of the world, who look on this Dante, will
find a brotherhood in him; the deep sincerity of his thoughts, his woes
and hopes, will speak likewise to their sincerity; they will feel that
this Dante too was a brother. Napoleon in Saint Helena is charmed with
the genial veracity of old Homer. The oldest Hebrew Prophet, under a
vesture the most diverse from ours, does yet, because he speaks from the
heart of man, speak to all men's hearts. It is the one sole secret of
continuing long memorable. Dante, for depth of sincerity, is like an
antique Prophet too; his words, like theirs, come from his very heart.
One need not wonder if it were predicted that his Poem might be the
most enduring thing our Europe has yet made; for nothing so endures as a
truly spoken word. All cathedrals, pontificalities, brass and stone,
and outer arrangement never so lasting, are brief in comparison to an
unfathomable heart-song like this: one feels as if it might survive,
still of importance to men, when these had all sunk into new
irrecognizable combinations, and had ceased individually to be. Europe
has made much; great cities, great empires, encyclopaedias, creeds,
bodies of opinion and practice: but it has made little of the class
of Dante's Thought. Homer yet _is_ veritably present face to face with
every open soul of us; and Greece, where is _it_? Desolate for thousands
of years; away, vanished; a bewildered heap of stones and rubbish, the
life and existence of it all gone. Like a dream; like the dust of King
Agamemnon! Greece was; Greece, except in the _words_ it spoke, is not.

The uses of this Dante? We will not say much about his "uses." A human
soul who has once got into that primal element of _Song_, and sung forth
fitly somewhat therefrom, has worked in the _depths_ of our existence;
feeding through long times the life-roots of all excellent human
things whatsoever,--in a way that "utilities" will not succeed well in
calculating! We will not estimate the Sun by the quantity of gaslight
it saves us; Dante shall be invaluable, or of no value. One remark I
may make: the contrast in this respect between the Hero-Poet and the
Hero-Prophet. In a hundred years, Mahomet, as we saw, had his Arabians
at Grenada and at Delhi; Dante's Italians seem to be yet very much where
they were. Shall we say, then, Dante's effect on the world was small in
comparison? Not so: his arena is far more restricted; but also it is far
nobler, clearer;--perhaps not less but more important. Mahomet speaks
to great masses of men, in the coarse dialect adapted to such; a dialect
filled with inconsistencies, crudities, follies: on the great masses
alone can he act, and there with good and with evil strangely blended.
Dante speaks to the noble, the pure and great, in all times and places.
Neither does he grow obsolete, as the other does. Dante burns as a pure
star, fixed there in the firmament, at which the great and the high of
all ages kindle themselves: he is the possession of all the chosen of
the world for uncounted time. Dante, one calculates, may long survive
Mahomet. In this way the balance may be made straight again.

But, at any rate, it is not by what is called their effect on the world,
by what _we_ can judge of their effect there, that a man and his work
are measured. Effect? Influence? Utility? Let a man _do_ his work; the
fruit of it is the care of Another than he. It will grow its own fruit;
and whether embodied in Caliph Thrones and Arabian Conquests, so that it
"fills all Morning and Evening Newspapers," and all Histories, which are
a kind of distilled Newspapers; or not embodied so at all;--what matters
that? That is not the real fruit of it! The Arabian Caliph, in so far
only as he did something, was something. If the great Cause of Man, and
Man's work in God's Earth, got no furtherance from the Arabian Caliph,
then no matter how many scimetars he drew, how many gold piasters
pocketed, and what uproar and blaring he made in this world,--_he_ was
but a loud-sounding inanity and futility; at bottom, he _was_ not
at all. Let us honor the great empire of _Silence_, once more! The
boundless treasury which we do not jingle in our pockets, or count up
and present before men! It is perhaps, of all things, the usefulest for
each of us to do, in these loud times.--


As Dante, the Italian man, was sent into our world to embody musically
the Religion of the Middle Ages, the Religion of our Modern Europe, its
Inner Life; so Shakspeare, we may say, embodies for us the Outer Life
of our Europe as developed then, its chivalries, courtesies, humors,
ambitions, what practical way of thinking, acting, looking at the
world, men then had. As in Homer we may still construe Old Greece; so in
Shakspeare and Dante, after thousands of years, what our modern Europe
was, in Faith and in Practice, will still be legible. Dante has given us
the Faith or soul; Shakspeare, in a not less noble way, has given us the
Practice or body. This latter also we were to have; a man was sent for
it, the man Shakspeare. Just when that chivalry way of life had reached
its last finish, and was on the point of breaking down into slow or
swift dissolution, as we now see it everywhere, this other sovereign
Poet, with his seeing eye, with his perennial singing voice, was sent to
take note of it, to give long-enduring record of it. Two fit men: Dante,
deep, fierce as the central fire of the world; Shakspeare, wide, placid,
far-seeing, as the Sun, the upper light of the world. Italy produced the
one world-voice; we English had the honor of producing the other.

Curious enough how, as it were by mere accident, this man came to us.
I think always, so great, quiet, complete and self-sufficing is
this Shakspeare, had the Warwickshire Squire not prosecuted him for
deer-stealing, we had perhaps never heard of him as a Poet! The woods
and skies, the rustic Life of Man in Stratford there, had been enough
for this man! But indeed that strange outbudding of our whole English
Existence, which we call the Elizabethan Era, did not it too come as
of its own accord? The "Tree Igdrasil" buds and withers by its own
laws,--too deep for our scanning. Yet it does bud and wither, and every
bough and leaf of it is there, by fixed eternal laws; not a Sir
Thomas Lucy but comes at the hour fit for him. Curious, I say, and not
sufficiently considered: how everything does co-operate with all; not
a leaf rotting on the highway but is indissoluble portion of solar and
stellar systems; no thought, word or act of man but has sprung
withal out of all men, and works sooner or later, recognizably or
irrecognizable, on all men! It is all a Tree: circulation of sap and
influences, mutual communication of every minutest leaf with the lowest
talon of a root, with every other greatest and minutest portion of the
whole. The Tree Igdrasil, that has its roots down in the Kingdoms of
Hela and Death, and whose boughs overspread the highest Heaven--!

In some sense it may be said that this glorious Elizabethan Era with its
Shakspeare, as the outcome and flowerage of all which had preceded
it, is itself attributable to the Catholicism of the Middle Ages. The
Christian Faith, which was the theme of Dante's Song, had produced this
Practical Life which Shakspeare was to sing. For Religion then, as it
now and always is, was the soul of Practice; the primary vital fact
in men's life. And remark here, as rather curious, that Middle-Age
Catholicism was abolished, so far as Acts of Parliament could abolish
it, before Shakspeare, the noblest product of it, made his appearance.
He did make his appearance nevertheless. Nature at her own time, with
Catholicism or what else might be necessary, sent him forth; taking
small thought of Acts of Parliament. King Henrys, Queen Elizabeths go
their way; and Nature too goes hers. Acts of Parliament, on the whole,
are small, notwithstanding the noise they make. What Act of Parliament,
debate at St. Stephen's, on the hustings or elsewhere, was it that
brought this Shakspeare into being? No dining at Freemason's Tavern,
opening subscription-lists, selling of shares, and infinite other
jangling and true or false endeavoring! This Elizabethan Era, and all
its nobleness and blessedness, came without proclamation, preparation of
ours. Priceless Shakspeare was the free gift of Nature; given altogether
silently;--received altogether silently, as if it had been a thing of
little account. And yet, very literally, it is a priceless thing. One
should look at that side of matters too.

Of this Shakspeare of ours, perhaps the opinion one sometimes hears a
little idolatrously expressed is, in fact, the right one; I think the
best judgment not of this country only, but of Europe at large, is
slowly pointing to the conclusion, that Shakspeare is the chief of all
Poets hitherto; the greatest intellect who, in our recorded world, has
left record of himself in the way of Literature. On the whole, I know
not such a power of vision, such a faculty of thought, if we take all
the characters of it, in any other man. Such a calmness of depth; placid
joyous strength; all things imaged in that great soul of his so true and
clear, as in a tranquil unfathomable sea! It has been said, that in
the constructing of Shakspeare's Dramas there is, apart from all other
"faculties" as they are called, an understanding manifested, equal to
that in Bacon's _Novum Organum_ That is true; and it is not a truth that
strikes every one. It would become more apparent if we tried, any of
us for himself, how, out of Shakspeare's dramatic materials, _we_ could
fashion such a result! The built house seems all so fit,--every way
as it should be, as if it came there by its own law and the nature of
things,--we forget the rude disorderly quarry it was shaped from. The
very perfection of the house, as if Nature herself had made it, hides
the builder's merit. Perfect, more perfect than any other man, we
may call Shakspeare in this: he discerns, knows as by instinct, what
condition he works under, what his materials are, what his own force and
its relation to them is. It is not a transitory glance of insight that
will suffice; it is deliberate illumination of the whole matter; it is
a calmly _seeing_ eye; a great intellect, in short. How a man, of some
wide thing that he has witnessed, will construct a narrative, what kind
of picture and delineation he will give of it,--is the best measure you
could get of what intellect is in the man. Which circumstance is vital
and shall stand prominent; which unessential, fit to be suppressed;
where is the true _beginning_, the true sequence and ending? To find out
this, you task the whole force of insight that is in the man. He must
_understand_ the thing; according to the depth of his understanding,
will the fitness of his answer be. You will try him so. Does like join
itself to like; does the spirit of method stir in that confusion, so
that its embroilment becomes order? Can the man say, _Fiat lux_, Let
there be light; and out of chaos make a world? Precisely as there is
light in himself, will he accomplish this.

Or indeed we may say again, it is in what I called Portrait-painting,
delineating of men and things, especially of men, that Shakspeare is
great. All the greatness of the man comes out decisively here. It is
unexampled, I think, that calm creative perspicacity of Shakspeare. The
thing he looks at reveals not this or that face of it, but its inmost
heart, and generic secret: it dissolves itself as in light before him,
so that he discerns the perfect structure of it. Creative, we said:
poetic creation, what is this too but _seeing_ the thing sufficiently?
The _word_ that will describe the thing, follows of itself from such
clear intense sight of the thing. And is not Shakspeare's _morality_,
his valor, candor, tolerance, truthfulness; his whole victorious
strength and greatness, which can triumph over such obstructions,
visible there too? Great as the world. No _twisted_, poor convex-concave
mirror, reflecting all objects with its own convexities and concavities;
a perfectly _level_ mirror;--that is to say withal, if we will
understand it, a man justly related to all things and men, a good man.
It is truly a lordly spectacle how this great soul takes in all kinds
of men and objects, a Falstaff, an Othello, a Juliet, a Coriolanus;
sets them all forth to us in their round completeness; loving, just, the
equal brother of all. _Novum Organum_, and all the intellect you will
find in Bacon, is of a quite secondary order; earthy, material, poor in
comparison with this. Among modern men, one finds, in strictness, almost
nothing of the same rank. Goethe alone, since the days of Shakspeare,
reminds me of it. Of him too you say that he _saw_ the object; you may
say what he himself says of Shakspeare: "His characters are like watches
with dial-plates of transparent crystal; they show you the hour like
others, and the inward mechanism also is all visible."

The seeing eye! It is this that discloses the inner harmony of things;
what Nature meant, what musical idea Nature has wrapped up in these
often rough embodiments. Something she did mean. To the seeing eye that
something were discernible. Are they base, miserable things? You can
laugh over them, you can weep over them; you can in some way or other
genially relate yourself to them;--you can, at lowest, hold your peace
about them, turn away your own and others' face from them, till the hour
come for practically exterminating and extinguishing them! At bottom,
it is the Poet's first gift, as it is all men's, that he have intellect
enough. He will be a Poet if he have: a Poet in word; or failing that,
perhaps still better, a Poet in act. Whether he write at all; and if
so, whether in prose or in verse, will depend on accidents: who knows
on what extremely trivial accidents,--perhaps on his having had a
singing-master, on his being taught to sing in his boyhood! But the
faculty which enables him to discern the inner heart of things, and the
harmony that dwells there (for whatsoever exists has a harmony in the
heart of it, or it would not hold together and exist), is not the result
of habits or accidents, but the gift of Nature herself; the primary
outfit for a Heroic Man in what sort soever. To the Poet, as to every
other, we say first of all, _See_. If you cannot do that, it is of no
use to keep stringing rhymes together, jingling sensibilities against
each other, and _name_ yourself a Poet; there is no hope for you. If you
can, there is, in prose or verse, in action or speculation, all manner
of hope. The crabbed old Schoolmaster used to ask, when they brought him
a new pupil, "But are ye sure he's _not a dunce_?" Why, really one
might ask the same thing, in regard to every man proposed for whatsoever
function; and consider it as the one inquiry needful: Are ye sure he's
not a dunce? There is, in this world, no other entirely fatal person.

For, in fact, I say the degree of vision that dwells in a man is a
correct measure of the man. If called to define Shakspeare's faculty, I
should say superiority of Intellect, and think I had included all under
that. What indeed are faculties? We talk of faculties as if they were
distinct, things separable; as if a man had intellect, imagination,
fancy, &c., as he has hands, feet and arms. That is a capital error.
Then again, we hear of a man's "intellectual nature," and of his
"moral nature," as if these again were divisible, and existed apart.
Necessities of language do perhaps prescribe such forms of utterance;
we must speak, I am aware, in that way, if we are to speak at all.
But words ought not to harden into things for us. It seems to me, our
apprehension of this matter is, for most part, radically falsified
thereby. We ought to know withal, and to keep forever in mind, that
these divisions are at bottom but _names_; that man's spiritual nature,
the vital Force which dwells in him, is essentially one and indivisible;
that what we call imagination, fancy, understanding, and so forth, are
but different figures of the same Power of Insight, all indissolubly
connected with each other, physiognomically related; that if we knew one
of them, we might know all of them. Morality itself, what we call the
moral quality of a man, what is this but another _side_ of the one vital
Force whereby he is and works? All that a man does is physiognomical of
him. You may see how a man would fight, by the way in which he sings;
his courage, or want of courage, is visible in the word he utters, in
the opinion he has formed, no less than in the stroke he strikes. He is
_one_; and preaches the same Self abroad in all these ways.

Without hands a man might have feet, and could still walk: but, consider
it,--without morality, intellect were impossible for him; a thoroughly
immoral _man_ could not know anything at all! To know a thing, what we
can call knowing, a man must first _love_ the thing, sympathize with it:
that is, be _virtuously_ related to it. If he have not the justice to
put down his own selfishness at every turn, the courage to stand by the
dangerous-true at every turn, how shall he know? His virtues, all
of them, will lie recorded in his knowledge. Nature, with her truth,
remains to the bad, to the selfish and the pusillanimous forever a
sealed book: what such can know of Nature is mean, superficial,
small; for the uses of the day merely.--But does not the very Fox know
something of Nature? Exactly so: it knows where the geese lodge! The
human Reynard, very frequent everywhere in the world, what more does he
know but this and the like of this? Nay, it should be considered too,
that if the Fox had not a certain vulpine _morality_, he could not even
know where the geese were, or get at the geese! If he spent his time
in splenetic atrabiliar reflections on his own misery, his ill usage
by Nature, Fortune and other Foxes, and so forth; and had not courage,
promptitude, practicality, and other suitable vulpine gifts and graces,
he would catch no geese. We may say of the Fox too, that his morality
and insight are of the same dimensions; different faces of the same
internal unity of vulpine life!--These things are worth stating; for
the contrary of them acts with manifold very baleful perversion, in this
time: what limitations, modifications they require, your own candor will
supply.

If I say, therefore, that Shakspeare is the greatest of Intellects,
I have said all concerning him. But there is more in Shakspeare's
intellect than we have yet seen. It is what I call an unconscious
intellect; there is more virtue in it than he himself is aware of.
Novalis beautifully remarks of him, that those Dramas of his are
Products of Nature too, deep as Nature herself. I find a great truth in
this saying. Shakspeare's Art is not Artifice; the noblest worth of it
is not there by plan or precontrivance. It grows up from the deeps of
Nature, through this noble sincere soul, who is a voice of Nature. The
latest generations of men will find new meanings in Shakspeare, new
elucidations of their own human being; "new harmonies with the infinite
structure of the Universe; concurrences with later ideas, affinities
with the higher powers and senses of man." This well deserves
meditating. It is Nature's highest reward to a true simple great
soul, that he get thus to be _a part of herself_. Such a man's works,
whatsoever he with utmost conscious exertion and forethought shall
accomplish, grow up withal unconsciously, from the unknown deeps in
him;--as the oak-tree grows from the Earth's bosom, as the mountains and
waters shape themselves; with a symmetry grounded on Nature's own laws,
conformable to all Truth whatsoever. How much in Shakspeare lies hid;
his sorrows, his silent struggles known to himself; much that was not
known at all, not speakable at all: like _roots_, like sap and forces
working underground! Speech is great; but Silence is greater.

Withal the joyful tranquillity of this man is notable. I will not
blame Dante for his misery: it is as battle without victory; but true
battle,--the first, indispensable thing. Yet I call Shakspeare greater
than Dante, in that he fought truly, and did conquer. Doubt it not, he
had his own sorrows: those _Sonnets_ of his will even testify expressly
in what deep waters he had waded, and swum struggling for his life;--as
what man like him ever failed to have to do? It seems to me a heedless
notion, our common one, that he sat like a bird on the bough; and sang
forth, free and off-hand, never knowing the troubles of other men. Not
so; with no man is it so. How could a man travel forward from rustic
deer-poaching to such tragedy-writing, and not fall in with sorrows
by the way? Or, still better, how could a man delineate a Hamlet, a
Coriolanus, a Macbeth, so many suffering heroic hearts, if his own
heroic heart had never suffered?--And now, in contrast with all this,
observe his mirthfulness, his genuine overflowing love of laughter! You
would say, in no point does he _exaggerate_ but only in laughter. Fiery
objurgations, words that pierce and burn, are to be found in Shakspeare;
yet he is always in measure here; never what Johnson would remark as
a specially "good hater." But his laughter seems to pour from him in
floods; he heaps all manner of ridiculous nicknames on the butt he is
bantering, tumbles and tosses him in all sorts of horse-play; you would
say, with his whole heart laughs. And then, if not always the finest, it
is always a genial laughter. Not at mere weakness, at misery or poverty;
never. No man who _can_ laugh, what we call laughing, will laugh at
these things. It is some poor character only _desiring_ to laugh, and
have the credit of wit, that does so. Laughter means sympathy; good
laughter is not "the crackling of thorns under the pot." Even at
stupidity and pretension this Shakspeare does not laugh otherwise than
genially. Dogberry and Verges tickle our very hearts; and we dismiss
them covered with explosions of laughter: but we like the poor fellows
only the better for our laughing; and hope they will get on well there,
and continue Presidents of the City-watch. Such laughter, like sunshine
on the deep sea, is very beautiful to me.


We have no room to speak of Shakspeare's individual works; though
perhaps there is much still waiting to be said on that head. Had we, for
instance, all his plays reviewed as _Hamlet_, in _Wilhelm Meister_, is!
A thing which might, one day, be done. August Wilhelm Schlegel has a
remark on his Historical Plays, _Henry Fifth_ and the others, which is
worth remembering. He calls them a kind of National Epic. Marlborough,
you recollect, said, he knew no English History but what he had learned
from Shakspeare. There are really, if we look to it, few as memorable
Histories. The great salient points are admirably seized; all rounds
itself off, into a kind of rhythmic coherence; it is, as Schlegel says,
epic;--as indeed all delineation by a great thinker will be. There are
right beautiful things in those Pieces, which indeed together form one
beautiful thing. That battle of Agincourt strikes me as one of the
most perfect things, in its sort, we anywhere have of Shakspeare's. The
description of the two hosts: the worn-out, jaded English; the dread
hour, big with destiny, when the battle shall begin; and then that
deathless valor: "Ye good yeomen, whose limbs were made in England!"
There is a noble Patriotism in it,--far other than the "indifference"
you sometimes hear ascribed to Shakspeare. A true English heart
breathes, calm and strong, through the whole business; not boisterous,
protrusive; all the better for that. There is a sound in it like the
ring of steel. This man too had a right stroke in him, had it come to
that!

But I will say, of Shakspeare's works generally, that we have no full
impress of him there; even as full as we have of many men. His works are
so many windows, through which we see a glimpse of the world that was
in him. All his works seem, comparatively speaking, cursory, imperfect,
written under cramping circumstances; giving only here and there a note
of the full utterance of the man. Passages there are that come upon you
like splendor out of Heaven; bursts of radiance, illuminating the very
heart of the thing: you say, "That is _true_, spoken once and forever;
wheresoever and whensoever there is an open human soul, that will
be recognized as true!" Such bursts, however, make us feel that the
surrounding matter is not radiant; that it is, in part, temporary,
conventional. Alas, Shakspeare had to write for the Globe Playhouse:
his great soul had to crush itself, as it could, into that and no other
mould. It was with him, then, as it is with us all. No man works save
under conditions. The sculptor cannot set his own free Thought before
us; but his Thought as he could translate it into the stone that was
given, with the tools that were given. _Disjecta membra_ are all that we
find of any Poet, or of any man.


Whoever looks intelligently at this Shakspeare may recognize that he too
was a _Prophet_, in his way; of an insight analogous to the Prophetic,
though he took it up in another strain. Nature seemed to this man also
divine; unspeakable, deep as Tophet, high as Heaven; "We are such stuff
as Dreams are made of!" That scroll in Westminster Abbey, which few read
with understanding, is of the depth of any seer. But the man sang; did
not preach, except musically. We called Dante the melodious Priest
of Middle-Age Catholicism. May we not call Shakspeare the still more
melodious Priest of a _true_ Catholicism, the "Universal Church" of
the Future and of all times? No narrow superstition, harsh asceticism,
intolerance, fanatical fierceness or perversion: a Revelation, so far as
it goes, that such a thousand-fold hidden beauty and divineness dwells
in all Nature; which let all men worship as they can! We may say
without offence, that there rises a kind of universal Psalm out of this
Shakspeare too; not unfit to make itself heard among the still more
sacred Psalms. Not in disharmony with these, if we understood them, but
in harmony!--I cannot call this Shakspeare a "Sceptic," as some do;
his indifference to the creeds and theological quarrels of his time
misleading them. No: neither unpatriotic, though he says little about
his Patriotism; nor sceptic, though he says little about his Faith. Such
"indifference" was the fruit of his greatness withal: his whole heart
was in his own grand sphere of worship (we may call it such); these
other controversies, vitally important to other men, were not vital to
him.

But call it worship, call it what you will, is it not a right glorious
thing, and set of things, this that Shakspeare has brought us? For
myself, I feel that there is actually a kind of sacredness in the fact
of such a man being sent into this Earth. Is he not an eye to us all;
a blessed heaven-sent Bringer of Light?--And, at bottom, was it not
perhaps far better that this Shakspeare, every way an unconscious man,
was _conscious_ of no Heavenly message? He did not feel, like Mahomet,
because he saw into those internal Splendors, that he specially was the
"Prophet of God:" and was he not greater than Mahomet in that? Greater;
and also, if we compute strictly, as we did in Dante's case, more
successful. It was intrinsically an error that notion of Mahomet's, of
his supreme Prophethood; and has come down to us inextricably involved
in error to this day; dragging along with it such a coil of fables,
impurities, intolerances, as makes it a questionable step for me here
and now to say, as I have done, that Mahomet was a true Speaker at all,
and not rather an ambitious charlatan, perversity and simulacrum; no
Speaker, but a Babbler! Even in Arabia, as I compute, Mahomet will have
exhausted himself and become obsolete, while this Shakspeare, this Dante
may still be young;--while this Shakspeare may still pretend to be a
Priest of Mankind, of Arabia as of other places, for unlimited periods
to come!

Compared with any speaker or singer one knows, even with Aeschylus or
Homer, why should he not, for veracity and universality, last like them?
He is _sincere_ as they; reaches deep down like them, to the universal
and perennial. But as for Mahomet, I think it had been better for
him _not_ to be so conscious! Alas, poor Mahomet; all that he was
_conscious_ of was a mere error; a futility and triviality,--as indeed
such ever is. The truly great in him too was the unconscious: that he
was a wild Arab lion of the desert, and did speak out with that great
thunder-voice of his, not by words which he _thought_ to be great, but
by actions, by feelings, by a history which _were_ great! His Koran has
become a stupid piece of prolix absurdity; we do not believe, like him,
that God wrote that! The Great Man here too, as always, is a Force
of Nature. Whatsoever is truly great in him springs up from the
_in_articulate deeps.


Well: this is our poor Warwickshire Peasant, who rose to be Manager of
a Playhouse, so that he could live without begging; whom the Earl of
Southampton cast some kind glances on; whom Sir Thomas Lucy, many thanks
to him, was for sending to the Treadmill! We did not account him a god,
like Odin, while he dwelt with us;--on which point there were much to
be said. But I will say rather, or repeat: In spite of the sad state
Hero-worship now lies in, consider what this Shakspeare has actually
become among us. Which Englishman we ever made, in this land of ours,
which million of Englishmen, would we not give up rather than the
Stratford Peasant? There is no regiment of highest Dignitaries that we
would sell him for. He is the grandest thing we have yet done. For our
honor among foreign nations, as an ornament to our English Household,
what item is there that we would not surrender rather than him? Consider
now, if they asked us, Will you give up your Indian Empire or your
Shakspeare, you English; never have had any Indian Empire, or never have
had any Shakspeare? Really it were a grave question. Official persons
would answer doubtless in official language; but we, for our part too,
should not we be forced to answer: Indian Empire, or no Indian Empire;
we cannot do without Shakspeare! Indian Empire will go, at any rate,
some day; but this Shakspeare does not go, he lasts forever with us; we
cannot give up our Shakspeare!

Nay, apart from spiritualities; and considering him merely as a real,
marketable, tangibly useful possession. England, before long, this
Island of ours, will hold but a small fraction of the English: in
America, in New Holland, east and west to the very Antipodes, there will
be a Saxondom covering great spaces of the Globe. And now, what is it
that can keep all these together into virtually one Nation, so that
they do not fall out and fight, but live at peace, in brotherlike
intercourse, helping one another? This is justly regarded as the
greatest practical problem, the thing all manner of sovereignties and
governments are here to accomplish: what is it that will accomplish
this? Acts of Parliament, administrative prime-ministers cannot. America
is parted from us, so far as Parliament could part it. Call it not
fantastic, for there is much reality in it: Here, I say, is an English
King, whom no time or chance, Parliament or combination of Parliaments,
can dethrone! This King Shakspeare, does not he shine, in crowned
sovereignty, over us all, as the noblest, gentlest, yet strongest of
rallying-signs; indestructible; really more valuable in that point of
view than any other means or appliance whatsoever? We can fancy him
as radiant aloft over all the Nations of Englishmen, a thousand years
hence. From Paramatta, from New York, wheresoever, under what sort of
Parish-Constable soever, English men and women are, they will say to one
another: "Yes, this Shakspeare is ours; we produced him, we speak
and think by him; we are of one blood and kind with him." The most
common-sense politician, too, if he pleases, may think of that.

Yes, truly, it is a great thing for a Nation that it get an articulate
voice; that it produce a man who will speak forth melodiously what the
heart of it means! Italy, for example, poor Italy lies dismembered,
scattered asunder, not appearing in any protocol or treaty as a unity
at all; yet the noble Italy is actually _one_: Italy produced its Dante;
Italy can speak! The Czar of all the Russias, he is strong with so many
bayonets, Cossacks and cannons; and does a great feat in keeping such a
tract of Earth politically together; but he cannot yet speak. Something
great in him, but it is a dumb greatness. He has had no voice of genius,
to be heard of all men and times. He must learn to speak. He is a great
dumb monster hitherto. His cannons and Cossacks will all have rusted
into nonentity, while that Dante's voice is still audible. The Nation
that has a Dante is bound together as no dumb Russia can be.--We must
here end what we had to say of the _Hero-Poet_.




LECTURE IV. THE HERO AS PRIEST. LUTHER; REFORMATION: KNOX; PURITANISM.

[May 15, 1840.]

Our present discourse is to be of the Great Man as Priest. We
have repeatedly endeavored to explain that all sorts of Heroes are
intrinsically of the same material; that given a great soul, open to the
Divine Significance of Life, then there is given a man fit to speak
of this, to sing of this, to fight and work for this, in a great,
victorious, enduring manner; there is given a Hero,--the outward shape
of whom will depend on the time and the environment he finds himself
in. The Priest too, as I understand it, is a kind of Prophet; in him too
there is required to be a light of inspiration, as we must name it. He
presides over the worship of the people; is the Uniter of them with the
Unseen Holy. He is the spiritual Captain of the people; as the Prophet
is their spiritual King with many captains: he guides them heavenward,
by wise guidance through this Earth and its work. The ideal of him
is, that he too be what we can call a voice from the unseen Heaven;
interpreting, even as the Prophet did, and in a more familiar manner
unfolding the same to men. The unseen Heaven,--the "open secret of the
Universe,"--which so few have an eye for! He is the Prophet shorn of
his more awful splendor; burning with mild equable radiance, as the
enlightener of daily life. This, I say, is the ideal of a Priest. So in
old times; so in these, and in all times. One knows very well that, in
reducing ideals to practice, great latitude of tolerance is needful;
very great. But a Priest who is not this at all, who does not any longer
aim or try to be this, is a character--of whom we had rather not speak
in this place.

Luther and Knox were by express vocation Priests, and did faithfully
perform that function in its common sense. Yet it will suit us better
here to consider them chiefly in their historical character, rather as
Reformers than Priests. There have been other Priests perhaps equally
notable, in calmer times, for doing faithfully the office of a Leader of
Worship; bringing down, by faithful heroism in that kind, a light from
Heaven into the daily life of their people; leading them forward, as
under God's guidance, in the way wherein they were to go. But when
this same _way_ was a rough one, of battle, confusion and danger, the
spiritual Captain, who led through that, becomes, especially to us who
live under the fruit of his leading, more notable than any other. He
is the warfaring and battling Priest; who led his people, not to quiet
faithful labor as in smooth times, but to faithful valorous conflict,
in times all violent, dismembered: a more perilous service, and a more
memorable one, be it higher or not. These two men we will account our
best Priests, inasmuch as they were our best Reformers. Nay I may ask,
Is not every true Reformer, by the nature of him, a _Priest_ first of
all? He appeals to Heaven's invisible justice against Earth's visible
force; knows that it, the invisible, is strong and alone strong. He is
a believer in the divine truth of things; a _seer_, seeing through the
shows of things; a worshipper, in one way or the other, of the divine
truth of things; a Priest, that is. If he be not first a Priest, he will
never be good for much as a Reformer.

Thus then, as we have seen Great Men, in various situations, building
up Religions, heroic Forms of human Existence in this world, Theories
of Life worthy to be sung by a Dante, Practices of Life by a
Shakspeare,--we are now to see the reverse process; which also is
necessary, which also may be carried on in the Heroic manner. Curious
how this should be necessary: yet necessary it is. The mild shining
of the Poet's light has to give place to the fierce lightning of the
Reformer: unfortunately the Reformer too is a personage that cannot
fail in History! The Poet indeed, with his mildness, what is he but
the product and ultimate adjustment of Reform, or Prophecy, with its
fierceness? No wild Saint Dominics and Thebaid Eremites, there had been
no melodious Dante; rough Practical Endeavor, Scandinavian and other,
from Odin to Walter Raleigh, from Ulfila to Cranmer, enabled Shakspeare
to speak. Nay the finished Poet, I remark sometimes, is a symptom that
his epoch itself has reached perfection and is finished; that before
long there will be a new epoch, new Reformers needed.

Doubtless it were finer, could we go along always in the way of _music_;
be tamed and taught by our Poets, as the rude creatures were by their
Orpheus of old. Or failing this rhythmic _musical_ way, how good were it
could we get so much as into the _equable_ way; I mean, if _peaceable_
Priests, reforming from day to day, would always suffice us! But it is
not so; even this latter has not yet been realized. Alas, the battling
Reformer too is, from time to time, a needful and inevitable phenomenon.
Obstructions are never wanting: the very things that were once
indispensable furtherances become obstructions; and need to be shaken
off, and left behind us,--a business often of enormous difficulty. It is
notable enough, surely, how a Theorem or spiritual Representation, so we
may call it, which once took in the whole Universe, and was completely
satisfactory in all parts of it to the highly discursive acute intellect
of Dante, one of the greatest in the world,--had in the course of
another century become dubitable to common intellects; become deniable;
and is now, to every one of us, flatly incredible, obsolete as Odin's
Theorem! To Dante, human Existence, and God's ways with men, were all
well represented by those _Malebolges_, _Purgatorios_; to Luther not
well. How was this? Why could not Dante's Catholicism continue; but
Luther's Protestantism must needs follow? Alas, nothing will _continue_.

I do not make much of "Progress of the Species," as handled in these
times of ours; nor do I think you would care to hear much about it.
The talk on that subject is too often of the most extravagant, confused
sort. Yet I may say, the fact itself seems certain enough; nay we can
trace out the inevitable necessity of it in the nature of things. Every
man, as I have stated somewhere, is not only a learner but a doer: he
learns with the mind given him what has been; but with the same mind
he discovers farther, he invents and devises somewhat of his own.
Absolutely without originality there is no man. No man whatever
believes, or can believe, exactly what his grandfather believed: he
enlarges somewhat, by fresh discovery, his view of the Universe, and
consequently his Theorem of the Universe,--which is an _infinite_
Universe, and can never be embraced wholly or finally by any view or
Theorem, in any conceivable enlargement: he enlarges somewhat, I say;
finds somewhat that was credible to his grandfather incredible to him,
false to him, inconsistent with some new thing he has discovered or
observed. It is the history of every man; and in the history of Mankind
we see it summed up into great historical amounts,--revolutions, new
epochs. Dante's Mountain of Purgatory does _not_ stand "in the ocean of
the other Hemisphere," when Columbus has once sailed thither! Men find
no such thing extant in the other Hemisphere. It is not there. It must
cease to be believed to be there. So with all beliefs whatsoever in this
world,--all Systems of Belief, and Systems of Practice that spring from
these.

If we add now the melancholy fact, that when Belief waxes uncertain,
Practice too becomes unsound, and errors, injustices and miseries
everywhere more and more prevail, we shall see material enough for
revolution. At all turns, a man who will _do_ faithfully, needs to
believe firmly. If he have to ask at every turn the world's suffrage; if
he cannot dispense with the world's suffrage, and make his own suffrage
serve, he is a poor eye-servant; the work committed to him will be
_mis_done. Every such man is a daily contributor to the inevitable
downfall. Whatsoever work he does, dishonestly, with an eye to the
outward look of it, is a new offence, parent of new misery to somebody
or other. Offences accumulate till they become insupportable; and are
then violently burst through, cleared off as by explosion. Dante's
sublime Catholicism, incredible now in theory, and defaced still worse
by faithless, doubting and dishonest practice, has to be torn asunder by
a Luther, Shakspeare's noble Feudalism, as beautiful as it once looked
and was, has to end in a French Revolution. The accumulation of offences
is, as we say, too literally _exploded_, blasted asunder volcanically;
and there are long troublous periods, before matters come to a
settlement again.

Surely it were mournful enough to look only at this face of the matter,
and find in all human opinions and arrangements merely the fact that
they were uncertain, temporary, subject to the law of death! At bottom,
it is not so: all death, here too we find, is but of the body, not of
the essence or soul; all destruction, by violent revolution or howsoever
it be, is but new creation on a wider scale. Odinism was _Valor_;
Christianism was _Humility_, a nobler kind of Valor. No thought that
ever dwelt honestly as true in the heart of man but _was_ an honest
insight into God's truth on man's part, and _has_ an essential truth in
it which endures through all changes, an everlasting possession for us
all. And, on the other hand, what a melancholy notion is that, which
has to represent all men, in all countries and times except our own, as
having spent their life in blind condemnable error, mere lost Pagans,
Scandinavians, Mahometans, only that we might have the true ultimate
knowledge! All generations of men were lost and wrong, only that this
present little section of a generation might be saved and right. They
all marched forward there, all generations since the beginning of the
world, like the Russian soldiers into the ditch of Schweidnitz Fort,
only to fill up the ditch with their dead bodies, that we might march
over and take the place! It is an incredible hypothesis.

Such incredible hypothesis we have seen maintained with fierce emphasis;
and this or the other poor individual man, with his sect of individual
men, marching as over the dead bodies of all men, towards sure victory
but when he too, with his hypothesis and ultimate infallible credo, sank
into the ditch, and became a dead body, what was to be said?--Withal, it
is an important fact in the nature of man, that he tends to reckon his
own insight as final, and goes upon it as such. He will always do it,
I suppose, in one or the other way; but it must be in some wider, wiser
way than this. Are not all true men that live, or that ever lived,
soldiers of the same army, enlisted, under Heaven's captaincy, to do
battle against the same enemy, the empire of Darkness and Wrong? Why
should we misknow one another, fight not against the enemy but against
ourselves, from mere difference of uniform? All uniforms shall be good,
so they hold in them true valiant men. All fashions of arms, the Arab
turban and swift scimetar, Thor's strong hammer smiting down _Jotuns_,
shall be welcome. Luther's battle-voice, Dante's march-melody, all
genuine things are with us, not against us. We are all under one
Captain, soldiers of the same host.--Let us now look a little at this
Luther's fighting; what kind of battle it was, and how he comported
himself in it. Luther too was of our spiritual Heroes; a Prophet to his
country and time.


As introductory to the whole, a remark about Idolatry will perhaps be
in place here. One of Mahomet's characteristics, which indeed belongs to
all Prophets, is unlimited implacable zeal against Idolatry. It is the
grand theme of Prophets: Idolatry, the worshipping of dead Idols as
the Divinity, is a thing they cannot away with, but have to denounce
continually, and brand with inexpiable reprobation; it is the chief of
all the sins they see done under the sun. This is worth noting. We will
not enter here into the theological question about Idolatry. Idol is
_Eidolon_, a thing seen, a symbol. It is not God, but a Symbol of God;
and perhaps one may question whether any the most benighted mortal ever
took it for more than a Symbol. I fancy, he did not think that the poor
image his own hands had made _was_ God; but that God was emblemed by
it, that God was in it some way or other. And now in this sense, one may
ask, Is not all worship whatsoever a worship by Symbols, by _eidola_, or
things seen? Whether _seen_, rendered visible as an image or picture to
the bodily eye; or visible only to the inward eye, to the imagination,
to the intellect: this makes a superficial, but no substantial
difference. It is still a Thing Seen, significant of Godhead; an Idol.
The most rigorous Puritan has his Confession of Faith, and intellectual
Representation of Divine things, and worships thereby; thereby is
worship first made possible for him. All creeds, liturgies, religious
forms, conceptions that fitly invest religious feelings, are in this
sense _eidola_, things seen. All worship whatsoever must proceed by
Symbols, by Idols:--we may say, all Idolatry is comparative, and the
worst Idolatry is only _more_ idolatrous.

Where, then, lies the evil of it? Some fatal evil must lie in it, or
earnest prophetic men would not on all hands so reprobate it. Why is
Idolatry so hateful to Prophets? It seems to me as if, in the worship
of those poor wooden symbols, the thing that had chiefly provoked the
Prophet, and filled his inmost soul with indignation and aversion, was
not exactly what suggested itself to his own thought, and came out of
him in words to others, as the thing. The rudest heathen that worshipped
Canopus, or the Caabah Black-Stone, he, as we saw, was superior to the
horse that worshipped nothing at all! Nay there was a kind of lasting
merit in that poor act of his; analogous to what is still meritorious in
Poets: recognition of a certain endless _divine_ beauty and significance
in stars and all natural objects whatsoever. Why should the Prophet
so mercilessly condemn him? The poorest mortal worshipping his Fetish,
while his heart is full of it, may be an object of pity, of contempt and
avoidance, if you will; but cannot surely be an object of hatred. Let
his heart _be_ honestly full of it, the whole space of his dark narrow
mind illuminated thereby; in one word, let him entirely _believe_ in
his Fetish,--it will then be, I should say, if not well with him, yet
as well as it can readily be made to be, and you will leave him alone,
unmolested there.

But here enters the fatal circumstance of Idolatry, that, in the era
of the Prophets, no man's mind _is_ any longer honestly filled with his
Idol or Symbol. Before the Prophet can arise who, seeing through it,
knows it to be mere wood, many men must have begun dimly to doubt that
it was little more. Condemnable Idolatry is _insincere_ Idolatry.
Doubt has eaten out the heart of it: a human soul is seen clinging
spasmodically to an Ark of the Covenant, which it half feels now to have
become a Phantasm. This is one of the balefulest sights. Souls are no
longer filled with their Fetish; but only pretend to be filled, and
would fain make themselves feel that they are filled. "You do not
believe," said Coleridge; "you only believe that you believe." It is the
final scene in all kinds of Worship and Symbolism; the sure symptom
that death is now nigh. It is equivalent to what we call Formulism, and
Worship of Formulas, in these days of ours. No more immoral act can be
done by a human creature; for it is the beginning of all immorality, or
rather it is the impossibility henceforth of any morality whatsoever:
the innermost moral soul is paralyzed thereby, cast into fatal magnetic
sleep! Men are no longer _sincere_ men. I do not wonder that the earnest
man denounces this, brands it, prosecutes it with inextinguishable
aversion. He and it, all good and it, are at death-feud. Blamable
Idolatry is _Cant_, and even what one may call Sincere-Cant.
Sincere-Cant: that is worth thinking of! Every sort of Worship ends with
this phasis.

I find Luther to have been a Breaker of Idols, no less than any other
Prophet. The wooden gods of the Koreish, made of timber and bees-wax,
were not more hateful to Mahomet than Tetzel's Pardons of Sin, made of
sheepskin and ink, were to Luther. It is the property of every Hero, in
every time, in every place and situation, that he come back to reality;
that he stand upon things, and not shows of things. According as he
loves, and venerates, articulately or with deep speechless thought, the
awful realities of things, so will the hollow shows of things, however
regular, decorous, accredited by Koreishes or Conclaves, be intolerable
and detestable to him. Protestantism, too, is the work of a Prophet:
the prophet-work of that sixteenth century. The first stroke of honest
demolition to an ancient thing grown false and idolatrous; preparatory
afar off to a new thing, which shall be true, and authentically divine!

At first view it might seem as if Protestantism were entirely
destructive to this that we call Hero-worship, and represent as the
basis of all possible good, religious or social, for mankind. One
often hears it said that Protestantism introduced a new era, radically
different from any the world had ever seen before: the era of "private
judgment," as they call it. By this revolt against the Pope, every man
became his own Pope; and learnt, among other things, that he must never
trust any Pope, or spiritual Hero-captain, any more! Whereby, is not
spiritual union, all hierarchy and subordination among men, henceforth
an impossibility? So we hear it said.--Now I need not deny that
Protestantism was a revolt against spiritual sovereignties, Popes and
much else. Nay I will grant that English Puritanism, revolt against
earthly sovereignties, was the second act of it; that the enormous
French Revolution itself was the third act, whereby all sovereignties
earthly and spiritual were, as might seem, abolished or made sure
of abolition. Protestantism is the grand root from which our whole
subsequent European History branches out. For the spiritual will always
body itself forth in the temporal history of men; the spiritual is the
beginning of the temporal. And now, sure enough, the cry is everywhere
for Liberty and Equality, Independence and so forth; instead of _Kings_,
Ballot-boxes and Electoral suffrages: it seems made out that any
Hero-sovereign, or loyal obedience of men to a man, in things temporal
or things spiritual, has passed away forever from the world. I should
despair of the world altogether, if so. One of my deepest convictions
is, that it is not so. Without sovereigns, true sovereigns, temporal
and spiritual, I see nothing possible but an anarchy; the hatefulest of
things. But I find Protestantism, whatever anarchic democracy it have
produced, to be the beginning of new genuine sovereignty and order.
I find it to be a revolt against _false_ sovereigns; the painful but
indispensable first preparative for _true_ sovereigns getting place
among us! This is worth explaining a little.

Let us remark, therefore, in the first place, that this of "private
judgment" is, at bottom, not a new thing in the world, but only new at
that epoch of the world. There is nothing generically new or peculiar in
the Reformation; it was a return to Truth and Reality in opposition
to Falsehood and Semblance, as all kinds of Improvement and genuine
Teaching are and have been. Liberty of private judgment, if we will
consider it, must at all times have existed in the world. Dante had not
put out his eyes, or tied shackles on himself; he was at home in
that Catholicism of his, a free-seeing soul in it,--if many a poor
Hogstraten, Tetzel, and Dr. Eck had now become slaves in it. Liberty of
judgment? No iron chain, or outward force of any kind, could ever
compel the soul of a man to believe or to disbelieve: it is his own
indefeasible light, that judgment of his; he will reign, and believe
there, by the grace of God alone! The sorriest sophistical Bellarmine,
preaching sightless faith and passive obedience, must first, by some
kind of _conviction_, have abdicated his right to be convinced. His
"private judgment" indicated that, as the advisablest step _he_ could
take. The right of private judgment will subsist, in full force,
wherever true men subsist. A true man _believes_ with his whole
judgment, with all the illumination and discernment that is in him, and
has always so believed. A false man, only struggling to "believe that
he believes," will naturally manage it in some other way. Protestantism
said to this latter, Woe! and to the former, Well done! At bottom, it
was no new saying; it was a return to all old sayings that ever had been
said. Be genuine, be sincere: that was, once more, the meaning of it.
Mahomet believed with his whole mind; Odin with his whole mind,--he, and
all _true_ Followers of Odinism. They, by their private judgment, had
"judged "--_so_.

And now I venture to assert, that the exercise of private judgment,
faithfully gone about, does by no means necessarily end in selfish
independence, isolation; but rather ends necessarily in the opposite
of that. It is not honest inquiry that makes anarchy; but it is error,
insincerity, half-belief and untruth that make it. A man protesting
against error is on the way towards uniting himself with all men that
believe in truth. There is no communion possible among men who believe
only in hearsays. The heart of each is lying dead; has no power of
sympathy even with _things_,--or he would believe _them_ and not
hearsays. No sympathy even with things; how much less with his
fellow-men! He cannot unite with men; he is an anarchic man. Only in a
world of sincere men is unity possible;--and there, in the long-run, it
is as good as _certain_.

For observe one thing, a thing too often left out of view, or rather
altogether lost sight of in this controversy: That it is not necessary a
man should himself have _discovered_ the truth he is to believe in, and
never so _sincerely_ to believe in. A Great Man, we said, was always
sincere, as the first condition of him. But a man need not be great in
order to be sincere; that is not the necessity of Nature and all Time,
but only of certain corrupt unfortunate epochs of Time. A man can
believe, and make his own, in the most genuine way, what he has received
from another;--and with boundless gratitude to that other! The merit of
_originality_ is not novelty; it is sincerity. The believing man is the
original man; whatsoever he believes, he believes it for himself, not
for another. Every son of Adam can become a sincere man, an original
man, in this sense; no mortal is doomed to be an insincere man. Whole
ages, what we call ages of Faith, are original; all men in them, or the
most of men in them, sincere. These are the great and fruitful ages:
every worker, in all spheres, is a worker not on semblance but on
substance; every work issues in a result: the general sum of such work
is great; for all of it, as genuine, tends towards one goal; all of
it is _additive_, none of it subtractive. There is true union, true
kingship, loyalty, all true and blessed things, so far as the poor Earth
can produce blessedness for men.

Hero-worship? Ah me, that a man be self-subsistent, original, true, or
what we call it, is surely the farthest in the world from indisposing
him to reverence and believe other men's truth! It only disposes,
necessitates and invincibly compels him to disbelieve other men's dead
formulas, hearsays and untruths. A man embraces truth with his eyes
open, and because his eyes are open: does he need to shut them before he
can love his Teacher of truth? He alone can love, with a right gratitude
and genuine loyalty of soul, the Hero-Teacher who has delivered him
out of darkness into light. Is not such a one a true Hero and
Serpent-queller; worthy of all reverence! The black monster, Falsehood,
our one enemy in this world, lies prostrate by his valor; it was he that
conquered the world for us!--See, accordingly, was not Luther himself
reverenced as a true Pope, or Spiritual Father, _being_ verily such?
Napoleon, from amid boundless revolt of Sansculottism, became a King.
Hero-worship never dies, nor can die. Loyalty and Sovereignty are
everlasting in the world:--and there is this in them, that they
are grounded not on garnitures and semblances, but on realities and
sincerities. Not by shutting your eyes, your "private judgment;" no, but
by opening them, and by having something to see! Luther's message was
deposition and abolition to all false Popes and Potentates, but life and
strength, though afar off, to new genuine ones.

All this of Liberty and Equality, Electoral suffrages, Independence and
so forth, we will take, therefore, to be a temporary phenomenon, by no
means a final one. Though likely to last a long time, with sad enough
embroilments for us all, we must welcome it, as the penalty of sins that
are past, the pledge of inestimable benefits that are coming. In all
ways, it behooved men to quit simulacra and return to fact; cost what it
might, that did behoove to be done. With spurious Popes, and Believers
having no private judgment,--quacks pretending to command over
dupes,--what can you do? Misery and mischief only. You cannot make an
association out of insincere men; you cannot build an edifice except
by plummet and level,--at right-angles to one another! In all this wild
revolutionary work, from Protestantism downwards, I see the blessedest
result preparing itself: not abolition of Hero-worship, but rather what
I would call a whole World of Heroes. If Hero mean _sincere man_, why
may not every one of us be a Hero? A world all sincere, a believing
world: the like has been; the like will again be,--cannot help being.
That were the right sort of Worshippers for Heroes: never could the
truly Better be so reverenced as where all were True and Good!--But we
must hasten to Luther and his Life.


Luther's birthplace was Eisleben in Saxony; he came into the world there
on the 10th of November, 1483. It was an accident that gave this honor
to Eisleben. His parents, poor mine-laborers in a village of that
region, named Mohra, had gone to the Eisleben Winter-Fair: in the tumult
of this scene the Frau Luther was taken with travail, found refuge in
some poor house there, and the boy she bore was named MARTIN LUTHER.
Strange enough to reflect upon it. This poor Frau Luther, she had gone
with her husband to make her small merchandisings; perhaps to sell the
lock of yarn she had been spinning, to buy the small winter-necessaries
for her narrow hut or household; in the whole world, that day, there was
not a more entirely unimportant-looking pair of people than this Miner
and his Wife. And yet what were all Emperors, Popes and Potentates, in
comparison? There was born here, once more, a Mighty Man; whose light
was to flame as the beacon over long centuries and epochs of the world;
the whole world and its history was waiting for this man. It is strange,
it is great. It leads us back to another Birth-hour, in a still meaner
environment, Eighteen Hundred years ago,--of which it is fit that we
_say_ nothing, that we think only in silence; for what words are there!
The Age of Miracles past? The Age of Miracles is forever here--!

I find it altogether suitable to Luther's function in this Earth, and
doubtless wisely ordered to that end by the Providence presiding over
him and us and all things, that he was born poor, and brought up poor,
one of the poorest of men. He had to beg, as the school-children
in those times did; singing for alms and bread, from door to door.
Hardship, rigorous Necessity was the poor boy's companion; no man nor no
thing would put on a false face to flatter Martin Luther. Among things,
not among the shows of things, had he to grow. A boy of rude figure, yet
with weak health, with his large greedy soul, full of all faculty and
sensibility, he suffered greatly. But it was his task to get acquainted
with _realities_, and keep acquainted with them, at whatever cost: his
task was to bring the whole world back to reality, for it had dwelt too
long with semblance! A youth nursed up in wintry whirlwinds, in desolate
darkness and difficulty, that he may step forth at last from his stormy
Scandinavia, strong as a true man, as a god: a Christian Odin,--a right
Thor once more, with his thunder-hammer, to smite asunder ugly enough
_Jotuns_ and Giant-monsters!

Perhaps the turning incident of his life, we may fancy, was that death
of his friend Alexis, by lightning, at the gate of Erfurt. Luther had
struggled up through boyhood, better and worse; displaying, in spite
of all hindrances, the largest intellect, eager to learn: his father
judging doubtless that he might promote himself in the world, set him
upon the study of Law. This was the path to rise; Luther, with little
will in it either way, had consented: he was now nineteen years of age.
Alexis and he had been to see the old Luther people at Mansfeldt; were
got back again near Erfurt, when a thunder-storm came on; the bolt
struck Alexis, he fell dead at Luther's feet. What is this Life
of ours?--gone in a moment, burnt up like a scroll, into the blank
Eternity! What are all earthly preferments, Chancellorships, Kingships?
They lie shrunk together--there! The Earth has opened on them; in a
moment they are not, and Eternity is. Luther, struck to the heart,
determined to devote himself to God and God's service alone. In spite
of all dissuasions from his father and others, he became a Monk in the
Augustine Convent at Erfurt.

This was probably the first light-point in the history of Luther, his
purer will now first decisively uttering itself; but, for the present,
it was still as one light-point in an element all of darkness. He says
he was a pious monk, _ich bin ein frommer Monch gewesen_; faithfully,
painfully struggling to work out the truth of this high act of his; but
it was to little purpose. His misery had not lessened; had rather, as it
were, increased into infinitude. The drudgeries he had to do, as novice
in his Convent, all sorts of slave-work, were not his grievance:
the deep earnest soul of the man had fallen into all manner of black
scruples, dubitations; he believed himself likely to die soon, and far
worse than die. One hears with a new interest for poor Luther that, at
this time, he lived in terror of the unspeakable misery; fancied that he
was doomed to eternal reprobation. Was it not the humble sincere nature
of the man? What was he, that he should be raised to Heaven! He that
had known only misery, and mean slavery: the news was too blessed to
be credible. It could not become clear to him how, by fasts, vigils,
formalities and mass-work, a man's soul could be saved. He fell into
the blackest wretchedness; had to wander staggering as on the verge of
bottomless Despair.

It must have been a most blessed discovery, that of an old Latin Bible
which he found in the Erfurt Library about this time. He had never seen
the Book before. It taught him another lesson than that of fasts and
vigils. A brother monk too, of pious experience, was helpful. Luther
learned now that a man was saved not by singing masses, but by the
infinite grace of God: a more credible hypothesis. He gradually got
himself founded, as on the rock. No wonder he should venerate the Bible,
which had brought this blessed help to him. He prized it as the Word of
the Highest must be prized by such a man. He determined to hold by that;
as through life and to death he firmly did.

This, then, is his deliverance from darkness, his final triumph over
darkness, what we call his conversion; for himself the most important of
all epochs. That he should now grow daily in peace and clearness; that,
unfolding now the great talents and virtues implanted in him, he should
rise to importance in his Convent, in his country, and be found more and
more useful in all honest business of life, is a natural result. He was
sent on missions by his Augustine Order, as a man of talent and fidelity
fit to do their business well: the Elector of Saxony, Friedrich, named
the Wise, a truly wise and just prince, had cast his eye on him as a
valuable person; made him Professor in his new University of Wittenberg,
Preacher too at Wittenberg; in both which capacities, as in all duties
he did, this Luther, in the peaceable sphere of common life, was gaining
more and more esteem with all good men.

It was in his twenty-seventh year that he first saw Rome; being sent
thither, as I said, on mission from his Convent. Pope Julius the Second,
and what was going on at Rome, must have filled the mind of Luther
with amazement. He had come as to the Sacred City, throne of God's
High-priest on Earth; and he found it--what we know! Many thoughts it
must have given the man; many which we have no record of, which perhaps
he did not himself know how to utter. This Rome, this scene of false
priests, clothed not in the beauty of holiness, but in far other
vesture, is _false_: but what is it to Luther? A mean man he, how shall
he reform a world? That was far from his thoughts. A humble, solitary
man, why should he at all meddle with the world? It was the task of
quite higher men than he. His business was to guide his own footsteps
wisely through the world. Let him do his own obscure duty in it well;
the rest, horrible and dismal as it looks, is in God's hand, not in his.

It is curious to reflect what might have been the issue, had Roman
Popery happened to pass this Luther by; to go on in its great wasteful
orbit, and not come athwart his little path, and force him to assault
it! Conceivable enough that, in this case, he might have held his peace
about the abuses of Rome; left Providence, and God on high, to deal with
them! A modest quiet man; not prompt he to attack irreverently persons
in authority. His clear task, as I say, was to do his own duty; to
walk wisely in this world of confused wickedness, and save his own soul
alive. But the Roman High-priesthood did come athwart him: afar off
at Wittenberg he, Luther, could not get lived in honesty for it; he
remonstrated, resisted, came to extremity; was struck at, struck again,
and so it came to wager of battle between them! This is worth attending
to in Luther's history. Perhaps no man of so humble, peaceable a
disposition ever filled the world with contention. We cannot but see
that he would have loved privacy, quiet diligence in the shade; that it
was against his will he ever became a notoriety. Notoriety: what would
that do for him? The goal of his march through this world was the
Infinite Heaven; an indubitable goal for him: in a few years, he should
either have attained that, or lost it forever! We will say nothing at
all, I think, of that sorrowfulest of theories, of its being some mean
shopkeeper grudge, of the Augustine Monk against the Dominican,
that first kindled the wrath of Luther, and produced the Protestant
Reformation. We will say to the people who maintain it, if indeed any
such exist now: Get first into the sphere of thought by which it is
so much as possible to judge of Luther, or of any man like Luther,
otherwise than distractedly; we may then begin arguing with you.

The Monk Tetzel, sent out carelessly in the way of trade, by Leo
Tenth,--who merely wanted to raise a little money, and for the rest
seems to have been a Pagan rather than a Christian, so far as he was
anything,--arrived at Wittenberg, and drove his scandalous trade there.
Luther's flock bought Indulgences; in the confessional of his Church,
people pleaded to him that they had already got their sins pardoned.
Luther, if he would not be found wanting at his own post, a false
sluggard and coward at the very centre of the little space of ground
that was his own and no other man's, had to step forth against
Indulgences, and declare aloud that _they_ were a futility and sorrowful
mockery, that no man's sins could be pardoned by _them_. It was the
beginning of the whole Reformation. We know how it went; forward from
this first public challenge of Tetzel, on the last day of October, 1517,
through remonstrance and argument;--spreading ever wider, rising ever
higher; till it became unquenchable, and enveloped all the world.
Luther's heart's desire was to have this grief and other griefs amended;
his thought was still far other than that of introducing separation in
the Church, or revolting against the Pope, Father of Christendom.--The
elegant Pagan Pope cared little about this Monk and his doctrines;
wished, however, to have done with the noise of him: in a space of some
three years, having tried various softer methods, he thought good to end
it by _fire_. He dooms the Monk's writings to be burnt by the hangman,
and his body to be sent bound to Rome,--probably for a similar purpose.
It was the way they had ended with Huss, with Jerome, the century
before. A short argument, fire. Poor Huss: he came to that Constance
Council, with all imaginable promises and safe-conducts; an earnest,
not rebellious kind of man: they laid him instantly in a stone dungeon
"three feet wide, six feet high, seven feet long;" _burnt_ the true
voice of him out of this world; choked it in smoke and fire. That was
_not_ well done!

I, for one, pardon Luther for now altogether revolting against the Pope.
The elegant Pagan, by this fire-decree of his, had kindled into noble
just wrath the bravest heart then living in this world. The bravest, if
also one of the humblest, peaceablest; it was now kindled. These words
of mine, words of truth and soberness, aiming faithfully, as human
inability would allow, to promote God's truth on Earth, and save men's
souls, you, God's vicegerent on earth, answer them by the hangman and
fire? You will burn me and them, for answer to the God's-message they
strove to bring you? You are not God's vicegerent; you are another's
than his, I think! I take your Bull, as an emparchmented Lie, and burn
_it_. _You_ will do what you see good next: this is what I do.--It was
on the 10th of December, 1520, three years after the beginning of the
business, that Luther, "with a great concourse of people," took this
indignant step of burning the Pope's fire-decree "at the Elster-Gate of
Wittenberg." Wittenberg looked on "with shoutings;" the whole world was
looking on. The Pope should not have provoked that "shout"! It was
the shout of the awakening of nations. The quiet German heart, modest,
patient of much, had at length got more than it could bear. Formulism,
Pagan Popeism, and other Falsehood and corrupt Semblance had ruled long
enough: and here once more was a man found who durst tell all men that
God's-world stood not on semblances but on realities; that Life was a
truth, and not a lie!

At bottom, as was said above, we are to consider Luther as a Prophet
Idol-breaker; a bringer-back of men to reality. It is the function of
great men and teachers. Mahomet said, These idols of yours are wood; you
put wax and oil on them, the flies stick on them: they are not God, I
tell you, they are black wood! Luther said to the Pope, This thing of
yours that you call a Pardon of Sins, it is a bit of rag-paper with ink.
It is nothing else; it, and so much like it, is nothing else. God alone
can pardon sins. Popeship, spiritual Fatherhood of God's Church, is that
a vain semblance, of cloth and parchment? It is an awful fact. God's
Church is not a semblance, Heaven and Hell are not semblances. I stand
on this, since you drive me to it. Standing on this, I a poor German
Monk am stronger than you all. I stand solitary, friendless, but on
God's Truth; you with your tiaras, triple-hats, with your treasuries and
armories, thunders spiritual and temporal, stand on the Devil's Lie, and
are not so strong--!

The Diet of Worms, Luther's appearance there on the 17th of April, 1521,
may be considered as the greatest scene in Modern European History; the
point, indeed, from which the whole subsequent history of civilization
takes its rise. After multiplied negotiations, disputations, it had
come to this. The young Emperor Charles Fifth, with all the Princes
of Germany, Papal nuncios, dignitaries spiritual and temporal, are
assembled there: Luther is to appear and answer for himself, whether he
will recant or not. The world's pomp and power sits there on this
hand: on that, stands up for God's Truth, one man, the poor miner Hans
Luther's Son. Friends had reminded him of Huss, advised him not to go;
he would not be advised. A large company of friends rode out to meet
him, with still more earnest warnings; he answered, "Were there as many
Devils in Worms as there are roof-tiles, I would on." The people, on
the morrow, as he went to the Hall of the Diet, crowded the windows and
house-tops, some of them calling out to him, in solemn words, not to
recant: "Whosoever denieth me before men!" they cried to him,--as in
a kind of solemn petition and adjuration. Was it not in reality our
petition too, the petition of the whole world, lying in dark bondage
of soul, paralyzed under a black spectral Nightmare and triple-hatted
Chimera, calling itself Father in God, and what not: "Free us; it rests
with thee; desert us not!"

Luther did not desert us. His speech, of two hours, distinguished itself
by its respectful, wise and honest tone; submissive to whatsoever could
lawfully claim submission, not submissive to any more than that. His
writings, he said, were partly his own, partly derived from the Word of
God. As to what was his own, human infirmity entered into it; unguarded
anger, blindness, many things doubtless which it were a blessing for him
could he abolish altogether. But as to what stood on sound truth and
the Word of God, he could not recant it. How could he? "Confute me," he
concluded, "by proofs of Scripture, or else by plain just arguments: I
cannot recant otherwise. For it is neither safe nor prudent to do aught
against conscience. Here stand I; I can do no other: God assist me!"--It
is, as we say, the greatest moment in the Modern History of Men. English
Puritanism, England and its Parliaments, Americas, and vast work these
two centuries; French Revolution, Europe and its work everywhere at
present: the germ of it all lay there: had Luther in that moment done
other, it had all been otherwise! The European World was asking him:
Am I to sink ever lower into falsehood, stagnant putrescence, loathsome
accursed death; or, with whatever paroxysm, to cast the falsehoods out
of me, and be cured and live?--


Great wars, contentions and disunion followed out of this Reformation;
which last down to our day, and are yet far from ended. Great talk and
crimination has been made about these. They are lamentable, undeniable;
but after all, what has Luther or his cause to do with them? It seems
strange reasoning to charge the Reformation with all this. When Hercules
turned the purifying river into King Augeas's stables, I have no doubt
the confusion that resulted was considerable all around: but I think
it was not Hercules's blame; it was some other's blame! The Reformation
might bring what results it liked when it came, but the Reformation
simply could not help coming. To all Popes and Popes' advocates,
expostulating, lamenting and accusing, the answer of the world is: Once
for all, your Popehood has become untrue. No matter how good it was, how
good you say it is, we cannot believe it; the light of our whole mind,
given us to walk by from Heaven above, finds it henceforth a thing
unbelievable. We will not believe it, we will not try to believe it,--we
dare not! The thing is _untrue_; we were traitors against the Giver
of all Truth, if we durst pretend to think it true. Away with it; let
whatsoever likes come in the place of it: with _it_ we can have no
farther trade!--Luther and his Protestantism is not responsible
for wars; the false Simulacra that forced him to protest, they are
responsible. Luther did what every man that God has made has not only
the right, but lies under the sacred duty, to do: answered a Falsehood
when it questioned him, Dost thou believe me?--No!--At what cost soever,
without counting of costs, this thing behooved to be done. Union,
organization spiritual and material, a far nobler than any Popedom or
Feudalism in their truest days, I never doubt, is coming for the world;
sure to come. But on Fact alone, not on Semblance and Simulacrum, will
it be able either to come, or to stand when come. With union grounded
on falsehood, and ordering us to speak and act lies, we will not have
anything to do. Peace? A brutal lethargy is peaceable, the noisome grave
is peaceable. We hope for a living peace, not a dead one!

And yet, in prizing justly the indispensable blessings of the New, let
us not be unjust to the Old. The Old was true, if it no longer is. In
Dante's days it needed no sophistry, self-blinding or other dishonesty,
to get itself reckoned true. It was good then; nay there is in the soul
of it a deathless good. The cry of "No Popery" is foolish enough in
these days. The speculation that Popery is on the increase, building new
chapels and so forth, may pass for one of the idlest ever started. Very
curious: to count up a few Popish chapels, listen to a few Protestant
logic-choppings,--to much dull-droning drowsy inanity that still calls
itself Protestant, and say: See, Protestantism is _dead_; Popeism is
more alive than it, will be alive after it!--Drowsy inanities, not a
few, that call themselves Protestant are dead; but _Protestantism_ has
not died yet, that I hear of! Protestantism, if we will look, has in
these days produced its Goethe, its Napoleon; German Literature and the
French Revolution; rather considerable signs of life! Nay, at bottom,
what else is alive _but_ Protestantism? The life of most else that one
meets is a galvanic one merely,--not a pleasant, not a lasting sort of
life!

Popery can build new chapels; welcome to do so, to all lengths. Popery
cannot come back, any more than Paganism can,--_which_ also still
lingers in some countries. But, indeed, it is with these things, as with
the ebbing of the sea: you look at the waves oscillating hither, thither
on the beach; for _minutes_ you cannot tell how it is going; look in
half an hour where it is,--look in half a century where your Popehood
is! Alas, would there were no greater danger to our Europe than the poor
old Pope's revival! Thor may as soon try to revive.--And withal this
oscillation has a meaning. The poor old Popehood will not die away
entirely, as Thor has done, for some time yet; nor ought it. We may say,
the Old never dies till this happen, Till all the soul of good that was
in it have got itself transfused into the practical New. While a good
work remains capable of being done by the Romish form; or, what is
inclusive of all, while a pious _life_ remains capable of being led
by it, just so long, if we consider, will this or the other human soul
adopt it, go about as a living witness of it. So long it will obtrude
itself on the eye of us who reject it, till we in our practice too have
appropriated whatsoever of truth was in it. Then, but also not till
then, it will have no charm more for any man. It lasts here for a
purpose. Let it last as long as it can.--


Of Luther I will add now, in reference to all these wars and bloodshed,
the noticeable fact that none of them began so long as he continued
living. The controversy did not get to fighting so long as he was there.
To me it is proof of his greatness in all senses, this fact. How seldom
do we find a man that has stirred up some vast commotion, who does
not himself perish, swept away in it! Such is the usual course of
revolutionists. Luther continued, in a good degree, sovereign of this
greatest revolution; all Protestants, of what rank or function soever,
looking much to him for guidance: and he held it peaceable, continued
firm at the centre of it. A man to do this must have a kingly faculty:
he must have the gift to discern at all turns where the true heart of
the matter lies, and to plant himself courageously on that, as a strong
true man, that other true men may rally round him there. He will not
continue leader of men otherwise. Luther's clear deep force of judgment,
his force of all sorts, of _silence_, of tolerance and moderation, among
others, are very notable in these circumstances.

Tolerance, I say; a very genuine kind of tolerance: he distinguishes
what is essential, and what is not; the unessential may go very much as
it will. A complaint comes to him that such and such a Reformed Preacher
"will not preach without a cassock." Well, answers Luther, what harm
will a cassock do the man? "Let him have a cassock to preach in; let
him have three cassocks if he find benefit in them!" His conduct in the
matter of Karlstadt's wild image-breaking; of the Anabaptists; of the
Peasants' War, shows a noble strength, very different from spasmodic
violence. With sure prompt insight he discriminates what is what: a
strong just man, he speaks forth what is the wise course, and all men
follow him in that. Luther's Written Works give similar testimony of
him. The dialect of these speculations is now grown obsolete for us;
but one still reads them with a singular attraction. And indeed the mere
grammatical diction is still legible enough; Luther's merit in literary
history is of the greatest: his dialect became the language of all
writing. They are not well written, these Four-and-twenty Quartos of
his; written hastily, with quite other than literary objects. But in no
Books have I found a more robust, genuine, I will say noble faculty of
a man than in these. A rugged honesty, homeliness, simplicity; a rugged
sterling sense and strength. He dashes out illumination from him; his
smiting idiomatic phrases seem to cleave into the very secret of the
matter. Good humor too, nay tender affection, nobleness and depth: this
man could have been a Poet too! He had to _work_ an Epic Poem, not
write one. I call him a great Thinker; as indeed his greatness of heart
already betokens that.

Richter says of Luther's words, "His words are half-battles." They may
be called so. The essential quality of him was, that he could fight and
conquer; that he was a right piece of human Valor. No more valiant man,
no mortal heart to be called _braver_, that one has record of, ever
lived in that Teutonic Kindred, whose character is valor. His defiance
of the "Devils" in Worms was not a mere boast, as the like might be if
now spoken. It was a faith of Luther's that there were Devils, spiritual
denizens of the Pit, continually besetting men. Many times, in his
writings, this turns up; and a most small sneer has been grounded on it
by some. In the room of the Wartburg where he sat translating the Bible,
they still show you a black spot on the wall; the strange memorial of
one of these conflicts. Luther sat translating one of the Psalms; he was
worn down with long labor, with sickness, abstinence from food: there
rose before him some hideous indefinable Image, which he took for the
Evil One, to forbid his work: Luther started up, with fiend-defiance;
flung his inkstand at the spectre, and it disappeared! The spot still
remains there; a curious monument of several things. Any apothecary's
apprentice can now tell us what we are to think of this apparition, in
a scientific sense: but the man's heart that dare rise defiant, face to
face, against Hell itself, can give no higher proof of fearlessness.
The thing he will quail before exists not on this Earth or under
it.--Fearless enough! "The Devil is aware," writes he on one occasion,
"that this does not proceed out of fear in me. I have seen and defied
innumerable Devils. Duke George," of Leipzig, a great enemy of his,
"Duke George is not equal to one Devil,"--far short of a Devil! "If I
had business at Leipzig, I would ride into Leipzig, though it rained
Duke Georges for nine days running." What a reservoir of Dukes to ride
into--!

At the same time, they err greatly who imagine that this man's courage
was ferocity, mere coarse disobedient obstinacy and savagery, as many
do. Far from that. There may be an absence of fear which arises from the
absence of thought or affection, from the presence of hatred and stupid
fury. We do not value the courage of the tiger highly! With Luther it
was far otherwise; no accusation could be more unjust than this of mere
ferocious violence brought against him. A most gentle heart withal, full
of pity and love, as indeed the truly valiant heart ever is. The tiger
before a _stronger_ foe--flies: the tiger is not what we call valiant,
only fierce and cruel. I know few things more touching than those soft
breathings of affection, soft as a child's or a mother's, in this great
wild heart of Luther. So honest, unadulterated with any cant; homely,
rude in their utterance; pure as water welling from the rock. What, in
fact, was all that down-pressed mood of despair and reprobation,
which we saw in his youth, but the outcome of pre-eminent thoughtful
gentleness, affections too keen and fine? It is the course such men as
the poor Poet Cowper fall into. Luther to a slight observer might have
seemed a timid, weak man; modesty, affectionate shrinking tenderness the
chief distinction of him. It is a noble valor which is roused in a heart
like this, once stirred up into defiance, all kindled into a heavenly
blaze.

In Luther's _Table-Talk_, a posthumous Book of anecdotes and sayings
collected by his friends, the most interesting now of all the Books
proceeding from him, we have many beautiful unconscious displays of the
man, and what sort of nature he had. His behavior at the death-bed of
his little Daughter, so still, so great and loving, is among the most
affecting things. He is resigned that his little Magdalene should die,
yet longs inexpressibly that she might live;--follows, in awe-struck
thought, the flight of her little soul through those unknown realms.
Awe-struck; most heartfelt, we can see; and sincere,--for after all
dogmatic creeds and articles, he feels what nothing it is that we know,
or can know: His little Magdalene shall be with God, as God wills; for
Luther too that is all; _Islam_ is all.

Once, he looks out from his solitary Patmos, the Castle of Coburg, in
the middle of the night: The great vault of Immensity, long flights of
clouds sailing through it,--dumb, gaunt, huge:--who supports all that?
"None ever saw the pillars of it; yet it is supported." God supports it.
We must know that God is great, that God is good; and trust, where
we cannot see.--Returning home from Leipzig once, he is struck by the
beauty of the harvest-fields: How it stands, that golden yellow corn,
on its fair taper stem, its golden head bent, all rich and waving
there,--the meek Earth, at God's kind bidding, has produced it once
again; the bread of man!--In the garden at Wittenberg one evening at
sunset, a little bird has perched for the night: That little bird, says
Luther, above it are the stars and deep Heaven of worlds; yet it has
folded its little wings; gone trustfully to rest there as in its home:
the Maker of it has given it too a home!--Neither are mirthful turns
wanting: there is a great free human heart in this man. The common
speech of him has a rugged nobleness, idiomatic, expressive, genuine;
gleams here and there with beautiful poetic tints. One feels him to be
a great brother man. His love of Music, indeed, is not this, as it were,
the summary of all these affections in him? Many a wild unutterability
he spoke forth from him in the tones of his flute. The Devils fled from
his flute, he says. Death-defiance on the one hand, and such love of
music on the other; I could call these the two opposite poles of a great
soul; between these two all great things had room.

Luther's face is to me expressive of him; in Kranach's best portraits
I find the true Luther. A rude plebeian face; with its huge crag-like
brows and bones, the emblem of rugged energy; at first, almost a
repulsive face. Yet in the eyes especially there is a wild silent
sorrow; an unnamable melancholy, the element of all gentle and fine
affections; giving to the rest the true stamp of nobleness. Laughter was
in this Luther, as we said; but tears also were there. Tears also were
appointed him; tears and hard toil. The basis of his life was Sadness,
Earnestness. In his latter days, after all triumphs and victories, he
expresses himself heartily weary of living; he considers that God alone
can and will regulate the course things are taking, and that perhaps the
Day of Judgment is not far. As for him, he longs for one thing: that
God would release him from his labor, and let him depart and be at rest.
They understand little of the man who cite this in discredit of him!--I
will call this Luther a true Great Man; great in intellect, in courage,
affection and integrity; one of our most lovable and precious men.
Great, not as a hewn obelisk; but as an Alpine mountain,--so simple,
honest, spontaneous, not setting up to be great at all; there for quite
another purpose than being great! Ah yes, unsubduable granite, piercing
far and wide into the Heavens; yet in the clefts of it fountains, green
beautiful valleys with flowers! A right Spiritual Hero and Prophet; once
more, a true Son of Nature and Fact, for whom these centuries, and many
that are to come yet, will be thankful to Heaven.


The most interesting phasis which the Reformation anywhere assumes,
especially for us English, is that of Puritanism. In Luther's own
country Protestantism soon dwindled into a rather barren affair: not a
religion or faith, but rather now a theological jangling of argument,
the proper seat of it not the heart; the essence of it sceptical
contention: which indeed has jangled more and more, down to
Voltaireism itself,--through Gustavus-Adolphus contentions onwards to
French-Revolution ones! But in our Island there arose a Puritanism,
which even got itself established as a Presbyterianism and National
Church among the Scotch; which came forth as a real business of the
heart; and has produced in the world very notable fruit. In some senses,
one may say it is the only phasis of Protestantism that ever got to the
rank of being a Faith, a true heart-communication with Heaven, and of
exhibiting itself in History as such. We must spare a few words for
Knox; himself a brave and remarkable man; but still more important as
Chief Priest and Founder, which one may consider him to be, of the Faith
that became Scotland's, New England's, Oliver Cromwell's. History will
have something to say about this, for some time to come!

We may censure Puritanism as we please; and no one of us, I suppose,
but would find it a very rough defective thing. But we, and all men, may
understand that it was a genuine thing; for Nature has adopted it,
and it has grown, and grows. I say sometimes, that all goes by
wager-of-battle in this world; that _strength_, well understood, is
the measure of all worth. Give a thing time; if it can succeed, it is a
right thing. Look now at American Saxondom; and at that little Fact of
the sailing of the Mayflower, two hundred years ago, from Delft Haven in
Holland! Were we of open sense as the Greeks were, we had found a Poem
here; one of Nature's own Poems, such as she writes in broad facts over
great continents. For it was properly the beginning of America: there
were straggling settlers in America before, some material as of a body
was there; but the soul of it was first this. These poor men, driven
out of their own country, not able well to live in Holland, determine
on settling in the New World. Black untamed forests are there, and wild
savage creatures; but not so cruel as Star-chamber hangmen. They
thought the Earth would yield them food, if they tilled honestly; the
everlasting heaven would stretch, there too, overhead; they should be
left in peace, to prepare for Eternity by living well in this world of
Time; worshipping in what they thought the true, not the idolatrous way.
They clubbed their small means together; hired a ship, the little ship
Mayflower, and made ready to set sail.

In Neal's _History of the Puritans_ [Neal (London, 1755), i. 490] is an
account of the ceremony of their departure: solemnity, we might call it
rather, for it was a real act of worship. Their minister went down with
them to the beach, and their brethren whom they were to leave behind;
all joined in solemn prayer, That God would have pity on His poor
children, and go with them into that waste wilderness, for He also had
made that, He was there also as well as here.--Hah! These men, I think,
had a work! The weak thing, weaker than a child, becomes strong one day,
if it be a true thing. Puritanism was only despicable, laughable then;
but nobody can manage to laugh at it now. Puritanism has got weapons and
sinews; it has firearms, war-navies; it has cunning in its ten fingers,
strength in its right arm; it can steer ships, fell forests, remove
mountains;--it is one of the strongest things under this sun at present!

In the history of Scotland, too, I can find properly but one epoch:
we may say, it contains nothing of world-interest at all but this
Reformation by Knox. A poor barren country, full of continual broils,
dissensions, massacrings; a people in the last state of rudeness and
destitution; little better perhaps than Ireland at this day. Hungry
fierce barons, not so much as able to form any arrangement with each
other _how to divide_ what they fleeced from these poor drudges; but
obliged, as the Colombian Republics are at this day, to make of every
alteration a revolution; no way of changing a ministry but by hanging
the old ministers on gibbets: this is a historical spectacle of no very
singular significance! "Bravery" enough, I doubt not; fierce fighting in
abundance: but not braver or fiercer than that of their old Scandinavian
Sea-king ancestors; _whose_ exploits we have not found worth dwelling
on! It is a country as yet without a soul: nothing developed in it but
what is rude, external, semi-animal. And now at the Reformation, the
internal life is kindled, as it were, under the ribs of this outward
material death. A cause, the noblest of causes kindles itself, like a
beacon set on high; high as Heaven, yet attainable from Earth;--whereby
the meanest man becomes not a Citizen only, but a Member of Christ's
visible Church; a veritable Hero, if he prove a true man!

Well; this is what I mean by a whole "nation of heroes;" a _believing_
nation. There needs not a great soul to make a hero; there needs a
god-created soul which will be true to its origin; that will be a great
soul! The like has been seen, we find. The like will be again seen,
under wider forms than the Presbyterian: there can be no lasting good
done till then.--Impossible! say some. Possible? Has it not _been_, in
this world, as a practiced fact? Did Hero-worship fail in Knox's case?
Or are we made of other clay now? Did the Westminster Confession of
Faith add some new property to the soul of man? God made the soul
of man. He did not doom any soul of man to live as a Hypothesis and
Hearsay, in a world filled with such, and with the fatal work and fruit
of such--!

But to return: This that Knox did for his Nation, I say, we may really
call a resurrection as from death. It was not a smooth business; but it
was welcome surely, and cheap at that price, had it been far rougher. On
the whole, cheap at any price!--as life is. The people began to _live_:
they needed first of all to do that, at what cost and costs soever.
Scotch Literature and Thought, Scotch Industry; James Watt, David Hume,
Walter Scott, Robert Burns: I find Knox and the Reformation acting in
the heart's core of every one of these persons and phenomena; I find
that without the Reformation they would not have been. Or what of
Scotland? The Puritanism of Scotland became that of England, of
New England. A tumult in the High Church of Edinburgh spread into a
universal battle and struggle over all these realms;--there came
out, after fifty years' struggling, what we all call the "_Glorious_
Revolution" a _Habeas Corpus_ Act, Free Parliaments, and much
else!--Alas, is it not too true what we said, That many men in the van
do always, like Russian soldiers, march into the ditch of Schweidnitz,
and fill it up with their dead bodies, that the rear may pass over them
dry-shod, and gain the honor? How many earnest rugged Cromwells, Knoxes,
poor Peasant Covenanters, wrestling, battling for very life, in rough
miry places, have to struggle, and suffer, and fall, greatly censured,
_bemired_,--before a beautiful Revolution of Eighty-eight can step
over them in official pumps and silk-stockings, with universal
three-times-three!

It seems to me hard measure that this Scottish man, now after three
hundred years, should have to plead like a culprit before the world;
intrinsically for having been, in such way as it was then possible to
be, the bravest of all Scotchmen! Had he been a poor Half-and-half, he
could have crouched into the corner, like so many others; Scotland
had not been delivered; and Knox had been without blame. He is the one
Scotchman to whom, of all others, his country and the world owe a debt.
He has to plead that Scotland would forgive him for having been worth to
it any million "unblamable" Scotchmen that need no forgiveness! He bared
his breast to the battle; had to row in French galleys, wander forlorn
in exile, in clouds and storms; was censured, shot at through his
windows; had a right sore fighting life: if this world were his place of
recompense, he had made but a bad venture of it. I cannot apologize for
Knox. To him it is very indifferent, these two hundred and fifty years
or more, what men say of him. But we, having got above all those details
of his battle, and living now in clearness on the fruits of his victory,
we, for our own sake, ought to look through the rumors and controversies
enveloping the man, into the man himself.

For one thing, I will remark that this post of Prophet to his Nation was
not of his seeking; Knox had lived forty years quietly obscure, before
he became conspicuous. He was the son of poor parents; had got a college
education; become a Priest; adopted the Reformation, and seemed well
content to guide his own steps by the light of it, nowise unduly
intruding it on others. He had lived as Tutor in gentlemen's families;
preaching when any body of persons wished to hear his doctrine: resolute
he to walk by the truth, and speak the truth when called to do it;
not ambitious of more; not fancying himself capable of more. In this
entirely obscure way he had reached the age of forty; was with the small
body of Reformers who were standing siege in St. Andrew's Castle,--when
one day in their chapel, the Preacher after finishing his exhortation to
these fighters in the forlorn hope, said suddenly, That there ought to
be other speakers, that all men who had a priest's heart and gift in
them ought now to speak;--which gifts and heart one of their own number,
John Knox the name of him, had: Had he not? said the Preacher, appealing
to all the audience: what then is _his_ duty? The people answered
affirmatively; it was a criminal forsaking of his post, if such a man
held the word that was in him silent. Poor Knox was obliged to stand
up; he attempted to reply; he could say no word;--burst into a flood
of tears, and ran out. It is worth remembering, that scene. He was in
grievous trouble for some days. He felt what a small faculty was his
for this great work. He felt what a baptism he was called to be baptized
withal. He "burst into tears."

Our primary characteristic of a Hero, that he is sincere, applies
emphatically to Knox. It is not denied anywhere that this, whatever
might be his other qualities or faults, is among the truest of men. With
a singular instinct he holds to the truth and fact; the truth alone is
there for him, the rest a mere shadow and deceptive nonentity. However
feeble, forlorn the reality may seem, on that and that only _can_ he
take his stand. In the Galleys of the River Loire, whither Knox and the
others, after their Castle of St. Andrew's was taken, had been sent as
Galley-slaves,--some officer or priest, one day, presented them an Image
of the Virgin Mother, requiring that they, the blasphemous heretics,
should do it reverence. Mother? Mother of God? said Knox, when the turn
came to him: This is no Mother of God: this is "_a pented bredd_,"--_a_
piece of wood, I tell you, with paint on it! She is fitter for swimming,
I think, than for being worshipped, added Knox; and flung the thing
into the river. It was not very cheap jesting there: but come of it what
might, this thing to Knox was and must continue nothing other than the
real truth; it was a _pented bredd_: worship it he would not.

He told his fellow-prisoners, in this darkest time, to be of courage;
the Cause they had was the true one, and must and would prosper; the
whole world could not put it down. Reality is of God's making; it is
alone strong. How many _pented bredds_, pretending to be real, are
fitter to swim than to be worshipped!--This Knox cannot live but by
fact: he clings to reality as the shipwrecked sailor to the cliff. He is
an instance to us how a man, by sincerity itself, becomes heroic: it
is the grand gift he has. We find in Knox a good honest intellectual
talent, no transcendent one;--a narrow, inconsiderable man, as compared
with Luther: but in heartfelt instinctive adherence to truth, in
_sincerity_, as we say, he has no superior; nay, one might ask, What
equal he has? The heart of him is of the true Prophet cast. "He lies
there," said the Earl of Morton at his grave, "who never feared the
face of man." He resembles, more than any of the moderns, an Old-Hebrew
Prophet. The same inflexibility, intolerance, rigid narrow-looking
adherence to God's truth, stern rebuke in the name of God to all that
forsake truth: an Old-Hebrew Prophet in the guise of an Edinburgh
Minister of the Sixteenth Century. We are to take him for that; not
require him to be other.

Knox's conduct to Queen Mary, the harsh visits he used to make in her
own palace, to reprove her there, have been much commented upon. Such
cruelty, such coarseness fills us with indignation. On reading the
actual narrative of the business, what Knox said, and what Knox meant,
I must say one's tragic feeling is rather disappointed. They are not
so coarse, these speeches; they seem to me about as fine as the
circumstances would permit! Knox was not there to do the courtier; he
came on another errand. Whoever, reading these colloquies of his with
the Queen, thinks they are vulgar insolences of a plebeian priest to a
delicate high lady, mistakes the purport and essence of them altogether.
It was unfortunately not possible to be polite with the Queen of
Scotland, unless one proved untrue to the Nation and Cause of Scotland.
A man who did not wish to see the land of his birth made a hunting-field
for intriguing ambitious Guises, and the Cause of God trampled underfoot
of Falsehoods, Formulas and the Devil's Cause, had no method of making
himself agreeable! "Better that women weep," said Morton, "than
that bearded men be forced to weep." Knox was the constitutional
opposition-party in Scotland: the Nobles of the country, called by their
station to take that post, were not found in it; Knox had to go, or no
one. The hapless Queen;--but the still more hapless Country, if _she_
were made happy! Mary herself was not without sharpness enough, among
her other qualities: "Who are you," said she once, "that presume to
school the nobles and sovereign of this realm?"--"Madam, a subject born
within the same," answered he. Reasonably answered! If the "subject"
have truth to speak, it is not the "subject's" footing that will fail
him here.--

We blame Knox for his intolerance. Well, surely it is good that each of
us be as tolerant as possible. Yet, at bottom, after all the talk there
is and has been about it, what is tolerance? Tolerance has to tolerate
the unessential; and to see well what that is. Tolerance has to be
noble, measured, just in its very wrath, when it can tolerate no longer.
But, on the whole, we are not altogether here to tolerate! We are
here to resist, to control and vanquish withal. We do not "tolerate"
Falsehoods, Thieveries, Iniquities, when they fasten on us; we say to
them, Thou art false, thou art not tolerable! We are here to extinguish
Falsehoods, and put an end to them, in some wise way! I will not quarrel
so much with the way; the doing of the thing is our great concern. In
this sense Knox was, full surely, intolerant.

A man sent to row in French Galleys, and such like, for teaching the
Truth in his own land, cannot always be in the mildest humor! I am not
prepared to say that Knox had a soft temper; nor do I know that he had
what we call an ill temper. An ill nature he decidedly had not. Kind
honest affections dwelt in the much-enduring, hard-worn, ever-battling
man. That he _could_ rebuke Queens, and had such weight among those
proud turbulent Nobles, proud enough whatever else they were; and could
maintain to the end a kind of virtual Presidency and Sovereignty in that
wild realm, he who was only "a subject born within the same:" this of
itself will prove to us that he was found, close at hand, to be no mean
acrid man; but at heart a healthful, strong, sagacious man. Such alone
can bear rule in that kind. They blame him for pulling down cathedrals,
and so forth, as if he were a seditious rioting demagogue: precisely the
reverse is seen to be the fact, in regard to cathedrals and the rest
of it, if we examine! Knox wanted no pulling down of stone edifices; he
wanted leprosy and darkness to be thrown out of the lives of men. Tumult
was not his element; it was the tragic feature of his life that he was
forced to dwell so much in that. Every such man is the born enemy of
Disorder; hates to be in it: but what then? Smooth Falsehood is not
Order; it is the general sum-total of Disorder. Order is _Truth_,--each
thing standing on the basis that belongs to it: Order and Falsehood
cannot subsist together.

Withal, unexpectedly enough, this Knox has a vein of drollery in him;
which I like much, in combination with his other qualities. He has a
true eye for the ridiculous. His _History_, with its rough earnestness,
is curiously enlivened with this. When the two Prelates, entering
Glasgow Cathedral, quarrel about precedence; march rapidly up, take
to hustling one another, twitching one another's rochets, and at last
flourishing their crosiers like quarter-staves, it is a great sight for
him every way! Not mockery, scorn, bitterness alone; though there is
enough of that too. But a true, loving, illuminating laugh mounts up
over the earnest visage; not a loud laugh; you would say, a laugh in
the _eyes_ most of all. An honest-hearted, brotherly man; brother to the
high, brother also to the low; sincere in his sympathy with both. He had
his pipe of Bourdeaux too, we find, in that old Edinburgh house of his;
a cheery social man, with faces that loved him! They go far wrong who
think this Knox was a gloomy, spasmodic, shrieking fanatic. Not at all:
he is one of the solidest of men. Practical, cautious-hopeful, patient;
a most shrewd, observing, quietly discerning man. In fact, he has very
much the type of character we assign to the Scotch at present: a certain
sardonic taciturnity is in him; insight enough; and a stouter heart than
he himself knows of. He has the power of holding his peace over many
things which do not vitally concern him,--"They? what are they?" But the
thing which does vitally concern him, that thing he will speak of; and
in a tone the whole world shall be made to hear: all the more emphatic
for his long silence.

This Prophet of the Scotch is to me no hateful man!--He had a sore fight
of an existence; wrestling with Popes and Principalities; in defeat,
contention, life-long struggle; rowing as a galley-slave, wandering as
an exile. A sore fight: but he won it. "Have you hope?" they asked him
in his last moment, when he could no longer speak. He lifted his finger,
"pointed upwards with his finger," and so died. Honor to him! His works
have not died. The letter of his work dies, as of all men's; but the
spirit of it never.

One word more as to the letter of Knox's work. The unforgivable offence
in him is, that he wished to set up Priests over the head of Kings. In
other words, he strove to make the Government of Scotland a _Theocracy_.
This indeed is properly the sum of his offences, the essential sin;
for which what pardon can there be? It is most true, he did, at bottom,
consciously or unconsciously, mean a Theocracy, or Government of God. He
did mean that Kings and Prime Ministers, and all manner of persons, in
public or private, diplomatizing or whatever else they might be doing,
should walk according to the Gospel of Christ, and understand that this
was their Law, supreme over all laws. He hoped once to see such a thing
realized; and the Petition, _Thy Kingdom come_, no longer an empty word.
He was sore grieved when he saw greedy worldly Barons clutch hold of
the Church's property; when he expostulated that it was not secular
property, that it was spiritual property, and should be turned to _true_
churchly uses, education, schools, worship;--and the Regent Murray had
to answer, with a shrug of the shoulders, "It is a devout imagination!"
This was Knox's scheme of right and truth; this he zealously endeavored
after, to realize it. If we think his scheme of truth was too narrow,
was not true, we may rejoice that he could not realize it; that it
remained after two centuries of effort, unrealizable, and is a "devout
imagination" still. But how shall we blame _him_ for struggling to
realize it? Theocracy, Government of God, is precisely the thing to
be struggled for! All Prophets, zealous Priests, are there for that
purpose. Hildebrand wished a Theocracy; Cromwell wished it, fought for
it; Mahomet attained it. Nay, is it not what all zealous men, whether
called Priests, Prophets, or whatsoever else called, do essentially
wish, and must wish? That right and truth, or God's Law, reign supreme
among men, this is the Heavenly Ideal (well named in Knox's time,
and namable in all times, a revealed "Will of God") towards which the
Reformer will insist that all be more and more approximated. All true
Reformers, as I said, are by the nature of them Priests, and strive for
a Theocracy.

How far such Ideals can ever be introduced into Practice, and at what
point our impatience with their non-introduction ought to begin,
is always a question. I think we may say safely, Let them introduce
themselves as far as they can contrive to do it! If they are the true
faith of men, all men ought to be more or less impatient always where
they are not found introduced. There will never be wanting Regent
Murrays enough to shrug their shoulders, and say, "A devout
imagination!" We will praise the Hero-priest rather, who does what is in
him to bring them in; and wears out, in toil, calumny, contradiction,
a noble life, to make a God's Kingdom of this Earth. The Earth will not
become too godlike!




LECTURE V. THE HERO AS MAN OF LETTERS. JOHNSON, ROUSSEAU, BURNS.

[May 19, 1840.]

Hero-Gods, Prophets, Poets, Priests are forms of Heroism that belong to
the old ages, make their appearance in the remotest times; some of
them have ceased to be possible long since, and cannot any more show
themselves in this world. The Hero as _Man of Letters_, again, of which
class we are to speak to-day, is altogether a product of these new ages;
and so long as the wondrous art of _Writing_, or of Ready-writing which
we call _Printing_, subsists, he may be expected to continue, as one
of the main forms of Heroism for all future ages. He is, in various
respects, a very singular phenomenon.

He is new, I say; he has hardly lasted above a century in the world yet.
Never, till about a hundred years ago, was there seen any figure of a
Great Soul living apart in that anomalous manner; endeavoring to speak
forth the inspiration that was in him by Printed Books, and find place
and subsistence by what the world would please to give him for doing
that. Much had been sold and bought, and left to make its own bargain
in the market-place; but the inspired wisdom of a Heroic Soul never till
then, in that naked manner. He, with his copy-rights and copy-wrongs,
in his squalid garret, in his rusty coat; ruling (for this is what he
does), from his grave, after death, whole nations and generations who
would, or would not, give him bread while living,--is a rather curious
spectacle! Few shapes of Heroism can be more unexpected.

Alas, the Hero from of old has had to cramp himself into strange shapes:
the world knows not well at any time what to do with him, so foreign is
his aspect in the world! It seemed absurd to us, that men, in their rude
admiration, should take some wise great Odin for a god, and worship him
as such; some wise great Mahomet for one god-inspired, and religiously
follow his Law for twelve centuries: but that a wise great Johnson, a
Burns, a Rousseau, should be taken for some idle nondescript, extant in
the world to amuse idleness, and have a few coins and applauses thrown
him, that he might live thereby; _this_ perhaps, as before hinted, will
one day seem a still absurder phasis of things!--Meanwhile, since it
is the spiritual always that determines the material, this same
Man-of-Letters Hero must be regarded as our most important modern
person. He, such as he may be, is the soul of all. What he teaches, the
whole world will do and make. The world's manner of dealing with him is
the most significant feature of the world's general position. Looking
well at his life, we may get a glance, as deep as is readily possible
for us, into the life of those singular centuries which have produced
him, in which we ourselves live and work.

There are genuine Men of Letters, and not genuine; as in every kind
there is a genuine and a spurious. If _hero_ be taken to mean genuine,
then I say the Hero as Man of Letters will be found discharging a
function for us which is ever honorable, ever the highest; and was once
well known to be the highest. He is uttering forth, in such way as he
has, the inspired soul of him; all that a man, in any case, can do. I
say _inspired_; for what we call "originality," "sincerity," "genius,"
the heroic quality we have no good name for, signifies that. The Hero
is he who lives in the inward sphere of things, in the True, Divine
and Eternal, which exists always, unseen to most, under the Temporary,
Trivial: his being is in that; he declares that abroad, by act or speech
as it may be in declaring himself abroad. His life, as we said before,
is a piece of the everlasting heart of Nature herself: all men's life
is,--but the weak many know not the fact, and are untrue to it, in most
times; the strong few are strong, heroic, perennial, because it cannot
be hidden from them. The Man of Letters, like every Hero, is there
to proclaim this in such sort as he can. Intrinsically it is the same
function which the old generations named a man Prophet, Priest, Divinity
for doing; which all manner of Heroes, by speech or by act, are sent
into the world to do.

Fichte the German Philosopher delivered, some forty years ago at
Erlangen, a highly remarkable Course of Lectures on this subject:
"_Ueber das Wesen des Gelehrten_, On the Nature of the Literary Man."
Fichte, in conformity with the Transcendental Philosophy, of which he
was a distinguished teacher, declares first: That all things which we
see or work with in this Earth, especially we ourselves and all persons,
are as a kind of vesture or sensuous Appearance: that under all there
lies, as the essence of them, what he calls the "Divine Idea of
the World;" this is the Reality which "lies at the bottom of all
Appearance." To the mass of men no such Divine Idea is recognizable in
the world; they live merely, says Fichte, among the superficialities,
practicalities and shows of the world, not dreaming that there is
anything divine under them. But the Man of Letters is sent hither
specially that he may discern for himself, and make manifest to us, this
same Divine Idea: in every new generation it will manifest itself in
a new dialect; and he is there for the purpose of doing that. Such is
Fichte's phraseology; with which we need not quarrel. It is his way of
naming what I here, by other words, am striving imperfectly to
name; what there is at present no name for: The unspeakable Divine
Significance, full of splendor, of wonder and terror, that lies in the
being of every man, of every thing,--the Presence of the God who made
every man and thing. Mahomet taught this in his dialect; Odin in his: it
is the thing which all thinking hearts, in one dialect or another, are
here to teach.

Fichte calls the Man of Letters, therefore, a Prophet, or as he prefers
to phrase it, a Priest, continually unfolding the Godlike to men: Men
of Letters are a perpetual Priesthood, from age to age, teaching all
men that a God is still present in their life, that all "Appearance,"
whatsoever we see in the world, is but as a vesture for the "Divine Idea
of the World," for "that which lies at the bottom of Appearance." In the
true Literary Man there is thus ever, acknowledged or not by the world,
a sacredness: he is the light of the world; the world's Priest;--guiding
it, like a sacred Pillar of Fire, in its dark pilgrimage through the
waste of Time. Fichte discriminates with sharp zeal the _true_ Literary
Man, what we here call the _Hero_ as Man of Letters, from multitudes of
false unheroic. Whoever lives not wholly in this Divine Idea, or living
partially in it, struggles not, as for the one good, to live wholly
in it,--he is, let him live where else he like, in what pomps and
prosperities he like, no Literary Man; he is, says Fichte, a "Bungler,
_Stumper_." Or at best, if he belong to the prosaic provinces, he may
be a "Hodman;" Fichte even calls him elsewhere a "Nonentity," and has
in short no mercy for him, no wish that _he_ should continue happy among
us! This is Fichte's notion of the Man of Letters. It means, in its own
form, precisely what we here mean.

In this point of view, I consider that, for the last hundred years, by
far the notablest of all Literary Men is Fichte's countryman, Goethe. To
that man too, in a strange way, there was given what we may call a life
in the Divine Idea of the World; vision of the inward divine mystery:
and strangely, out of his Books, the world rises imaged once more as
godlike, the workmanship and temple of a God. Illuminated all, not
in fierce impure fire-splendor as of Mahomet, but in mild celestial
radiance;--really a Prophecy in these most unprophetic times; to my
mind, by far the greatest, though one of the quietest, among all the
great things that have come to pass in them. Our chosen specimen of the
Hero as Literary Man would be this Goethe. And it were a very pleasant
plan for me here to discourse of his heroism: for I consider him to be
a true Hero; heroic in what he said and did, and perhaps still more in
what he did not say and did not do; to me a noble spectacle: a great
heroic ancient man, speaking and keeping silence as an ancient Hero, in
the guise of a most modern, high-bred, high-cultivated Man of Letters!
We have had no such spectacle; no man capable of affording such, for the
last hundred and fifty years.

But at present, such is the general state of knowledge about Goethe, it
were worse than useless to attempt speaking of him in this case.
Speak as I might, Goethe, to the great majority of you, would remain
problematic, vague; no impression but a false one could be realized.
Him we must leave to future times. Johnson, Burns, Rousseau, three great
figures from a prior time, from a far inferior state of circumstances,
will suit us better here. Three men of the Eighteenth Century; the
conditions of their life far more resemble what those of ours still are
in England, than what Goethe's in Germany were. Alas, these men did not
conquer like him; they fought bravely, and fell. They were not heroic
bringers of the light, but heroic seekers of it. They lived under
galling conditions; struggling as under mountains of impediment, and
could not unfold themselves into clearness, or victorious interpretation
of that "Divine Idea." It is rather the _Tombs_ of three Literary Heroes
that I have to show you. There are the monumental heaps, under which
three spiritual giants lie buried. Very mournful, but also great and
full of interest for us. We will linger by them for a while.


Complaint is often made, in these times, of what we call the
disorganized condition of society: how ill many forces of society fulfil
their work; how many powerful are seen working in a wasteful, chaotic,
altogether unarranged manner. It is too just a complaint, as we all
know. But perhaps if we look at this of Books and the Writers of
Books, we shall find here, as it were, the summary of all other
disorganizations;--a sort of _heart_, from which, and to which all other
confusion circulates in the world! Considering what Book writers do in
the world, and what the world does with Book writers, I should say, It
is the most anomalous thing the world at present has to show.--We should
get into a sea far beyond sounding, did we attempt to give account of
this: but we must glance at it for the sake of our subject. The worst
element in the life of these three Literary Heroes was, that they found
their business and position such a chaos. On the beaten road there is
tolerable travelling; but it is sore work, and many have to perish,
fashioning a path through the impassable!

Our pious Fathers, feeling well what importance lay in the speaking of
man to men, founded churches, made endowments, regulations; everywhere
in the civilized world there is a Pulpit, environed with all manner of
complex dignified appurtenances and furtherances, that therefrom a man
with the tongue may, to best advantage, address his fellow-men. They
felt that this was the most important thing; that without this there was
no good thing. It is a right pious work, that of theirs; beautiful to
behold! But now with the art of Writing, with the art of Printing, a
total change has come over that business. The Writer of a Book, is not
he a Preacher preaching not to this parish or that, on this day or
that, but to all men in all times and places? Surely it is of the last
importance that _he_ do his work right, whoever do it wrong;--that the
_eye_ report not falsely, for then all the other members are astray!
Well; how he may do his work, whether he do it right or wrong, or do
it at all, is a point which no man in the world has taken the pains
to think of. To a certain shopkeeper, trying to get some money for
his books, if lucky, he is of some importance; to no other man of any.
Whence he came, whither he is bound, by what ways he arrived, by what
he might be furthered on his course, no one asks. He is an accident in
society. He wanders like a wild Ishmaelite, in a world of which he is as
the spiritual light, either the guidance or the misguidance!

Certainly the Art of Writing is the most miraculous of all things man
has devised. Odin's _Runes_ were the first form of the work of a Hero;
_Books_ written words, are still miraculous _Runes_, the latest form!
In Books lies the _soul_ of the whole Past Time; the articulate audible
voice of the Past, when the body and material substance of it has
altogether vanished like a dream. Mighty fleets and armies, harbors and
arsenals, vast cities, high-domed, many-engined,--they are precious,
great: but what do they become? Agamemnon, the many Agamemnons,
Pericleses, and their Greece; all is gone now to some ruined fragments,
dumb mournful wrecks and blocks: but the Books of Greece! There Greece,
to every thinker, still very literally lives: can be called up again
into life. No magic _Rune_ is stranger than a Book. All that Mankind has
done, thought, gained or been: it is lying as in magic preservation in
the pages of Books. They are the chosen possession of men.

Do not Books still accomplish _miracles_, as _Runes_ were fabled to do?
They persuade men. Not the wretchedest circulating-library novel,
which foolish girls thumb and con in remote villages, but will help to
regulate the actual practical weddings and households of those foolish
girls. So "Celia" felt, so "Clifford" acted: the foolish Theorem of
Life, stamped into those young brains, comes out as a solid Practice
one day. Consider whether any _Rune_ in the wildest imagination of
Mythologist ever did such wonders as, on the actual firm Earth, some
Books have done! What built St. Paul's Cathedral? Look at the heart of
the matter, it was that divine Hebrew BOOK,--the word partly of the man
Moses, an outlaw tending his Midianitish herds, four thousand years ago,
in the wildernesses of Sinai! It is the strangest of things, yet nothing
is truer. With the art of Writing, of which Printing is a simple, an
inevitable and comparatively insignificant corollary, the true reign
of miracles for mankind commenced. It related, with a wondrous new
contiguity and perpetual closeness, the Past and Distant with the
Present in time and place; all times and all places with this our actual
Here and Now. All things were altered for men; all modes of important
work of men: teaching, preaching, governing, and all else.

To look at Teaching, for instance. Universities are a notable,
respectable product of the modern ages. Their existence too is modified,
to the very basis of it, by the existence of Books. Universities arose
while there were yet no Books procurable; while a man, for a single
Book, had to give an estate of land. That, in those circumstances, when
a man had some knowledge to communicate, he should do it by gathering
the learners round him, face to face, was a necessity for him. If you
wanted to know what Abelard knew, you must go and listen to Abelard.
Thousands, as many as thirty thousand, went to hear Abelard and that
metaphysical theology of his. And now for any other teacher who had also
something of his own to teach, there was a great convenience opened:
so many thousands eager to learn were already assembled yonder; of all
places the best place for him was that. For any third teacher it was
better still; and grew ever the better, the more teachers there came.
It only needed now that the King took notice of this new phenomenon;
combined or agglomerated the various schools into one school; gave it
edifices, privileges, encouragements, and named it _Universitas_,
or School of all Sciences: the University of Paris, in its essential
characters, was there. The model of all subsequent Universities; which
down even to these days, for six centuries now, have gone on to found
themselves. Such, I conceive, was the origin of Universities.

It is clear, however, that with this simple circumstance, facility of
getting Books, the whole conditions of the business from top to bottom
were changed. Once invent Printing, you metamorphosed all Universities,
or superseded them! The Teacher needed not now to gather men personally
round him, that he might _speak_ to them what he knew: print it in a
Book, and all learners far and wide, for a trifle, had it each at his
own fireside, much more effectually to learn it!--Doubtless there is
still peculiar virtue in Speech; even writers of Books may still, in
some circumstances, find it convenient to speak also,--witness our
present meeting here! There is, one would say, and must ever remain
while man has a tongue, a distinct province for Speech as well as for
Writing and Printing. In regard to all things this must remain; to
Universities among others. But the limits of the two have nowhere yet
been pointed out, ascertained; much less put in practice: the University
which would completely take in that great new fact, of the existence of
Printed Books, and stand on a clear footing for the Nineteenth
Century as the Paris one did for the Thirteenth, has not yet come into
existence. If we think of it, all that a University, or final highest
School can do for us, is still but what the first School began
doing,--teach us to _read_. We learn to _read_, in various languages,
in various sciences; we learn the alphabet and letters of all manner
of Books. But the place where we are to get knowledge, even theoretic
knowledge, is the Books themselves! It depends on what we read,
after all manner of Professors have done their best for us. The true
University of these days is a Collection of Books.

But to the Church itself, as I hinted already, all is changed, in its
preaching, in its working, by the introduction of Books. The Church is
the working recognized Union of our Priests or Prophets, of those who by
wise teaching guide the souls of men. While there was no Writing, even
while there was no Easy-writing, or _Printing_, the preaching of the
voice was the natural sole method of performing this. But now with
Books!--He that can write a true Book, to persuade England, is not he
the Bishop and Archbishop, the Primate of England and of All England?
I many a time say, the writers of Newspapers, Pamphlets, Poems, Books,
these _are_ the real working effective Church of a modern country. Nay
not only our preaching, but even our worship, is not it too accomplished
by means of Printed Books? The noble sentiment which a gifted soul
has clothed for us in melodious words, which brings melody into our
hearts,--is not this essentially, if we will understand it, of the
nature of worship? There are many, in all countries, who, in this
confused time, have no other method of worship. He who, in any way,
shows us better than we knew before that a lily of the fields is
beautiful, does he not show it us as an effluence of the Fountain of all
Beauty; as the _handwriting_, made visible there, of the great Maker of
the Universe? He has sung for us, made us sing with him, a little verse
of a sacred Psalm. Essentially so. How much more he who sings, who
says, or in any way brings home to our heart the noble doings, feelings,
darings and endurances of a brother man! He has verily touched our
hearts as with a live coal _from the altar_. Perhaps there is no worship
more authentic.

Literature, so far as it is Literature, is an "apocalypse of Nature," a
revealing of the "open secret." It may well enough be named, in Fichte's
style, a "continuous revelation" of the Godlike in the Terrestrial and
Common. The Godlike does ever, in very truth, endure there; is
brought out, now in this dialect, now in that, with various degrees
of clearness: all true gifted Singers and Speakers are, consciously or
unconsciously, doing so. The dark stormful indignation of a Byron, so
wayward and perverse, may have touches of it; nay the withered mockery
of a French sceptic,--his mockery of the False, a love and worship of
the True. How much more the sphere-harmony of a Shakspeare, of a Goethe;
the cathedral music of a Milton! They are something too, those humble
genuine lark-notes of a Burns,--skylark, starting from the humble
furrow, far overhead into the blue depths, and singing to us so
genuinely there! For all true singing is of the nature of worship; as
indeed all true _working_ may be said to be,--whereof such _singing_ is
but the record, and fit melodious representation, to us. Fragments of a
real "Church Liturgy" and "Body of Homilies," strangely disguised from
the common eye, are to be found weltering in that huge froth-ocean of
Printed Speech we loosely call Literature! Books are our Church too.

Or turning now to the Government of men. Witenagemote, old Parliament,
was a great thing. The affairs of the nation were there deliberated and
decided; what we were to _do_ as a nation. But does not, though the name
Parliament subsists, the parliamentary debate go on now, everywhere
and at all times, in a far more comprehensive way, _out_ of Parliament
altogether? Burke said there were Three Estates in Parliament; but,
in the Reporters' Gallery yonder, there sat a _Fourth Estate_ more
important far than they all. It is not a figure of speech, or a witty
saying; it is a literal fact,--very momentous to us in these times.
Literature is our Parliament too. Printing, which comes necessarily out
of Writing, I say often, is equivalent to Democracy: invent Writing,
Democracy is inevitable. Writing brings Printing; brings universal
everyday extempore Printing, as we see at present. Whoever can
speak, speaking now to the whole nation, becomes a power, a branch
of government, with inalienable weight in law-making, in all acts of
authority. It matters not what rank he has, what revenues or garnitures.
the requisite thing is, that he have a tongue which others will listen
to; this and nothing more is requisite. The nation is governed by all
that has tongue in the nation: Democracy is virtually _there_. Add only,
that whatsoever power exists will have itself, by and by, organized;
working secretly under bandages, obscurations, obstructions, it will
never rest till it get to work free, unencumbered, visible to all.
Democracy virtually extant will insist on becoming palpably extant.--

On all sides, are we not driven to the conclusion that, of the things
which man can do or make here below, by far the most momentous,
wonderful and worthy are the things we call Books! Those poor bits
of rag-paper with black ink on them;--from the Daily Newspaper to
the sacred Hebrew BOOK, what have they not done, what are they not
doing!--For indeed, whatever be the outward form of the thing (bits
of paper, as we say, and black ink), is it not verily, at bottom, the
highest act of man's faculty that produces a Book? It is the _Thought_
of man; the true thaumaturgic virtue; by which man works all things
whatsoever. All that he does, and brings to pass, is the vesture of a
Thought. This London City, with all its houses, palaces, steam-engines,
cathedrals, and huge immeasurable traffic and tumult, what is it but a
Thought, but millions of Thoughts made into One;--a huge immeasurable
Spirit of a THOUGHT, embodied in brick, in iron, smoke, dust, Palaces,
Parliaments, Hackney Coaches, Katherine Docks, and the rest of it! Not
a brick was made but some man had to _think_ of the making of that
brick.--The thing we called "bits of paper with traces of black ink," is
the _purest_ embodiment a Thought of man can have. No wonder it is, in
all ways, the activest and noblest.

All this, of the importance and supreme importance of the Man of Letters
in modern Society, and how the Press is to such a degree superseding
the Pulpit, the Senate, the _Senatus Academicus_ and much else, has been
admitted for a good while; and recognized often enough, in late times,
with a sort of sentimental triumph and wonderment. It seems to me, the
Sentimental by and by will have to give place to the Practical. If Men
of Letters _are_ so incalculably influential, actually performing such
work for us from age to age, and even from day to day, then I think
we may conclude that Men of Letters will not always wander like
unrecognized unregulated Ishmaelites among us! Whatsoever thing, as I
said above, has virtual unnoticed power will cast off its wrappages,
bandages, and step forth one day with palpably articulated, universally
visible power. That one man wear the clothes, and take the wages, of a
function which is done by quite another: there can be no profit in
this; this is not right, it is wrong. And yet, alas, the _making_ of it
right,--what a business, for long times to come! Sure enough, this that
we call Organization of the Literary Guild is still a great way off,
encumbered with all manner of complexities. If you asked me what were
the best possible organization for the Men of Letters in modern society;
the arrangement of furtherance and regulation, grounded the most
accurately on the actual facts of their position and of the world's
position,--I should beg to say that the problem far exceeded my faculty!
It is not one man's faculty; it is that of many successive men turned
earnestly upon it, that will bring out even an approximate solution.
What the best arrangement were, none of us could say. But if you ask,
Which is the worst? I answer: This which we now have, that Chaos should
sit umpire in it; this is the worst. To the best, or any good one, there
is yet a long way.

One remark I must not omit, That royal or parliamentary grants of money
are by no means the chief thing wanted! To give our Men of Letters
stipends, endowments and all furtherance of cash, will do little
towards the business. On the whole, one is weary of hearing about the
omnipotence of money. I will say rather that, for a genuine man, it is
no evil to be poor; that there ought to be Literary Men poor,--to show
whether they are genuine or not! Mendicant Orders, bodies of good men
doomed to beg, were instituted in the Christian Church; a most natural
and even necessary development of the spirit of Christianity. It was
itself founded on Poverty, on Sorrow, Contradiction, Crucifixion, every
species of worldly Distress and Degradation. We may say, that he who has
not known those things, and learned from them the priceless lessons they
have to teach, has missed a good opportunity of schooling. To beg, and
go barefoot, in coarse woollen cloak with a rope round your loins,
and be despised of all the world, was no beautiful business;--nor an
honorable one in any eye, till the nobleness of those who did so had
made it honored of some!

Begging is not in our course at the present time: but for the rest of
it, who will say that a Johnson is not perhaps the better for being
poor? It is needful for him, at all rates, to know that outward profit,
that success of any kind is _not_ the goal he has to aim at. Pride,
vanity, ill-conditioned egoism of all sorts, are bred in his heart, as
in every heart; need, above all, to be cast out of his heart,--to be,
with whatever pangs, torn out of it, cast forth from it, as a thing
worthless. Byron, born rich and noble, made out even less than
Burns, poor and plebeian. Who knows but, in that same "best possible
organization" as yet far off, Poverty may still enter as an important
element? What if our Men of Letters, men setting up to be Spiritual
Heroes, were still _then_, as they now are, a kind of "involuntary
monastic order;" bound still to this same ugly Poverty,--till they had
tried what was in it too, till they had learned to make it too do for
them! Money, in truth, can do much, but it cannot do all. We must know
the province of it, and confine it there; and even spurn it back, when
it wishes to get farther.

Besides, were the money-furtherances, the proper season for them, the
fit assigner of them, all settled,--how is the Burns to be recognized
that merits these? He must pass through the ordeal, and prove himself.
_This_ ordeal; this wild welter of a chaos which is called Literary
Life: this too is a kind of ordeal! There is clear truth in the idea
that a struggle from the lower classes of society, towards the upper
regions and rewards of society, must ever continue. Strong men are
born there, who ought to stand elsewhere than there. The manifold,
inextricably complex, universal struggle of these constitutes, and must
constitute, what is called the progress of society. For Men of Letters,
as for all other sorts of men. How to regulate that struggle? There is
the whole question. To leave it as it is, at the mercy of blind Chance;
a whirl of distracted atoms, one cancelling the other; one of the
thousand arriving saved, nine hundred and ninety-nine lost by the way;
your royal Johnson languishing inactive in garrets, or harnessed to the
yoke of Printer Cave; your Burns dying broken-hearted as a Gauger; your
Rousseau driven into mad exasperation, kindling French Revolutions
by his paradoxes: this, as we said, is clearly enough the _worst_
regulation. The _best_, alas, is far from us!

And yet there can be no doubt but it is coming; advancing on us, as yet
hidden in the bosom of centuries: this is a prophecy one can risk.
For so soon as men get to discern the importance of a thing, they do
infallibly set about arranging it, facilitating, forwarding it; and rest
not till, in some approximate degree, they have accomplished that. I
say, of all Priesthoods, Aristocracies, Governing Classes at present
extant in the world, there is no class comparable for importance to that
Priesthood of the Writers of Books. This is a fact which he who runs may
read,--and draw inferences from. "Literature will take care of itself,"
answered Mr. Pitt, when applied to for some help for Burns. "Yes," adds
Mr. Southey, "it will take care of itself; _and of you too_, if you do
not look to it!"

The result to individual Men of Letters is not the momentous one; they
are but individuals, an infinitesimal fraction of the great body; they
can struggle on, and live or else die, as they have been wont. But it
deeply concerns the whole society, whether it will set its _light_ on
high places, to walk thereby; or trample it under foot, and scatter it
in all ways of wild waste (not without conflagration), as heretofore!
Light is the one thing wanted for the world. Put wisdom in the head of
the world, the world will fight its battle victoriously, and be the best
world man can make it. I called this anomaly of a disorganic Literary
Class the heart of all other anomalies, at once product and parent; some
good arrangement for that would be as the _punctum saliens_ of a
new vitality and just arrangement for all. Already, in some European
countries, in France, in Prussia, one traces some beginnings of an
arrangement for the Literary Class; indicating the gradual possibility
of such. I believe that it is possible; that it will have to be
possible.

By far the most interesting fact I hear about the Chinese is one on
which we cannot arrive at clearness, but which excites endless curiosity
even in the dim state: this namely, that they do attempt to make their
Men of Letters their Governors! It would be rash to say, one understood
how this was done, or with what degree of success it was done. All
such things must be very unsuccessful; yet a small degree of success is
precious; the very attempt how precious! There does seem to be, all over
China, a more or less active search everywhere to discover the men of
talent that grow up in the young generation. Schools there are for
every one: a foolish sort of training, yet still a sort. The youths who
distinguish themselves in the lower school are promoted into
favorable stations in the higher, that they may still more distinguish
themselves,--forward and forward: it appears to be out of these that
the Official Persons, and incipient Governors, are taken. These are they
whom they _try_ first, whether they can govern or not. And surely with
the best hope: for they are the men that have already shown intellect.
Try them: they have not governed or administered as yet; perhaps they
cannot; but there is no doubt they _have_ some Understanding,--without
which no man can! Neither is Understanding a _tool_, as we are too apt
to figure; "it is a _hand_ which can handle any tool." Try these men:
they are of all others the best worth trying.--Surely there is no
kind of government, constitution, revolution, social apparatus or
arrangement, that I know of in this world, so promising to one's
scientific curiosity as this. The man of intellect at the top of
affairs: this is the aim of all constitutions and revolutions, if they
have any aim. For the man of true intellect, as I assert and believe
always, is the noble-hearted man withal, the true, just, humane and
valiant man. Get him for governor, all is got; fail to get him, though
you had Constitutions plentiful as blackberries, and a Parliament in
every village, there is nothing yet got--!

These things look strange, truly; and are not such as we commonly
speculate upon. But we are fallen into strange times; these things will
require to be speculated upon; to be rendered practicable, to be in some
way put in practice. These, and many others. On all hands of us, there
is the announcement, audible enough, that the old Empire of Routine
has ended; that to say a thing has long been, is no reason for its
continuing to be. The things which have been are fallen into decay, are
fallen into incompetence; large masses of mankind, in every society of
our Europe, are no longer capable of living at all by the things which
have been. When millions of men can no longer by their utmost exertion
gain food for themselves, and "the third man for thirty-six weeks each
year is short of third-rate potatoes," the things which have been must
decidedly prepare to alter themselves!--I will now quit this of the
organization of Men of Letters.


Alas, the evil that pressed heaviest on those Literary Heroes of ours
was not the want of organization for Men of Letters, but a far deeper
one; out of which, indeed, this and so many other evils for the Literary
Man, and for all men, had, as from their fountain, taken rise. That our
Hero as Man of Letters had to travel without highway, companionless,
through an inorganic chaos,--and to leave his own life and faculty lying
there, as a partial contribution towards _pushing_ some highway through
it: this, had not his faculty itself been so perverted and paralyzed, he
might have put up with, might have considered to be but the common lot
of Heroes. His fatal misery was the _spiritual paralysis_, so we may
name it, of the Age in which his life lay; whereby his life too, do what
he might, was half paralyzed! The Eighteenth was a _Sceptical_ Century;
in which little word there is a whole Pandora's Box of miseries.
Scepticism means not intellectual Doubt alone, but moral Doubt; all
sorts of infidelity, insincerity, spiritual paralysis. Perhaps, in few
centuries that one could specify since the world began, was a life of
Heroism more difficult for a man. That was not an age of Faith,--an
age of Heroes! The very possibility of Heroism had been, as it were,
formally abnegated in the minds of all. Heroism was gone forever;
Triviality, Formulism and Commonplace were come forever. The "age of
miracles" had been, or perhaps had not been; but it was not any longer.
An effete world; wherein Wonder, Greatness, Godhood could not now
dwell;--in one word, a godless world!

How mean, dwarfish are their ways of thinking, in this time,--compared
not with the Christian Shakspeares and Miltons, but with the old Pagan
Skalds, with any species of believing men! The living TREE Igdrasil,
with the melodious prophetic waving of its world-wide boughs,
deep-rooted as Hela, has died out into the clanking of a World-MACHINE.
"Tree" and "Machine:" contrast these two things. I, for my share,
declare the world to be no machine! I say that it does _not_ go by
wheel-and-pinion "motives" self-interests, checks, balances; that there
is something far other in it than the clank of spinning-jennies, and
parliamentary majorities; and, on the whole, that it is not a machine at
all!--The old Norse Heathen had a truer motion of God's-world than these
poor Machine-Sceptics: the old Heathen Norse were _sincere_ men. But
for these poor Sceptics there was no sincerity, no truth. Half-truth and
hearsay was called truth. Truth, for most men, meant plausibility; to be
measured by the number of votes you could get. They had lost any
notion that sincerity was possible, or of what sincerity was. How many
Plausibilities asking, with unaffected surprise and the air of offended
virtue, What! am not I sincere? Spiritual Paralysis, I say, nothing left
but a Mechanical life, was the characteristic of that century. For the
common man, unless happily he stood _below_ his century and belonged to
another prior one, it was impossible to be a Believer, a Hero; he lay
buried, unconscious, under these baleful influences. To the strongest
man, only with infinite struggle and confusion was it possible to work
himself half loose; and lead as it were, in an enchanted, most tragical
way, a spiritual death-in-life, and be a Half-Hero!

Scepticism is the name we give to all this; as the chief symptom, as the
chief origin of all this. Concerning which so much were to be said! It
would take many Discourses, not a small fraction of one Discourse, to
state what one feels about that Eighteenth Century and its ways. As
indeed this, and the like of this, which we now call Scepticism, is
precisely the black malady and life-foe, against which all teaching and
discoursing since man's life began has directed itself: the battle of
Belief against Unbelief is the never-ending battle! Neither is it in the
way of crimination that one would wish to speak. Scepticism, for that
century, we must consider as the decay of old ways of believing, the
preparation afar off for new better and wider ways,--an inevitable
thing. We will not blame men for it; we will lament their hard fate. We
will understand that destruction of old _forms_ is not destruction of
everlasting _substances_; that Scepticism, as sorrowful and hateful as
we see it, is not an end but a beginning.

The other day speaking, without prior purpose that way, of Bentham's
theory of man and man's life, I chanced to call it a more beggarly one
than Mahomet's. I am bound to say, now when it is once uttered, that
such is my deliberate opinion. Not that one would mean offence against
the man Jeremy Bentham, or those who respect and believe him. Bentham
himself, and even the creed of Bentham, seems to me comparatively worthy
of praise. It is a determinate _being_ what all the world, in a cowardly
half-and-half manner, was tending to be. Let us have the crisis; we
shall either have death or the cure. I call this gross, steam-engine
Utilitarianism an approach towards new Faith. It was a laying-down
of cant; a saying to oneself: "Well then, this world is a dead iron
machine, the god of it Gravitation and selfish Hunger; let us see what,
by checking and balancing, and good adjustment of tooth and pinion,
can be made of it!" Benthamism has something complete, manful, in such
fearless committal of itself to what it finds true; you may call it
Heroic, though a Heroism with its _eyes_ put out! It is the culminating
point, and fearless ultimatum, of what lay in the half-and-half state,
pervading man's whole existence in that Eighteenth Century. It seems to
me, all deniers of Godhood, and all lip-believers of it, are bound to
be Benthamites, if they have courage and honesty. Benthamism is an
_eyeless_ Heroism: the Human Species, like a hapless blinded Samson
grinding in the Philistine Mill, clasps convulsively the pillars of
its Mill; brings huge ruin down, but ultimately deliverance withal. Of
Bentham I meant to say no harm.

But this I do say, and would wish all men to know and lay to heart,
that he who discerns nothing but Mechanism in the Universe has in the
fatalest way missed the secret of the Universe altogether. That all
Godhood should vanish out of men's conception of this Universe seems to
me precisely the most brutal error,--I will not disparage Heathenism by
calling it a Heathen error,--that men could fall into. It is not true;
it is false at the very heart of it. A man who thinks so will think
_wrong_ about all things in the world; this original sin will vitiate
all other conclusions he can form. One might call it the most lamentable
of Delusions,--not forgetting Witchcraft itself! Witchcraft worshipped
at least a living Devil; but this worships a dead iron Devil; no God,
not even a Devil! Whatsoever is noble, divine, inspired, drops
thereby out of life. There remains everywhere in life a despicable
_caput-mortuum_; the mechanical hull, all soul fled out of it. How can a
man act heroically? The "Doctrine of Motives" will teach him that it is,
under more or less disguise, nothing but a wretched love of Pleasure,
fear of Pain; that Hunger, of applause, of cash, of whatsoever victual
it may be, is the ultimate fact of man's life. Atheism, in brief;--which
does indeed frightfully punish itself. The man, I say, is become
spiritually a paralytic man; this godlike Universe a dead mechanical
steam-engine, all working by motives, checks, balances, and I know not
what; wherein, as in the detestable belly of some Phalaris'-Bull of his
own contriving, he the poor Phalaris sits miserably dying!

Belief I define to be the healthy act of a man's mind. It
is a mysterious indescribable process, that of getting to
believe;--indescribable, as all vital acts are. We have our mind given
us, not that it may cavil and argue, but that it may see into something,
give us clear belief and understanding about something, whereon we are
then to proceed to act. Doubt, truly, is not itself a crime. Certainly
we do not rush out, clutch up the first thing we find, and straightway
believe that! All manner of doubt, inquiry, [Gr.] _skepsis_ as it is
named, about all manner of objects, dwells in every reasonable mind. It
is the mystic working of the mind, on the object it is _getting_ to know
and believe. Belief comes out of all this, above ground, like the tree
from its hidden _roots_. But now if, even on common things, we require
that a man keep his doubts _silent_, and not babble of them till they in
some measure become affirmations or denials; how much more in regard to
the highest things, impossible to speak of in words at all! That a man
parade his doubt, and get to imagine that debating and logic (which
means at best only the manner of _telling_ us your thought, your belief
or disbelief, about a thing) is the triumph and true work of what
intellect he has: alas, this is as if you should _overturn_ the tree,
and instead of green boughs, leaves and fruits, show us ugly taloned
roots turned up into the air,--and no growth, only death and misery
going on!

For the Scepticism, as I said, is not intellectual only; it is moral
also; a chronic atrophy and disease of the whole soul. A man lives by
believing something; not by debating and arguing about many things. A
sad case for him when all that he can manage to believe is something
he can button in his pocket, and with one or the other organ eat and
digest! Lower than that he will not get. We call those ages in which
he gets so low the mournfulest, sickest and meanest of all ages. The
world's heart is palsied, sick: how can any limb of it be whole?
Genuine Acting ceases in all departments of the world's work; dexterous
Similitude of Acting begins. The world's wages are pocketed, the
world's work is not done. Heroes have gone out; Quacks have come in.
Accordingly, what Century, since the end of the Roman world, which also
was a time of scepticism, simulacra and universal decadence, so
abounds with Quacks as that Eighteenth? Consider them, with their
tumid sentimental vaporing about virtue, benevolence,--the wretched
Quack-squadron, Cagliostro at the head of them! Few men were without
quackery; they had got to consider it a necessary ingredient and amalgam
for truth. Chatham, our brave Chatham himself, comes down to the House,
all wrapt and bandaged; he "has crawled out in great bodily suffering,"
and so on;--_forgets_, says Walpole, that he is acting the sick man; in
the fire of debate, snatches his arm from the sling, and oratorically
swings and brandishes it! Chatham himself lives the strangest mimetic
life, half-hero, half-quack, all along. For indeed the world is full of
dupes; and you have to gain the _world's_ suffrage! How the duties of
the world will be done in that case, what quantities of error, which
means failure, which means sorrow and misery, to some and to many, will
gradually accumulate in all provinces of the world's business, we need
not compute.

It seems to me, you lay your finger here on the heart of the world's
maladies, when you call it a Sceptical World. An insincere world; a
godless untruth of a world! It is out of this, as I consider, that the
whole tribe of social pestilences, French Revolutions, Chartisms, and
what not, have derived their being,--their chief necessity to be. This
must alter. Till this alter, nothing can beneficially alter. My one hope
of the world, my inexpugnable consolation in looking at the miseries of
the world, is that this is altering. Here and there one does now find
a man who knows, as of old, that this world is a Truth, and no
Plausibility and Falsity; that he himself is alive, not dead or
paralytic; and that the world is alive, instinct with Godhood, beautiful
and awful, even as in the beginning of days! One man once knowing this,
many men, all men, must by and by come to know it. It lies there clear,
for whosoever will take the _spectacles_ off his eyes and honestly look,
to know! For such a man the Unbelieving Century, with its unblessed
Products, is already past; a new century is already come. The old
unblessed Products and Performances, as solid as they look, are
Phantasms, preparing speedily to vanish. To this and the other noisy,
very great-looking Simulacrum with the whole world huzzaing at its
heels, he can say, composedly stepping aside: Thou art not _true_; thou
art not extant, only semblant; go thy way!--Yes, hollow Formulism, gross
Benthamism, and other unheroic atheistic Insincerity is visibly and
even rapidly declining. An unbelieving Eighteenth Century is but an
exception,--such as now and then occurs. I prophesy that the world will
once more become _sincere_; a believing world; with _many_ Heroes in it,
a heroic world! It will then be a victorious world; never till then.

Or indeed what of the world and its victories? Men speak too much about
the world. Each one of us here, let the world go how it will, and be
victorious or not victorious, has he not a Life of his own to lead? One
Life; a little gleam of Time between two Eternities; no second chance to
us forevermore! It were well for us to live not as fools and simulacra,
but as wise and realities. The world's being saved will not save us; nor
the world's being lost destroy us. We should look to ourselves: there is
great merit here in the "duty of staying at home"! And, on the whole,
to say truth, I never heard of "world's" being "saved" in any other way.
That mania of saving worlds is itself a piece of the Eighteenth Century
with its windy sentimentalism. Let us not follow it too far. For the
saving of the _world_ I will trust confidently to the Maker of the
world; and look a little to my own saving, which I am more competent
to!--In brief, for the world's sake, and for our own, we will rejoice
greatly that Scepticism, Insincerity, Mechanical Atheism, with all their
poison-dews, are going, and as good as gone.--

Now it was under such conditions, in those times of Johnson, that our
Men of Letters had to live. Times in which there was properly no truth
in life. Old truths had fallen nigh dumb; the new lay yet hidden, not
trying to speak. That Man's Life here below was a Sincerity and Fact,
and would forever continue such, no new intimation, in that dusk of
the world, had yet dawned. No intimation; not even any French
Revolution,--which we define to be a Truth once more, though a Truth
clad in hell-fire! How different was the Luther's pilgrimage, with
its assured goal, from the Johnson's, girt with mere traditions,
suppositions, grown now incredible, unintelligible! Mahomet's Formulas
were of "wood waxed and oiled," and could be burnt out of one's way:
poor Johnson's were far more difficult to burn.--The strong man will
ever find _work_, which means difficulty, pain, to the full measure of
his strength. But to make out a victory, in those circumstances of our
poor Hero as Man of Letters, was perhaps more difficult than in any. Not
obstruction, disorganization, Bookseller Osborne and Fourpence-halfpenny
a day; not this alone; but the light of his own soul was taken from him.
No landmark on the Earth; and, alas, what is that to having no loadstar
in the Heaven! We need not wonder that none of those Three men rose to
victory. That they fought truly is the highest praise. With a mournful
sympathy we will contemplate, if not three living victorious Heroes, as
I said, the Tombs of three fallen Heroes! They fell for us too; making
a way for us. There are the mountains which they hurled abroad in their
confused War of the Giants; under which, their strength and life spent,
they now lie buried.


I have already written of these three Literary Heroes, expressly or
incidentally; what I suppose is known to most of you; what need not be
spoken or written a second time. They concern us here as the singular
_Prophets_ of that singular age; for such they virtually were; and the
aspect they and their world exhibit, under this point of view, might
lead us into reflections enough! I call them, all three, Genuine Men
more or less; faithfully, for most part unconsciously, struggling to be
genuine, and plant themselves on the everlasting truth of things. This
to a degree that eminently distinguishes them from the poor artificial
mass of their contemporaries; and renders them worthy to be considered
as Speakers, in some measure, of the everlasting truth, as Prophets in
that age of theirs. By Nature herself a noble necessity was laid on them
to be so. They were men of such magnitude that they could not live on
unrealities,--clouds, froth and all inanity gave way under them: there
was no footing for them but on firm earth; no rest or regular motion for
them, if they got not footing there. To a certain extent, they were Sons
of Nature once more in an age of Artifice; once more, Original Men.

As for Johnson, I have always considered him to be, by nature, one
of our great English souls. A strong and noble man; so much left
undeveloped in him to the last: in a kindlier element what might he not
have been,--Poet, Priest, sovereign Ruler! On the whole, a man must not
complain of his "element," of his "time," or the like; it is thriftless
work doing so. His time is bad: well then, he is there to make it
better!--Johnson's youth was poor, isolated, hopeless, very miserable.
Indeed, it does not seem possible that, in any the favorablest outward
circumstances, Johnson's life could have been other than a painful one.
The world might have had more of profitable _work_ out of him, or less;
but his _effort_ against the world's work could never have been a light
one. Nature, in return for his nobleness, had said to him, Live in an
element of diseased sorrow. Nay, perhaps the sorrow and the nobleness
were intimately and even inseparably connected with each other. At all
events, poor Johnson had to go about girt with continual hypochondria,
physical and spiritual pain. Like a Hercules with the burning
Nessus'-shirt on him, which shoots in on him dull incurable misery: the
Nessus'-shirt not to be stript off, which is his own natural skin! In
this manner _he_ had to live. Figure him there, with his scrofulous
diseases, with his great greedy heart, and unspeakable chaos of
thoughts; stalking mournful as a stranger in this Earth; eagerly
devouring what spiritual thing he could come at: school-languages
and other merely grammatical stuff, if there were nothing better! The
largest soul that was in all England; and provision made for it of
"fourpence-halfpenny a day." Yet a giant invincible soul; a true man's.
One remembers always that story of the shoes at Oxford: the rough,
seamy-faced, rawboned College Servitor stalking about, in winter-season,
with his shoes worn out; how the charitable Gentleman Commoner secretly
places a new pair at his door; and the rawboned Servitor, lifting them,
looking at them near, with his dim eyes, with what thoughts,--pitches
them out of window! Wet feet, mud, frost, hunger or what you will; but
not beggary: we cannot stand beggary! Rude stubborn self-help here;
a whole world of squalor, rudeness, confused misery and want, yet of
nobleness and manfulness withal. It is a type of the man's life,
this pitching away of the shoes. An original man;--not a second-hand,
borrowing or begging man. Let us stand on our own basis, at any rate! On
such shoes as we ourselves can get. On frost and mud, if you will, but
honestly on that;--on the reality and substance which Nature gives _us_,
not on the semblance, on the thing she has given another than us--!

And yet with all this rugged pride of manhood and self-help, was there
ever soul more tenderly affectionate, loyally submissive to what was
really higher than he? Great souls are always loyally submissive,
reverent to what is over them; only small mean souls are otherwise. I
could not find a better proof of what I said the other day, That the
sincere man was by nature the obedient man; that only in a World
of Heroes was there loyal Obedience to the Heroic. The essence of
_originality_ is not that it be _new_: Johnson believed altogether in
the old; he found the old opinions credible for him, fit for him; and in
a right heroic manner lived under them. He is well worth study in regard
to that. For we are to say that Johnson was far other than a mere man
of words and formulas; he was a man of truths and facts. He stood by the
old formulas; the happier was it for him that he could so stand: but in
all formulas that _he_ could stand by, there needed to be a most
genuine substance. Very curious how, in that poor Paper-age, so barren,
artificial, thick-quilted with Pedantries, Hearsays, the great Fact of
this Universe glared in, forever wonderful, indubitable, unspeakable,
divine-infernal, upon this man too! How he harmonized his Formulas with
it, how he managed at all under such circumstances: that is a thing
worth seeing. A thing "to be looked at with reverence, with pity, with
awe." That Church of St. Clement Danes, where Johnson still _worshipped_
in the era of Voltaire, is to me a venerable place.

It was in virtue of his _sincerity_, of his speaking still in some sort
from the heart of Nature, though in the current artificial dialect, that
Johnson was a Prophet. Are not all dialects "artificial"? Artificial
things are not all false;--nay every true Product of Nature will
infallibly _shape_ itself; we may say all artificial things are, at
the starting of them, _true_. What we call "Formulas" are not in their
origin bad; they are indispensably good. Formula is _method_, habitude;
found wherever man is found. Formulas fashion themselves as Paths do, as
beaten Highways, leading toward some sacred or high object, whither many
men are bent. Consider it. One man, full of heartfelt earnest impulse,
finds out a way of doing somewhat,--were it of uttering his soul's
reverence for the Highest, were it but of fitly saluting his fellow-man.
An inventor was needed to do that, a _poet_; he has articulated the
dim-struggling thought that dwelt in his own and many hearts. This
is his way of doing that; these are his footsteps, the beginning of a
"Path." And now see: the second men travels naturally in the footsteps
of his foregoer, it is the _easiest_ method. In the footsteps of his
foregoer; yet with improvements, with changes where such seem good; at
all events with enlargements, the Path ever _widening_ itself as more
travel it;--till at last there is a broad Highway whereon the whole
world may travel and drive. While there remains a City or Shrine, or
any Reality to drive to, at the farther end, the Highway shall be right
welcome! When the City is gone, we will forsake the Highway. In this
manner all Institutions, Practices, Regulated Things in the world have
come into existence, and gone out of existence. Formulas all begin
by being _full_ of substance; you may call them the _skin_, the
articulation into shape, into limbs and skin, of a substance that is
already there: _they_ had not been there otherwise. Idols, as we said,
are not idolatrous till they become doubtful, empty for the worshipper's
heart. Much as we talk against Formulas, I hope no one of us is ignorant
withal of the high significance of _true_ Formulas; that they were, and
will ever be, the indispensablest furniture of our habitation in this
world.--

Mark, too, how little Johnson boasts of his "sincerity." He has no
suspicion of his being particularly sincere,--of his being particularly
anything! A hard-struggling, weary-hearted man, or "scholar" as he calls
himself, trying hard to get some honest livelihood in the world, not
to starve, but to live--without stealing! A noble unconsciousness is in
him. He does not "engrave _Truth_ on his watch-seal;" no, but he stands
by truth, speaks by it, works and lives by it. Thus it ever is. Think of
it once more. The man whom Nature has appointed to do great things is,
first of all, furnished with that openness to Nature which renders him
incapable of being _in_sincere! To his large, open, deep-feeling heart
Nature is a Fact: all hearsay is hearsay; the unspeakable greatness of
this Mystery of Life, let him acknowledge it or not, nay even though
he seem to forget it or deny it, is ever present to _him_,--fearful
and wonderful, on this hand and on that. He has a basis of sincerity;
unrecognized, because never questioned or capable of question. Mirabeau,
Mahomet, Cromwell, Napoleon: all the Great Men I ever heard of have
this as the primary material of them. Innumerable commonplace men are
debating, are talking everywhere their commonplace doctrines, which they
have learned by logic, by rote, at second-hand: to that kind of man all
this is still nothing. He must have truth; truth which _he_ feels to be
true. How shall he stand otherwise? His whole soul, at all moments, in
all ways, tells him that there is no standing. He is under the noble
necessity of being true. Johnson's way of thinking about this world is
not mine, any more than Mahomet's was: but I recognize the everlasting
element of _heart-sincerity_ in both; and see with pleasure how neither
of them remains ineffectual. Neither of them is as _chaff_ sown; in both
of them is something which the seedfield will _grow_.

Johnson was a Prophet to his people; preached a Gospel to them,--as all
like him always do. The highest Gospel he preached we may describe as a
kind of Moral Prudence: "in a world where much is to be done, and little
is to be known," see how you will _do_ it! A thing well worth preaching.
"A world where much is to be done, and little is to be known:" do not
sink yourselves in boundless bottomless abysses of Doubt, of wretched
god-forgetting Unbelief;--you were miserable then, powerless, mad:
how could you _do_ or work at all? Such Gospel Johnson preached and
taught;--coupled, theoretically and practically, with this other great
Gospel, "Clear your mind of Cant!" Have no trade with Cant: stand on the
cold mud in the frosty weather, but let it be in your own _real_ torn
shoes: "that will be better for you," as Mahomet says! I call this, I
call these two things _joined together_, a great Gospel, the greatest
perhaps that was possible at that time.

Johnson's Writings, which once had such currency and celebrity, are
now as it were disowned by the young generation. It is not wonderful;
Johnson's opinions are fast becoming obsolete: but his style of thinking
and of living, we may hope, will never become obsolete. I find in
Johnson's Books the indisputablest traces of a great intellect and great
heart;--ever welcome, under what obstructions and perversions soever.
They are _sincere_ words, those of his; he means things by them. A
wondrous buckram style,--the best he could get to then; a measured
grandiloquence, stepping or rather stalking along in a very solemn
way, grown obsolete now; sometimes a tumid _size_ of phraseology not in
proportion to the contents of it: all this you will put up with. For
the phraseology, tumid or not, has always _something within it_. So
many beautiful styles and books, with _nothing_ in them;--a man is
a malefactor to the world who writes such! _They_ are the avoidable
kind!--Had Johnson left nothing but his _Dictionary_, one might have
traced there a great intellect, a genuine man. Looking to its clearness
of definition, its general solidity, honesty, insight and successful
method, it may be called the best of all Dictionaries. There is in it
a kind of architectural nobleness; it stands there like a great solid
square-built edifice, finished, symmetrically complete: you judge that a
true Builder did it.

One word, in spite of our haste, must be granted to poor Bozzy. He
passes for a mean, inflated, gluttonous creature; and was so in many
senses. Yet the fact of his reverence for Johnson will ever remain
noteworthy. The foolish conceited Scotch Laird, the most conceited man
of his time, approaching in such awe-struck attitude the great dusty
irascible Pedagogue in his mean garret there: it is a genuine reverence
for Excellence; a _worship_ for Heroes, at a time when neither Heroes
nor worship were surmised to exist. Heroes, it would seem, exist always,
and a certain worship of them! We will also take the liberty to deny
altogether that of the witty Frenchman, that no man is a Hero to his
valet-de-chambre. Or if so, it is not the Hero's blame, but the Valet's:
that his soul, namely, is a mean _valet_-soul! He expects his Hero
to advance in royal stage-trappings, with measured step, trains borne
behind him, trumpets sounding before him. It should stand rather, No
man can be a _Grand-Monarque_ to his valet-de-chambre. Strip your Louis
Quatorze of his king-gear, and there _is_ left nothing but a poor forked
radish with a head fantastically carved;--admirable to no valet. The
Valet does not know a Hero when he sees him! Alas, no: it requires a
kind of _Hero_ to do that;--and one of the world's wants, in _this_ as
in other senses, is for most part want of such.

On the whole, shall we not say, that Boswell's admiration was well
bestowed; that he could have found no soul in all England so worthy of
bending down before? Shall we not say, of this great mournful Johnson
too, that he guided his difficult confused existence wisely; led it
_well_, like a right valiant man? That waste chaos of Authorship by
trade; that waste chaos of Scepticism in religion and politics, in
life-theory and life-practice; in his poverty, in his dust and dimness,
with the sick body and the rusty coat: he made it do for him, like a
brave man. Not wholly without a loadstar in the Eternal; he had still
a loadstar, as the brave all need to have: with his eye set on that, he
would change his course for nothing in these confused vortices of the
lower sea of Time. "To the Spirit of Lies, bearing death and hunger, he
would in nowise strike his flag." Brave old Samuel: _ultimus Romanorum_!


Of Rousseau and his Heroism I cannot say so much. He is not what I
call a strong man. A morbid, excitable, spasmodic man; at best, intense
rather than strong. He had not "the talent of Silence," an invaluable
talent; which few Frenchmen, or indeed men of any sort in these times,
excel in! The suffering man ought really "to consume his own smoke;"
there is no good in emitting _smoke_ till you have made it into
_fire_,--which, in the metaphorical sense too, all smoke is capable
of becoming! Rousseau has not depth or width, not calm force for
difficulty; the first characteristic of true greatness. A fundamental
mistake to call vehemence and rigidity strength! A man is not strong who
takes convulsion-fits; though six men cannot hold him then. He that can
walk under the heaviest weight without staggering, he is the strong
man. We need forever, especially in these loud-shrieking days, to remind
ourselves of that. A man who cannot _hold his peace_, till the time come
for speaking and acting, is no right man.

Poor Rousseau's face is to me expressive of him. A high but narrow
contracted intensity in it: bony brows; deep, strait-set eyes, in
which there is something bewildered-looking,--bewildered, peering with
lynx-eagerness. A face full of misery, even ignoble misery, and also of
the antagonism against that; something mean, plebeian there, redeemed
only by _intensity_: the face of what is called a Fanatic,--a sadly
_contracted_ Hero! We name him here because, with all his drawbacks, and
they are many, he has the first and chief characteristic of a Hero: he
is heartily _in earnest_. In earnest, if ever man was; as none of these
French Philosophers were. Nay, one would say, of an earnestness too
great for his otherwise sensitive, rather feeble nature; and which
indeed in the end drove him into the strangest incoherences, almost
delirations. There had come, at last, to be a kind of madness in him:
his Ideas _possessed_ him like demons; hurried him so about, drove him
over steep places--!

The fault and misery of Rousseau was what we easily name by a single
word, _Egoism_; which is indeed the source and summary of all faults and
miseries whatsoever. He had not perfected himself into victory over mere
Desire; a mean Hunger, in many sorts, was still the motive principle of
him. I am afraid he was a very vain man; hungry for the praises of men.
You remember Genlis's experience of him. She took Jean Jacques to the
Theatre; he bargaining for a strict incognito,--"He would not be seen
there for the world!" The curtain did happen nevertheless to be drawn
aside: the Pit recognized Jean Jacques, but took no great notice of him!
He expressed the bitterest indignation; gloomed all evening, spake no
other than surly words. The glib Countess remained entirely convinced
that his anger was not at being seen, but at not being applauded
when seen. How the whole nature of the man is poisoned; nothing but
suspicion, self-isolation, fierce moody ways! He could not live with
anybody. A man of some rank from the country, who visited him often, and
used to sit with him, expressing all reverence and affection for him,
comes one day; finds Jean Jacques full of the sourest unintelligible
humor. "Monsieur," said Jean Jacques, with flaming eyes, "I know why you
come here. You come to see what a poor life I lead; how little is in my
poor pot that is boiling there. Well, look into the pot! There is half a
pound of meat, one carrot and three onions; that is all: go and tell the
whole world that, if you like, Monsieur!"--A man of this sort was far
gone. The whole world got itself supplied with anecdotes, for light
laughter, for a certain theatrical interest, from these perversions and
contortions of poor Jean Jacques. Alas, to him they were not laughing or
theatrical; too real to him! The contortions of a dying gladiator: the
crowded amphitheatre looks on with entertainment; but the gladiator is
in agonies and dying.

And yet this Rousseau, as we say, with his passionate appeals to
Mothers, with his _contrat-social_, with his celebrations of Nature,
even of savage life in Nature, did once more touch upon Reality,
struggle towards Reality; was doing the function of a Prophet to his
Time. As he could, and as the Time could! Strangely through all that
defacement, degradation and almost madness, there is in the inmost heart
of poor Rousseau a spark of real heavenly fire. Once more, out of
the element of that withered mocking Philosophism, Scepticism and
Persiflage, there has arisen in this man the ineradicable feeling and
knowledge that this Life of ours is true: not a Scepticism, Theorem,
or Persiflage, but a Fact, an awful Reality. Nature had made that
revelation to him; had ordered him to speak it out. He got it spoken
out; if not well and clearly, then ill and dimly,--as clearly as he
could. Nay what are all errors and perversities of his, even those
stealings of ribbons, aimless confused miseries and vagabondisms, if we
will interpret them kindly, but the blinkard dazzlement and staggerings
to and fro of a man sent on an errand he is too weak for, by a path he
cannot yet find? Men are led by strange ways. One should have tolerance
for a man, hope of him; leave him to try yet what he will do. While life
lasts, hope lasts for every man.

Of Rousseau's literary talents, greatly celebrated still among his
countrymen, I do not say much. His Books, like himself, are what I
call unhealthy; not the good sort of Books. There is a sensuality in
Rousseau. Combined with such an intellectual gift as his, it makes
pictures of a certain gorgeous attractiveness: but they are not
genuinely poetical. Not white sunlight: something _operatic_; a kind
of rose-pink, artificial bedizenment. It is frequent, or rather it
is universal, among the French since his time. Madame de Stael has
something of it; St. Pierre; and down onwards to the present astonishing
convulsionary "Literature of Desperation," it is everywhere abundant.
That same _rose-pink_ is not the right hue. Look at a Shakspeare, at a
Goethe, even at a Walter Scott! He who has once seen into this, has seen
the difference of the True from the Sham-True, and will discriminate
them ever afterwards.

We had to observe in Johnson how much good a Prophet, under all
disadvantages and disorganizations, can accomplish for the world. In
Rousseau we are called to look rather at the fearful amount of evil
which, under such disorganization, may accompany the good. Historically
it is a most pregnant spectacle, that of Rousseau. Banished into Paris
garrets, in the gloomy company of his own Thoughts and Necessities
there; driven from post to pillar; fretted, exasperated till the heart
of him went mad, he had grown to feel deeply that the world was not his
friend nor the world's law. It was expedient, if any way possible, that
such a man should _not_ have been set in flat hostility with the world.
He could be cooped into garrets, laughed at as a maniac, left to starve
like a wild beast in his cage;--but he could not be hindered from
setting the world on fire. The French Revolution found its Evangelist in
Rousseau. His semi-delirious speculations on the miseries of civilized
life, the preferability of the savage to the civilized, and such like,
helped well to produce a whole delirium in France generally. True, you
may well ask, What could the world, the governors of the world, do with
such a man? Difficult to say what the governors of the world could
do with him! What he could do with them is unhappily clear
enough,--_guillotine_ a great many of them! Enough now of Rousseau.


It was a curious phenomenon, in the withered, unbelieving second-hand
Eighteenth Century, that of a Hero starting up, among the artificial
pasteboard figures and productions, in the guise of a Robert Burns. Like
a little well in the rocky desert places,--like a sudden splendor of
Heaven in the artificial Vauxhall! People knew not what to make of
it. They took it for a piece of the Vauxhall fire-work; alas, it _let_
itself be so taken, though struggling half-blindly, as in bitterness of
death, against that! Perhaps no man had such a false reception from his
fellow-men. Once more a very wasteful life-drama was enacted under the
sun.

The tragedy of Burns's life is known to all of you. Surely we may
say, if discrepancy between place held and place merited constitute
perverseness of lot for a man, no lot could be more perverse then
Burns's. Among those second-hand acting-figures, _mimes_ for most part,
of the Eighteenth Century, once more a giant Original Man; one of those
men who reach down to the perennial Deeps, who take rank with the Heroic
among men: and he was born in a poor Ayrshire hut. The largest soul
of all the British lands came among us in the shape of a hard-handed
Scottish Peasant.

His Father, a poor toiling man, tried various things; did not succeed in
any; was involved in continual difficulties. The Steward, Factor as
the Scotch call him, used to send letters and threatenings, Burns says,
"which threw us all into tears." The brave, hard-toiling, hard-suffering
Father, his brave heroine of a wife; and those children, of whom Robert
was one! In this Earth, so wide otherwise, no shelter for _them_. The
letters "threw us all into tears:" figure it. The brave Father, I say
always;--a _silent_ Hero and Poet; without whom the son had never been
a speaking one! Burns's Schoolmaster came afterwards to London, learnt
what good society was; but declares that in no meeting of men did he
ever enjoy better discourse than at the hearth of this peasant. And his
poor "seven acres of nursery-ground,"--not that, nor the miserable patch
of clay-farm, nor anything he tried to get a living by, would prosper
with him; he had a sore unequal battle all his days. But he stood to
it valiantly; a wise, faithful, unconquerable man;--swallowing down
how many sore sufferings daily into silence; fighting like an unseen
Hero,--nobody publishing newspaper paragraphs about his nobleness;
voting pieces of plate to him! However, he was not lost; nothing
is lost. Robert is there the outcome of him,--and indeed of many
generations of such as him.

This Burns appeared under every disadvantage: uninstructed, poor, born
only to hard manual toil; and writing, when it came to that, in a rustic
special dialect, known only to a small province of the country he lived
in. Had he written, even what he did write, in the general language of
England, I doubt not he had already become universally recognized as
being, or capable to be, one of our greatest men. That he should have
tempted so many to penetrate through the rough husk of that dialect of
his, is proof that there lay something far from common within it. He
has gained a certain recognition, and is continuing to do so over all
quarters of our wide Saxon world: wheresoever a Saxon dialect is spoken,
it begins to be understood, by personal inspection of this and the
other, that one of the most considerable Saxon men of the Eighteenth
Century was an Ayrshire Peasant named Robert Burns. Yes, I will say,
here too was a piece of the right Saxon stuff: strong as the Harz-rock,
rooted in the depths of the world;--rock, yet with wells of living
softness in it! A wild impetuous whirlwind of passion and faculty
slumbered quiet there; such heavenly _melody_ dwelling in the heart of
it. A noble rough genuineness; homely, rustic, honest; true simplicity
of strength; with its lightning-fire, with its soft dewy pity;--like the
old Norse Thor, the Peasant-god!

Burns's Brother Gilbert, a man of much sense and worth, has told me that
Robert, in his young days, in spite of their hardship, was usually
the gayest of speech; a fellow of infinite frolic, laughter, sense and
heart; far pleasanter to hear there, stript cutting peats in the bog, or
such like, than he ever afterwards knew him. I can well believe it. This
basis of mirth ("_fond gaillard_," as old Marquis Mirabeau calls it), a
primal element of sunshine and joyfulness, coupled with his other deep
and earnest qualities, is one of the most attractive characteristics
of Burns. A large fund of Hope dwells in him; spite of his tragical
history, he is not a mourning man. He shakes his sorrows gallantly
aside; bounds forth victorious over them. It is as the lion shaking
"dew-drops from his mane;" as the swift-bounding horse, that _laughs_
at the shaking of the spear.--But indeed, Hope, Mirth, of the sort
like Burns's, are they not the outcome properly of warm generous
affection,--such as is the beginning of all to every man?

You would think it strange if I called Burns the most gifted British
soul we had in all that century of his: and yet I believe the day is
coming when there will be little danger in saying so. His writings, all
that he _did_ under such obstructions, are only a poor fragment of him.
Professor Stewart remarked very justly, what indeed is true of all Poets
good for much, that his poetry was not any particular faculty; but the
general result of a naturally vigorous original mind expressing itself
in that way. Burns's gifts, expressed in conversation, are the theme
of all that ever heard him. All kinds of gifts: from the gracefulest
utterances of courtesy, to the highest fire of passionate speech; loud
floods of mirth, soft wailings of affection, laconic emphasis, clear
piercing insight; all was in him. Witty duchesses celebrate him as a
man whose speech "led them off their feet." This is beautiful: but still
more beautiful that which Mr. Lockhart has recorded, which I have more
than once alluded to, How the waiters and ostlers at inns would get
out of bed, and come crowding to hear this man speak! Waiters and
ostlers:--they too were men, and here was a man! I have heard much about
his speech; but one of the best things I ever heard of it was, last
year, from a venerable gentleman long familiar with him. That it was
speech distinguished by always _having something in it_. "He spoke
rather little than much," this old man told me; "sat rather silent in
those early days, as in the company of persons above him; and always
when he did speak, it was to throw new light on the matter." I know not
why any one should ever speak otherwise!--But if we look at his
general force of soul, his healthy _robustness_ every way, the rugged
downrightness, penetration, generous valor and manfulness that was in
him,--where shall we readily find a better-gifted man?

Among the great men of the Eighteenth Century, I sometimes feel as if
Burns might be found to resemble Mirabeau more than any other. They
differ widely in vesture; yet look at them intrinsically. There is the
same burly thick-necked strength of body as of soul;--built, in both
cases, on what the old Marquis calls a _fond gaillard_. By nature, by
course of breeding, indeed by nation, Mirabeau has much more of bluster;
a noisy, forward, unresting man. But the characteristic of Mirabeau too
is veracity and sense, power of true _insight_, superiority of vision.
The thing that he says is worth remembering. It is a flash of insight
into some object or other: so do both these men speak. The same raging
passions; capable too in both of manifesting themselves as the tenderest
noble affections. Wit; wild laughter, energy, directness, sincerity:
these were in both. The types of the two men are not dissimilar. Burns
too could have governed, debated in National Assemblies; politicized, as
few could. Alas, the courage which had to exhibit itself in capture of
smuggling schooners in the Solway Frith; in keeping _silence_ over so
much, where no good speech, but only inarticulate rage was possible:
this might have bellowed forth Ushers de Breze and the like; and made
itself visible to all men, in managing of kingdoms, in ruling of great
ever-memorable epochs! But they said to him reprovingly, his Official
Superiors said, and wrote: "You are to work, not think." Of your
_thinking-faculty_, the greatest in this land, we have no need; you are
to gauge beer there; for that only are you wanted. Very notable;--and
worth mentioning, though we know what is to be said and answered! As if
Thought, Power of Thinking, were not, at all times, in all places and
situations of the world, precisely the thing that was wanted. The fatal
man, is he not always the unthinking man, the man who cannot think and
_see_; but only grope, and hallucinate, and _mis_see the nature of the
thing he works with? He mis-sees it, mis_takes_ it as we say; takes it
for one thing, and it _is_ another thing,--and leaves him standing like
a Futility there! He is the fatal man; unutterably fatal, put in the
high places of men.--"Why complain of this?" say some: "Strength is
mournfully denied its arena; that was true from of old." Doubtless;
and the worse for the _arena_, answer I! _Complaining_ profits little;
stating of the truth may profit. That a Europe, with its French
Revolution just breaking out, finds no need of a Burns except for
gauging beer,--is a thing I, for one, cannot _rejoice_ at--!

Once more we have to say here, that the chief quality of Burns is the
_sincerity_ of him. So in his Poetry, so in his Life. The song he sings
is not of fantasticalities; it is of a thing felt, really there; the
prime merit of this, as of all in him, and of his Life generally, is
truth. The Life of Burns is what we may call a great tragic sincerity. A
sort of savage sincerity,--not cruel, far from that; but wild, wrestling
naked with the truth of things. In that sense, there is something of the
savage in all great men.

Hero-worship,--Odin, Burns? Well; these Men of Letters too were not
without a kind of Hero-worship: but what a strange condition has that
got into now! The waiters and ostlers of Scotch inns, prying about
the door, eager to catch any word that fell from Burns, were doing
unconscious reverence to the Heroic. Johnson had his Boswell for
worshipper. Rousseau had worshippers enough; princes calling on him in
his mean garret; the great, the beautiful doing reverence to the poor
moon-struck man. For himself a most portentous contradiction; the two
ends of his life not to be brought into harmony. He sits at the tables
of grandees; and has to copy music for his own living. He cannot even
get his music copied: "By dint of dining out," says he, "I run the
risk of dying by starvation at home." For his worshippers too a most
questionable thing! If doing Hero-worship well or badly be the test of
vital well-being or ill-being to a generation, can we say that _these_
generations are very first-rate?--And yet our heroic Men of Letters
do teach, govern, are kings, priests, or what you like to call them;
intrinsically there is no preventing it by any means whatever. The world
has to obey him who thinks and sees in the world. The world can alter
the manner of that; can either have it as blessed continuous summer
sunshine, or as unblessed black thunder and tornado,--with unspeakable
difference of profit for the world! The manner of it is very alterable;
the matter and fact of it is not alterable by any power under the sky.
Light; or, failing that, lightning: the world can take its choice. Not
whether we call an Odin god, prophet, priest, or what we call him; but
whether we believe the word he tells us: there it all lies. If it be a
true word, we shall have to believe it; believing it, we shall have
to do it. What _name_ or welcome we give him or it, is a point that
concerns ourselves mainly. _It_, the new Truth, new deeper revealing of
the Secret of this Universe, is verily of the nature of a message from
on high; and must and will have itself obeyed.--

My last remark is on that notablest phasis of Burns's history,--his
visit to Edinburgh. Often it seems to me as if his demeanor there were
the highest proof he gave of what a fund of worth and genuine manhood
was in him. If we think of it, few heavier burdens could be laid on
the strength of a man. So sudden; all common _Lionism_. which ruins
innumerable men, was as nothing to this. It is as if Napoleon had
been made a King of, not gradually, but at once from the Artillery
Lieutenancy in the Regiment La Fere. Burns, still only in his
twenty-seventh year, is no longer even a ploughman; he is flying to the
West Indies to escape disgrace and a jail. This month he is a ruined
peasant, his wages seven pounds a year, and these gone from him: next
month he is in the blaze of rank and beauty, handing down jewelled
Duchesses to dinner; the cynosure of all eyes! Adversity is sometimes
hard upon a man; but for one man who can stand prosperity, there are a
hundred that will stand adversity. I admire much the way in which Burns
met all this. Perhaps no man one could point out, was ever so sorely
tried, and so little forgot himself. Tranquil, unastonished; not
abashed, not inflated, neither awkwardness nor affectation: he feels
that _he_ there is the man Robert Burns; that the "rank is but the
guinea-stamp;" that the celebrity is but the candle-light, which will
show _what_ man, not in the least make him a better or other man! Alas,
it may readily, unless he look to it, make him a _worse_ man; a wretched
inflated wind-bag,--inflated till he _burst_, and become a _dead_ lion;
for whom, as some one has said, "there is no resurrection of the body;"
worse than a living dog!--Burns is admirable here.

And yet, alas, as I have observed elsewhere, these Lion-hunters were the
ruin and death of Burns. It was they that rendered it impossible for him
to live! They gathered round him in his Farm; hindered his industry;
no place was remote enough from them. He could not get his Lionism
forgotten, honestly as he was disposed to do so. He falls into
discontents, into miseries, faults; the world getting ever more desolate
for him; health, character, peace of mind, all gone;--solitary enough
now. It is tragical to think of! These men came but to _see_ him; it was
out of no sympathy with him, nor no hatred to him. They came to get a
little amusement; they got their amusement;--and the Hero's life went
for it!

Richter says, in the Island of Sumatra there is a kind of
"Light-chafers," large Fire-flies, which people stick upon spits, and
illuminate the ways with at night. Persons of condition can thus travel
with a pleasant radiance, which they much admire. Great honor to the
Fire-flies! But--!




LECTURE VI. THE HERO AS KING. CROMWELL, NAPOLEON: MODERN REVOLUTIONISM.

[May 22, 1840.]

We come now to the last form of Heroism; that which we call Kingship.
The Commander over Men; he to whose will our wills are to be
subordinated, and loyally surrender themselves, and find their welfare
in doing so, may be reckoned the most important of Great Men. He is
practically the summary for us of _all_ the various figures of Heroism;
Priest, Teacher, whatsoever of earthly or of spiritual dignity we can
fancy to reside in a man, embodies itself here, to _command_ over us, to
furnish us with constant practical teaching, to tell us for the day and
hour what we are to _do_. He is called _Rex_, Regulator, _Roi_: our own
name is still better; King, _Konning_, which means _Can_-ning, Able-man.

Numerous considerations, pointing towards deep, questionable, and indeed
unfathomable regions, present themselves here: on the most of which we
must resolutely for the present forbear to speak at all. As Burke said
that perhaps fair _Trial by Jury_ was the soul of Government, and that
all legislation, administration, parliamentary debating, and the rest
of it, went on, in "order to bring twelve impartial men into a
jury-box;"--so, by much stronger reason, may I say here, that the
finding of your _Ableman_ and getting him invested with the _symbols of
ability_, with dignity, worship (_worth_-ship), royalty, kinghood,
or whatever we call it, so that _he_ may actually have room to guide
according to his faculty of doing it,--is the business, well or
ill accomplished, of all social procedure whatsoever in this world!
Hustings-speeches, Parliamentary motions, Reform Bills, French
Revolutions, all mean at heart this; or else nothing. Find in any
country the Ablest Man that exists there; raise _him_ to the supreme
place, and loyally reverence him: you have a perfect government for
that country; no ballot-box, parliamentary eloquence, voting,
constitution-building, or other machinery whatsoever can improve it a
whit. It is in the perfect state; an ideal country. The Ablest Man; he
means also the truest-hearted, justest, the Noblest Man: what he _tells
us to do_ must be precisely the wisest, fittest, that we could anywhere
or anyhow learn;--the thing which it will in all ways behoove US, with
right loyal thankfulness and nothing doubting, to do! Our _doing_ and
life were then, so far as government could regulate it, well regulated;
that were the ideal of constitutions.

Alas, we know very well that Ideals can never be completely embodied in
practice. Ideals must ever lie a very great way off; and we will right
thankfully content ourselves with any not intolerable approximation
thereto! Let no man, as Schiller says, too querulously "measure by a
scale of perfection the meagre product of reality" in this poor world
of ours. We will esteem him no wise man; we will esteem him a sickly,
discontented, foolish man. And yet, on the other hand, it is never to be
forgotten that Ideals do exist; that if they be not approximated to at
all, the whole matter goes to wreck! Infallibly. No bricklayer builds a
wall _perfectly_ perpendicular, mathematically this is not possible;
a certain degree of perpendicularity suffices him; and he, like a good
bricklayer, who must have done with his job, leaves it so. And yet if he
sway _too much_ from the perpendicular; above all, if he throw plummet
and level quite away from him, and pile brick on brick heedless, just
as it comes to hand--! Such bricklayer, I think, is in a bad way. He has
forgotten himself: but the Law of Gravitation does not forget to act on
him; he and his wall rush down into confused welter of ruin--!

This is the history of all rebellions, French Revolutions, social
explosions in ancient or modern times. You have put the too _Un_able
Man at the head of affairs! The too ignoble, unvaliant, fatuous man. You
have forgotten that there is any rule, or natural necessity whatever, of
putting the Able Man there. Brick must lie on brick as it may and can.
Unable Simulacrum of Ability, _quack_, in a word, must adjust himself
with quack, in all manner of administration of human things;--which
accordingly lie unadministered, fermenting into unmeasured masses
of failure, of indigent misery: in the outward, and in the inward or
spiritual, miserable millions stretch out the hand for their due supply,
and it is not there. The "law of gravitation" acts; Nature's laws do
none of them forget to act. The miserable millions burst forth into
Sansculottism, or some other sort of madness: bricks and bricklayer lie
as a fatal chaos--!

Much sorry stuff, written some hundred years ago or more, about the
"Divine right of Kings," moulders unread now in the Public Libraries of
this country. Far be it from us to disturb the calm process by which it
is disappearing harmlessly from the earth, in those repositories! At the
same time, not to let the immense rubbish go without leaving us, as it
ought, some soul of it behind--I will say that it did mean something;
something true, which it is important for us and all men to keep in
mind. To assert that in whatever man you chose to lay hold of (by this
or the other plan of clutching at him); and claps a round piece of metal
on the head of, and called King,--there straightway came to reside
a divine virtue, so that _he_ became a kind of god, and a Divinity
inspired him with faculty and right to rule over you to all lengths:
this,--what can we do with this but leave it to rot silently in
the Public Libraries? But I will say withal, and that is what these
Divine-right men meant, That in Kings, and in all human Authorities,
and relations that men god-created can form among each other, there is
verily either a Divine Right or else a Diabolic Wrong; one or the
other of these two! For it is false altogether, what the last Sceptical
Century taught us, that this world is a steam-engine. There is a God in
this world; and a God's-sanction, or else the violation of such, does
look out from all ruling and obedience, from all moral acts of men.
There is no act more moral between men than that of rule and obedience.
Woe to him that claims obedience when it is not due; woe to him
that refuses it when it is! God's law is in that, I say, however the
Parchment-laws may run: there is a Divine Right or else a Diabolic Wrong
at the heart of every claim that one man makes upon another.

It can do none of us harm to reflect on this: in all the relations of
life it will concern us; in Loyalty and Royalty, the highest of these. I
esteem the modern error, That all goes by self-interest and the checking
and balancing of greedy knaveries, and that in short, there is nothing
divine whatever in the association of men, a still more despicable
error, natural as it is to an unbelieving century, than that of a
"divine right" in people _called_ Kings. I say, Find me the true
_Konning_, King, or Able-man, and he _has_ a divine right over me. That
we knew in some tolerable measure how to find him, and that all men were
ready to acknowledge his divine right when found: this is precisely the
healing which a sick world is everywhere, in these ages, seeking after!
The true King, as guide of the practical, has ever something of the
Pontiff in him,--guide of the spiritual, from which all practice has
its rise. This too is a true saying, That the _King_ is head of the
_Church_.--But we will leave the Polemic stuff of a dead century to lie
quiet on its bookshelves.


Certainly it is a fearful business, that of having your Ableman to
_seek_, and not knowing in what manner to proceed about it! That is
the world's sad predicament in these times of ours. They are times
of revolution, and have long been. The bricklayer with his bricks,
no longer heedful of plummet or the law of gravitation, have toppled,
tumbled, and it all welters as we see! But the beginning of it was not
the French Revolution; that is rather the _end_, we can hope. It were
truer to say, the _beginning_ was three centuries farther back: in
the Reformation of Luther. That the thing which still called itself
Christian Church had become a Falsehood, and brazenly went about
pretending to pardon men's sins for metallic coined money, and to do
much else which in the everlasting truth of Nature it did _not_ now do:
here lay the vital malady. The inward being wrong, all outward went ever
more and more wrong. Belief died away; all was Doubt, Disbelief. The
builder cast _away_ his plummet; said to himself, "What is gravitation?
Brick lies on brick there!" Alas, does it not still sound strange to
many of us, the assertion that there _is_ a God's-truth in the business
of god-created men; that all is not a kind of grimace, an "expediency,"
diplomacy, one knows not what--!

From that first necessary assertion of Luther's, "You, self-styled
_Papa_, you are no Father in God at all; you are--a Chimera, whom I know
not how to name in polite language!"--from that onwards to the shout
which rose round Camille Desmoulins in the Palais-Royal, "_Aux armes_!"
when the people had burst up against _all_ manner of Chimeras,--I find
a natural historical sequence. That shout too, so frightful,
half-infernal, was a great matter. Once more the voice of awakened
nations;--starting confusedly, as out of nightmare, as out of
death-sleep, into some dim feeling that Life was real; that God's-world
was not an expediency and diplomacy! Infernal;--yes, since they would
not have it otherwise. Infernal, since not celestial or terrestrial!
Hollowness, insincerity _has_ to cease; sincerity of some sort has to
begin. Cost what it may, reigns of terror, horrors of French Revolution
or what else, we have to return to truth. Here is a Truth, as I said: a
Truth clad in hell-fire, since they would not but have it so--!

A common theory among considerable parties of men in England and
elsewhere used to be, that the French Nation had, in those days, as
it were gone _mad_; that the French Revolution was a general act of
insanity, a temporary conversion of France and large sections of the
world into a kind of Bedlam. The Event had risen and raged; but was a
madness and nonentity,--gone now happily into the region of Dreams and
the Picturesque!--To such comfortable philosophers, the Three Days of
July, 1830, must have been a surprising phenomenon. Here is the French
Nation risen again, in musketry and death-struggle, out shooting and
being shot, to make that same mad French Revolution good! The sons and
grandsons of those men, it would seem, persist in the enterprise: they
do not disown it; they will have it made good; will have themselves
shot, if it be not made good. To philosophers who had made up their
life-system, on that "madness" quietus, no phenomenon could be more
alarming. Poor Niebuhr, they say, the Prussian Professor and Historian,
fell broken-hearted in consequence; sickened, if we can believe it, and
died of the Three Days! It was surely not a very heroic death;--little
better than Racine's, dying because Louis Fourteenth looked sternly on
him once. The world had stood some considerable shocks, in its time;
might have been expected to survive the Three Days too, and be found
turning on its axis after even them! The Three Days told all mortals
that the old French Revolution, mad as it might look, was not a
transitory ebullition of Bedlam, but a genuine product of this Earth
where we all live; that it was verily a Fact, and that the world in
general would do well everywhere to regard it as such.

Truly, without the French Revolution, one would not know what to make
of an age like this at all. We will hail the French Revolution, as
shipwrecked mariners might the sternest rock, in a world otherwise all
of baseless sea and waves. A true Apocalypse, though a terrible one, to
this false withered artificial time; testifying once more that Nature
is _preter_natural; if not divine, then diabolic; that Semblance is
not Reality; that it has to become Reality, or the world will take fire
under it,--burn _it_ into what it is, namely Nothing! Plausibility has
ended; empty Routine has ended; much has ended. This, as with a Trump of
Doom, has been proclaimed to all men. They are the wisest who will
learn it soonest. Long confused generations before it be learned; peace
impossible till it be! The earnest man, surrounded, as ever, with a
world of inconsistencies, can await patiently, patiently strive to do
_his_ work, in the midst of that. Sentence of Death is written down
in Heaven against all that; sentence of Death is now proclaimed on the
Earth against it: this he with his eyes may see. And surely, I
should say, considering the other side of the matter, what enormous
difficulties lie there, and how fast, fearfully fast, in all countries,
the inexorable demand for solution of them is pressing on,--he may
easily find other work to do than laboring in the Sansculottic province
at this time of day!

To me, in these circumstances, that of "Hero-worship" becomes a fact
inexpressibly precious; the most solacing fact one sees in the world at
present. There is an everlasting hope in it for the management of the
world. Had all traditions, arrangements, creeds, societies that men ever
instituted, sunk away, this would remain. The certainty of Heroes being
sent us; our faculty, our necessity, to reverence Heroes when sent: it
shines like a polestar through smoke-clouds, dust-clouds, and all manner
of down-rushing and conflagration.

Hero-worship would have sounded very strange to those workers and
fighters in the French Revolution. Not reverence for Great Men; not any
hope or belief, or even wish, that Great Men could again appear in the
world! Nature, turned into a "Machine," was as if effete now; could not
any longer produce Great Men:--I can tell her, she may give up the trade
altogether, then; we cannot do without Great Men!--But neither have I
any quarrel with that of "Liberty and Equality;" with the faith that,
wise great men being impossible, a level immensity of foolish small
men would suffice. It was a natural faith then and there. "Liberty and
Equality; no Authority needed any longer. Hero-worship, reverence for
_such_ Authorities, has proved false, is itself a falsehood; no more
of it! We have had such _forgeries_, we will now trust nothing. So
many base plated coins passing in the market, the belief has now become
common that no gold any longer exists,--and even that we can do very
well without gold!" I find this, among other things, in that universal
cry of Liberty and Equality; and find it very natural, as matters then
stood.

And yet surely it is but the _transition_ from false to true. Considered
as the whole truth, it is false altogether;--the product of entire
sceptical blindness, as yet only _struggling_ to see. Hero-worship
exists forever, and everywhere: not Loyalty alone; it extends from
divine adoration down to the lowest practical regions of life. "Bending
before men," if it is not to be a mere empty grimace, better dispensed
with than practiced, is Hero-worship,--a recognition that there does
dwell in that presence of our brother something divine; that every
created man, as Novalis said, is a "revelation in the Flesh." They were
Poets too, that devised all those graceful courtesies which make life
noble! Courtesy is not a falsehood or grimace; it need not be such.
And Loyalty, religious Worship itself, are still possible; nay still
inevitable.

May we not say, moreover, while so many of our late Heroes have worked
rather as revolutionary men, that nevertheless every Great Man, every
genuine man, is by the nature of him a son of Order, not of Disorder? It
is a tragical position for a true man to work in revolutions. He seems
an anarchist; and indeed a painful element of anarchy does encumber him
at every step,--him to whose whole soul anarchy is hostile, hateful.
His mission is Order; every man's is. He is here to make what was
disorderly, chaotic, into a thing ruled, regular. He is the missionary
of Order. Is not all work of man in this world a _making of Order_? The
carpenter finds rough trees; shapes them, constrains them into square
fitness, into purpose and use. We are all born enemies of Disorder:
it is tragical for us all to be concerned in image-breaking and
down-pulling; for the Great Man, _more_ a man than we, it is doubly
tragical.

Thus too all human things, maddest French Sansculottisms, do and must
work towards Order. I say, there is not a _man_ in them, raging in the
thickest of the madness, but is impelled withal, at all moments, towards
Order. His very life means that; Disorder is dissolution, death. No
chaos but it seeks a _centre_ to revolve round. While man is
man, some Cromwell or Napoleon is the necessary finish of a
Sansculottism.--Curious: in those days when Hero-worship was the most
incredible thing to every one, how it does come out nevertheless, and
assert itself practically, in a way which all have to credit. Divine
_right_, take it on the great scale, is found to mean divine _might_
withal! While old false Formulas are getting trampled everywhere into
destruction, new genuine Substances unexpectedly unfold themselves
indestructible. In rebellious ages, when Kingship itself seems dead and
abolished, Cromwell, Napoleon step forth again as Kings. The history of
these men is what we have now to look at, as our last phasis of Heroism.
The old ages are brought back to us; the manner in which Kings were
made, and Kingship itself first took rise, is again exhibited in the
history of these Two.


We have had many civil wars in England; wars of Red and White Roses,
wars of Simon de Montfort; wars enough, which are not very memorable.
But that war of the Puritans has a significance which belongs to no one
of the others. Trusting to your candor, which will suggest on the other
side what I have not room to say, I will call it a section once more of
that great universal war which alone makes up the true History of the
World,--the war of Belief against Unbelief! The struggle of men intent
on the real essence of things, against men intent on the semblances and
forms of things. The Puritans, to many, seem mere savage Iconoclasts,
fierce destroyers of Forms; but it were more just to call them haters of
_untrue_ Forms. I hope we know how to respect Laud and his King as well
as them. Poor Laud seems to me to have been weak and ill-starred, not
dishonest an unfortunate Pedant rather than anything worse. His "Dreams"
and superstitions, at which they laugh so, have an affectionate, lovable
kind of character. He is like a College-Tutor, whose whole world is
forms, College-rules; whose notion is that these are the life and safety
of the world. He is placed suddenly, with that unalterable luckless
notion of his, at the head not of a College but of a Nation, to regulate
the most complex deep-reaching interests of men. He thinks they ought to
go by the old decent regulations; nay that their salvation will lie in
extending and improving these. Like a weak man, he drives with spasmodic
vehemence towards his purpose; cramps himself to it, heeding no voice of
prudence, no cry of pity: He will have his College-rules obeyed by his
Collegians; that first; and till that, nothing. He is an ill-starred
Pedant, as I said. He would have it the world was a College of that
kind, and the world was _not_ that. Alas, was not his doom stern enough?
Whatever wrongs he did, were they not all frightfully avenged on him?

It is meritorious to insist on forms; Religion and all else naturally
clothes itself in forms. Everywhere the _formed_ world is the only
habitable one. The naked formlessness of Puritanism is not the thing
I praise in the Puritans; it is the thing I pity,--praising only
the spirit which had rendered that inevitable! All substances clothe
themselves in forms: but there are suitable true forms, and then there
are untrue unsuitable. As the briefest definition, one might say, Forms
which _grow_ round a substance, if we rightly understand that, will
correspond to the real nature and purport of it, will be true, good;
forms which are consciously _put_ round a substance, bad. I invite you
to reflect on this. It distinguishes true from false in Ceremonial Form,
earnest solemnity from empty pageant, in all human things.

There must be a veracity, a natural spontaneity in forms. In the
commonest meeting of men, a person making, what we call, "set speeches,"
is not he an offence? In the mere drawing-room, whatsoever courtesies
you see to be grimaces, prompted by no spontaneous reality within, are a
thing you wish to get away from. But suppose now it were some matter
of vital concernment, some transcendent matter (as Divine Worship is),
about which your whole soul, struck dumb with its excess of feeling,
knew not how to _form_ itself into utterance at all, and preferred
formless silence to any utterance there possible,--what should we say
of a man coming forward to represent or utter it for you in the way of
upholsterer-mummery? Such a man,--let him depart swiftly, if he love
himself! You have lost your only son; are mute, struck down, without
even tears: an importunate man importunately offers to celebrate Funeral
Games for him in the manner of the Greeks! Such mummery is not only not
to be accepted,--it is hateful, unendurable. It is what the old Prophets
called "Idolatry," worshipping of hollow _shows_; what all earnest men
do and will reject. We can partly understand what those poor Puritans
meant. Laud dedicating that St. Catherine Creed's Church, in the
manner we have it described; with his multiplied ceremonial bowings,
gesticulations, exclamations: surely it is rather the rigorous formal
Pedant, intent on his "College-rules," than the earnest Prophet intent
on the essence of the matter!

Puritanism found _such_ forms insupportable; trampled on such forms;--we
have to excuse it for saying, No form at all rather than such! It stood
preaching in its bare pulpit, with nothing but the Bible in its hand.
Nay, a man preaching from his earnest _soul_ into the earnest _souls_ of
men: is not this virtually the essence of all Churches whatsoever?
The nakedest, savagest reality, I say, is preferable to any semblance,
however dignified. Besides, it will clothe itself with _due_ semblance
by and by, if it be real. No fear of that; actually no fear at all.
Given the living _man_, there will be found _clothes_ for him; he will
find himself clothes. But the suit-of-clothes pretending that _it_ is
both clothes and man--! We cannot "fight the French" by three hundred
thousand red uniforms; there must be _men_ in the inside of them!
Semblance, I assert, must actually _not_ divorce itself from Reality.
If Semblance do,--why then there must be men found to rebel against
Semblance, for it has become a lie! These two Antagonisms at war here,
in the case of Laud and the Puritans, are as old nearly as the world.
They went to fierce battle over England in that age; and fought out
their confused controversy to a certain length, with many results for
all of us.


In the age which directly followed that of the Puritans, their cause or
themselves were little likely to have justice done them. Charles Second
and his Rochesters were not the kind of men you would set to judge what
the worth or meaning of such men might have been. That there could be
any faith or truth in the life of a man, was what these poor Rochesters,
and the age they ushered in, had forgotten. Puritanism was hung on
gibbets,--like the bones of the leading Puritans. Its work nevertheless
went on accomplishing itself. All true work of a man, hang the author of
it on what gibbet you like, must and will accomplish itself. We have our
_Habeas-Corpus_, our free Representation of the People; acknowledgment,
wide as the world, that all men are, or else must, shall, and will
become, what we call _free_ men;--men with their life grounded on
reality and justice, not on tradition, which has become unjust and
a chimera! This in part, and much besides this, was the work of the
Puritans.

And indeed, as these things became gradually manifest, the character
of the Puritans began to clear itself. Their memories were, one after
another, taken _down_ from the gibbet; nay a certain portion of them
are now, in these days, as good as canonized. Eliot, Hampden, Pym, nay
Ludlow, Hutchinson, Vane himself, are admitted to be a kind of Heroes;
political Conscript Fathers, to whom in no small degree we owe what
makes us a free England: it would not be safe for anybody to designate
these men as wicked now. Few Puritans of note but find their apologists
somewhere, and have a certain reverence paid them by earnest men. One
Puritan, I think, and almost he alone, our poor Cromwell, seems to hang
yet on the gibbet, and find no hearty apologist anywhere. Him neither
saint nor sinner will acquit of great wickedness. A man of ability,
infinite talent, courage, and so forth: but he betrayed the Cause.
Selfish ambition, dishonesty, duplicity; a fierce, coarse, hypocritical
_Tartuffe_; turning all that noble Struggle for constitutional Liberty
into a sorry farce played for his own benefit: this and worse is the
character they give of Cromwell. And then there come contrasts with
Washington and others; above all, with these noble Pyms and Hampdens,
whose noble work he stole for himself, and ruined into a futility and
deformity.

This view of Cromwell seems to me the not unnatural product of a century
like the Eighteenth. As we said of the Valet, so of the Sceptic: He does
not know a Hero when he sees him! The Valet expected purple mantles,
gilt sceptres, bodyguards and flourishes of trumpets: the Sceptic of
the Eighteenth century looks for regulated respectable Formulas,
"Principles," or what else he may call them; a style of speech and
conduct which has got to seem "respectable," which can plead for
itself in a handsome articulate manner, and gain the suffrages of an
enlightened sceptical Eighteenth century! It is, at bottom, the
same thing that both the Valet and he expect: the garnitures of some
_acknowledged_ royalty, which _then_ they will acknowledge! The King
coming to them in the rugged _un_formulistic state shall be no King.

For my own share, far be it from me to say or insinuate a word of
disparagement against such characters as Hampden, Elliot, Pym; whom I
believe to have been right worthy and useful men. I have read diligently
what books and documents about them I could come at;--with the honestest
wish to admire, to love and worship them like Heroes; but I am sorry to
say, if the real truth must be told, with very indifferent success! At
bottom, I found that it would not do. They are very noble men, these;
step along in their stately way, with their measured euphemisms,
philosophies, parliamentary eloquences, Ship-moneys, _Monarchies of
Man_; a most constitutional, unblamable, dignified set of men. But the
heart remains cold before them; the fancy alone endeavors to get up some
worship of them. What man's heart does, in reality, break forth into any
fire of brotherly love for these men? They are become dreadfully dull
men! One breaks down often enough in the constitutional eloquence of the
admirable Pym, with his "seventhly and lastly." You find that it may
be the admirablest thing in the world, but that it is heavy,--heavy as
lead, barren as brick-clay; that, in a word, for you there is little or
nothing now surviving there! One leaves all these Nobilities standing
in their niches of honor: the rugged outcast Cromwell, he is the man
of them all in whom one still finds human stuff. The great savage
_Baresark_: he could write no euphemistic _Monarchy of Man_; did not
speak, did not work with glib regularity; had no straight story to
tell for himself anywhere. But he stood bare, not cased in euphemistic
coat-of-mail; he grappled like a giant, face to face, heart to heart,
with the naked truth of things! That, after all, is the sort of man for
one. I plead guilty to valuing such a man beyond all other sorts of men.
Smooth-shaven Respectabilities not a few one finds, that are not good
for much. Small thanks to a man for keeping his hands clean, who would
not touch the work but with gloves on!

Neither, on the whole, does this constitutional tolerance of the
Eighteenth century for the other happier Puritans seem to be a very
great matter. One might say, it is but a piece of Formulism and
Scepticism, like the rest. They tell us, It was a sorrowful thing to
consider that the foundation of our English Liberties should have been
laid by "Superstition." These Puritans came forward with Calvinistic
incredible Creeds, Anti-Laudisms, Westminster Confessions; demanding,
chiefly of all, that they should have liberty to _worship_ in their own
way. Liberty to _tax_ themselves: that was the thing they should have
demanded! It was Superstition, Fanaticism, disgraceful ignorance of
Constitutional Philosophy to insist on the other thing!--Liberty to
_tax_ oneself? Not to pay out money from your pocket except on reason
shown? No century, I think, but a rather barren one would have fixed on
that as the first right of man! I should say, on the contrary, A just
man will generally have better cause than _money_ in what shape soever,
before deciding to revolt against his Government. Ours is a most
confused world; in which a good man will be thankful to see any kind of
Government maintain itself in a not insupportable manner: and here in
England, to this hour, if he is not ready to pay a great many taxes
which he can see very small reason in, it will not go well with him, I
think! He must try some other climate than this. Tax-gatherer? Money?
He will say: "Take my money, since you _can_, and it is so desirable to
you; take it,--and take yourself away with it; and leave me alone to my
work here. I am still here; can still work, after all the money you have
taken from me!" But if they come to him, and say, "Acknowledge a Lie;
pretend to say you are worshipping God, when you are not doing it:
believe not the thing that you find true, but the thing that I find, or
pretend to find true!" He will answer: "No; by God's help, no! You may
take my purse; but I cannot have my moral Self annihilated. The purse is
any Highwayman's who might meet me with a loaded pistol: but the Self is
mine and God my Maker's; it is not yours; and I will resist you to the
death, and revolt against you, and, on the whole, front all manner of
extremities, accusations and confusions, in defence of that!"--

Really, it seems to me the one reason which could justify revolting,
this of the Puritans. It has been the soul of all just revolts among
men. Not _Hunger_ alone produced even the French Revolution; no, but
the feeling of the insupportable all-pervading _Falsehood_ which had now
embodied itself in Hunger, in universal material Scarcity and Nonentity,
and thereby become _indisputably_ false in the eyes of all! We will
leave the Eighteenth century with its "liberty to tax itself." We will
not astonish ourselves that the meaning of such men as the Puritans
remained dim to it. To men who believe in no reality at all, how shall a
_real_ human soul, the intensest of all realities, as it were the Voice
of this world's Maker still speaking to us,--be intelligible? What it
cannot reduce into constitutional doctrines relative to "taxing," or
other the like material interest, gross, palpable to the sense, such
a century will needs reject as an amorphous heap of rubbish. Hampdens,
Pyms and Ship-money will be the theme of much constitutional eloquence,
striving to be fervid;--which will glitter, if not as fire does, then
as ice does: and the irreducible Cromwell will remain a chaotic mass of
"madness," "hypocrisy," and much else.


From of old, I will confess, this theory of Cromwell's falsity has
been incredible to me. Nay I cannot believe the like, of any Great Man
whatever. Multitudes of Great Men figure in History as false selfish
men; but if we will consider it, they are but _figures_ for us,
unintelligible shadows; we do not see into them as men that could have
existed at all. A superficial unbelieving generation only, with no eye
but for the surfaces and semblances of things, could form such notions
of Great Men. Can a great soul be possible without a _conscience_ in it,
the essence of all _real_ souls, great or small?--No, we cannot figure
Cromwell as a Falsity and Fatuity; the longer I study him and his
career, I believe this the less. Why should we? There is no evidence of
it. Is it not strange that, after all the mountains of calumny this
man has been subject to, after being represented as the very prince of
liars, who never, or hardly ever, spoke truth, but always some cunning
counterfeit of truth, there should not yet have been one falsehood
brought clearly home to him? A prince of liars, and no lie spoken by
him. Not one that I could yet get sight of. It is like Pococke asking
Grotius, Where is your _proof_ of Mahomet's Pigeon? No proof!--Let us
leave all these calumnious chimeras, as chimeras ought to be left. They
are not portraits of the man; they are distracted phantasms of him, the
joint product of hatred and darkness.

Looking at the man's life with our own eyes, it seems to me, a very
different hypothesis suggests itself. What little we know of his earlier
obscure years, distorted as it has come down to us, does it not all
betoken an earnest, affectionate, sincere kind of man? His nervous
melancholic temperament indicates rather a seriousness _too_ deep for
him. Of those stories of "Spectres;" of the white Spectre in broad
daylight, predicting that he should be King of England, we are not bound
to believe much;--probably no more than of the other black Spectre,
or Devil in person, to whom the Officer _saw_ him sell himself before
Worcester Fight! But the mournful, oversensitive, hypochondriac humor
of Oliver, in his young years, is otherwise indisputably known. The
Huntingdon Physician told Sir Philip Warwick himself, He had often been
sent for at midnight; Mr. Cromwell was full of hypochondria, thought
himself near dying, and "had fancies about the Town-cross." These things
are significant. Such an excitable deep-feeling nature, in that rugged
stubborn strength of his, is not the symptom of falsehood; it is the
symptom and promise of quite other than falsehood!

The young Oliver is sent to study Law; falls, or is said to have fallen,
for a little period, into some of the dissipations of youth; but if
so, speedily repents, abandons all this: not much above twenty, he is
married, settled as an altogether grave and quiet man. "He pays back
what money he had won at gambling," says the story;--he does not think
any gain of that kind could be really _his_. It is very interesting,
very natural, this "conversion," as they well name it; this awakening of
a great true soul from the worldly slough, to see into the awful _truth_
of things;--to see that Time and its shows all rested on Eternity, and
this poor Earth of ours was the threshold either of Heaven or of Hell!
Oliver's life at St. Ives and Ely, as a sober industrious Farmer, is it
not altogether as that of a true and devout man? He has renounced the
world and its ways; _its_ prizes are not the thing that can enrich him.
He tills the earth; he reads his Bible; daily assembles his servants
round him to worship God. He comforts persecuted ministers, is fond of
preachers; nay can himself preach,--exhorts his neighbors to be wise,
to redeem the time. In all this what "hypocrisy," "ambition," "cant,"
or other falsity? The man's hopes, I do believe, were fixed on the other
Higher World; his aim to get well _thither_, by walking well through his
humble course in _this_ world. He courts no notice: what could notice
here do for him? "Ever in his great Taskmaster's eye."

It is striking, too, how he comes out once into public view; he, since
no other is willing to come: in resistance to a public grievance. I
mean, in that matter of the Bedford Fens. No one else will go to law
with Authority; therefore he will. That matter once settled, he returns
back into obscurity, to his Bible and his Plough. "Gain influence"? His
influence is the most legitimate; derived from personal knowledge of
him, as a just, religious, reasonable and determined man. In this way
he has lived till past forty; old age is now in view of him, and the
earnest portal of Death and Eternity; it was at this point that he
suddenly became "ambitious"! I do not interpret his Parliamentary
mission in that way!

His successes in Parliament, his successes through the war, are honest
successes of a brave man; who has more resolution in the heart of him,
more light in the head of him than other men. His prayers to God; his
spoken thanks to the God of Victory, who had preserved him safe, and
carried him forward so far, through the furious clash of a world all set
in conflict, through desperate-looking envelopments at Dunbar; through
the death-hail of so many battles; mercy after mercy; to the "crowning
mercy" of Worcester Fight: all this is good and genuine for a
deep-hearted Calvinistic Cromwell. Only to vain unbelieving Cavaliers,
worshipping not God but their own "love-locks," frivolities and
formalities, living quite apart from contemplations of God, living
_without_ God in the world, need it seem hypocritical.

Nor will his participation in the King's death involve him in
condemnation with us. It is a stern business killing of a King! But if
you once go to war with him, it lies _there_; this and all else lies
there. Once at war, you have made wager of battle with him: it is he to
die, or else you. Reconciliation is problematic; may be possible, or,
far more likely, is impossible. It is now pretty generally admitted that
the Parliament, having vanquished Charles First, had no way of making
any tenable arrangement with him. The large Presbyterian party,
apprehensive now of the Independents, were most anxious to do so;
anxious indeed as for their own existence; but it could not be. The
unhappy Charles, in those final Hampton-Court negotiations, shows
himself as a man fatally incapable of being dealt with. A man who, once
for all, could not and would not _understand_:--whose thought did not
in any measure represent to him the real fact of the matter; nay worse,
whose _word_ did not at all represent his thought. We may say this
of him without cruelty, with deep pity rather: but it is true and
undeniable. Forsaken there of all but the _name_ of Kingship, he still,
finding himself treated with outward respect as a King, fancied that
he might play off party against party, and smuggle himself into his
old power by deceiving both. Alas, they both _discovered_ that he was
deceiving them. A man whose _word_ will not inform you at all what he
means or will do, is not a man you can bargain with. You must get out
of that man's way, or put him out of yours! The Presbyterians, in
their despair, were still for believing Charles, though found false,
unbelievable again and again. Not so Cromwell: "For all our fighting,"
says he, "we are to have a little bit of paper?" No--!

In fact, everywhere we have to note the decisive practical _eye_ of this
man; how he drives towards the practical and practicable; has a genuine
insight into what _is_ fact. Such an intellect, I maintain, does not
belong to a false man: the false man sees false shows, plausibilities,
expediences: the true man is needed to discern even practical truth.
Cromwell's advice about the Parliament's Army, early in the contest, How
they were to dismiss their city-tapsters, flimsy riotous persons, and
choose substantial yeomen, whose heart was in the work, to be soldiers
for them: this is advice by a man who _saw_. Fact answers, if you see
into Fact! Cromwell's _Ironsides_ were the embodiment of this insight of
his; men fearing God; and without any other fear. No more conclusively
genuine set of fighters ever trod the soil of England, or of any other
land.

Neither will we blame greatly that word of Cromwell's to them; which
was so blamed: "If the King should meet me in battle, I would kill the
King." Why not? These words were spoken to men who stood as before a
Higher than Kings. They had set more than their own lives on the cast.
The Parliament may call it, in official language, a fighting "_for_ the
King;" but we, for our share, cannot understand that. To us it is no
dilettante work, no sleek officiality; it is sheer rough death and
earnest. They have brought it to the calling-forth of War; horrid
internecine fight, man grappling with man in fire-eyed rage,--the
_infernal_ element in man called forth, to try it by that! _Do_ that
therefore; since that is the thing to be done.--The successes of
Cromwell seem to me a very natural thing! Since he was not shot in
battle, they were an inevitable thing. That such a man, with the eye
to see, with the heart to dare, should advance, from post to post, from
victory to victory, till the Huntingdon Farmer became, by whatever name
you might call him, the acknowledged Strongest Man in England, virtually
the King of England, requires no magic to explain it--!


Truly it is a sad thing for a people, as for a man, to fall into
Scepticism, into dilettantism, insincerity; not to know Sincerity when
they see it. For this world, and for all worlds, what curse is so fatal?
The heart lying dead, the eye cannot see. What intellect remains is
merely the _vulpine_ intellect. That a true _King_ be sent them is of
small use; they do not know him when sent. They say scornfully, Is this
your King? The Hero wastes his heroic faculty in bootless contradiction
from the unworthy; and can accomplish little. For himself he does
accomplish a heroic life, which is much, which is all; but for the world
he accomplishes comparatively nothing. The wild rude Sincerity, direct
from Nature, is not glib in answering from the witness-box: in your
small-debt _pie-powder_ court, he is scouted as a counterfeit. The
vulpine intellect "detects" him. For being a man worth any thousand
men, the response your Knox, your Cromwell gets, is an argument for two
centuries whether he was a man at all. God's greatest gift to this Earth
is sneeringly flung away. The miraculous talisman is a paltry plated
coin, not fit to pass in the shops as a common guinea.

Lamentable this! I say, this must be remedied. Till this be remedied in
some measure, there is nothing remedied. "Detect quacks"? Yes do, for
Heaven's sake; but know withal the men that are to be trusted! Till
we know that, what is all our knowledge; how shall we even so much
as "detect"? For the vulpine sharpness, which considers itself to be
knowledge, and "detects" in that fashion, is far mistaken. Dupes indeed
are many: but, of all _dupes_, there is none so fatally situated as
he who lives in undue terror of being duped. The world does exist; the
world has truth in it, or it would not exist! First recognize what is
true, we shall _then_ discern what is false; and properly never till
then.

"Know the men that are to be trusted:" alas, this is yet, in these days,
very far from us. The sincere alone can recognize sincerity. Not a Hero
only is needed, but a world fit for him; a world not of _Valets_;--the
Hero comes almost in vain to it otherwise! Yes, it is far from us: but
it must come; thank God, it is visibly coming. Till it do come, what
have we? Ballot-boxes, suffrages, French Revolutions:--if we are as
Valets, and do not know the Hero when we see him, what good are all
these? A heroic Cromwell comes; and for a hundred and fifty years he
cannot have a vote from us. Why, the insincere, unbelieving world is
the _natural property_ of the Quack, and of the Father of quacks and
quackeries! Misery, confusion, unveracity are alone possible there. By
ballot-boxes we alter the _figure_ of our Quack; but the substance of
him continues. The Valet-World _has_ to be governed by the Sham-Hero, by
the King merely _dressed_ in King-gear. It is his; he is its! In brief,
one of two things: We shall either learn to know a Hero, a true Governor
and Captain, somewhat better, when we see him; or else go on to be
forever governed by the Unheroic;--had we ballot-boxes clattering at
every street-corner, there were no remedy in these.

Poor Cromwell,--great Cromwell! The inarticulate Prophet; Prophet who
could not _speak_. Rude, confused, struggling to utter himself, with his
savage depth, with his wild sincerity; and he looked so strange,
among the elegant Euphemisms, dainty little Falklands, didactic
Chillingworths, diplomatic Clarendons! Consider him. An outer hull
of chaotic confusion, visions of the Devil, nervous dreams, almost
semi-madness; and yet such a clear determinate man's-energy working in
the heart of that. A kind of chaotic man. The ray as of pure starlight
and fire, working in such an element of boundless hypochondria, unformed
black of darkness! And yet withal this hypochondria, what was it but
the very greatness of the man? The depth and tenderness of his wild
affections: the quantity of _sympathy_ he had with things,--the quantity
of insight he would yet get into the heart of things, the mastery he
would yet get over things: this was his hypochondria. The man's misery,
as man's misery always does, came of his greatness. Samuel Johnson too
is that kind of man. Sorrow-stricken, half-distracted; the wide element
of mournful _black_ enveloping him,--wide as the world. It is the
character of a prophetic man; a man with his whole soul _seeing_, and
struggling to see.

On this ground, too, I explain to myself Cromwell's reputed confusion of
speech. To himself the internal meaning was sun-clear; but the material
with which he was to clothe it in utterance was not there. He had
_lived_ silent; a great unnamed sea of Thought round him all his days;
and in his way of life little call to attempt _naming_ or uttering that.
With his sharp power of vision, resolute power of action, I doubt not he
could have learned to write Books withal, and speak fluently enough;--he
did harder things than writing of Books. This kind of man is precisely
he who is fit for doing manfully all things you will set him on doing.
Intellect is not speaking and logicizing; it is seeing and ascertaining.
Virtue, Virtues, manhood, _hero_hood, is not fair-spoken immaculate
regularity; it is first of all, what the Germans well name it, _Tugend_
(_Taugend_, _dow_-ing or _Dough_-tiness), Courage and the Faculty to
_do_. This basis of the matter Cromwell had in him.

One understands moreover how, though he could not speak in Parliament,
he might _preach_, rhapsodic preaching; above all, how he might be great
in extempore prayer. These are the free outpouring utterances of what is
in the heart: method is not required in them; warmth, depth, sincerity
are all that is required. Cromwell's habit of prayer is a notable
feature of him. All his great enterprises were commenced with prayer.
In dark inextricable-looking difficulties, his Officers and he used to
assemble, and pray alternately, for hours, for days, till some definite
resolution rose among them, some "door of hope," as they would name it,
disclosed itself. Consider that. In tears, in fervent prayers, and cries
to the great God, to have pity on them, to make His light shine before
them. They, armed Soldiers of Christ, as they felt themselves to be;
a little band of Christian Brothers, who had drawn the sword against
a great black devouring world not Christian, but Mammonish,
Devilish,--they cried to God in their straits, in their extreme need,
not to forsake the Cause that was His. The light which now rose upon
them,--how could a human soul, by any means at all, get better light?
Was not the purpose so formed like to be precisely the best, wisest, the
one to be followed without hesitation any more? To them it was as the
shining of Heaven's own Splendor in the waste-howling darkness; the
Pillar of Fire by night, that was to guide them on their desolate
perilous way. _Was_ it not such? Can a man's soul, to this hour, get
guidance by any other method than intrinsically by that same,--devout
prostration of the earnest struggling soul before the Highest, the
Giver of all Light; be such _prayer_ a spoken, articulate, or be it a
voiceless, inarticulate one? There is no other method. "Hypocrisy"? One
begins to be weary of all that. They who call it so, have no right to
speak on such matters. They never formed a purpose, what one can call
a purpose. They went about balancing expediencies, plausibilities;
gathering votes, advices; they never were alone with the _truth_ of a
thing at all.--Cromwell's prayers were likely to be "eloquent," and much
more than that. His was the heart of a man who _could_ pray.

But indeed his actual Speeches, I apprehend, were not nearly so
ineloquent, incondite, as they look. We find he was, what all speakers
aim to be, an impressive speaker, even in Parliament; one who, from the
first, had weight. With that rude passionate voice of his, he was
always understood to _mean_ something, and men wished to know what.
He disregarded eloquence, nay despised and disliked it; spoke always
without premeditation of the words he was to use. The Reporters, too,
in those days seem to have been singularly candid; and to have given the
Printer precisely what they found on their own note-paper. And withal,
what a strange proof is it of Cromwell's being the premeditative
ever-calculating hypocrite, acting a play before the world, That to the
last he took no more charge of his Speeches! How came he not to study
his words a little, before flinging them out to the public? If the words
were true words, they could be left to shift for themselves.

But with regard to Cromwell's "lying," we will make one remark. This,
I suppose, or something like this, to have been the nature of it. All
parties found themselves deceived in him; each party understood him to
be meaning _this_, heard him even say so, and behold he turns out to
have been meaning _that_! He was, cry they, the chief of liars. But now,
intrinsically, is not all this the inevitable fortune, not of a false
man in such times, but simply of a superior man? Such a man must have
_reticences_ in him. If he walk wearing his heart upon his sleeve for
daws to peck at, his journey will not extend far! There is no use for
any man's taking up his abode in a house built of glass. A man always is
to be himself the judge how much of his mind he will show to other men;
even to those he would have work along with him. There are impertinent
inquiries made: your rule is, to leave the inquirer uninformed on that
matter; not, if you can help it, misinformed, but precisely as dark as
he was! This, could one hit the right phrase of response, is what the
wise and faithful man would aim to answer in such a case.

Cromwell, no doubt of it, spoke often in the dialect of small subaltern
parties; uttered to them a _part_ of his mind. Each little party thought
him all its own. Hence their rage, one and all, to find him not of their
party, but of his own party. Was it his blame? At all seasons of his
history he must have felt, among such people, how, if he explained to
them the deeper insight he had, they must either have shuddered aghast
at it, or believing it, their own little compact hypothesis must have
gone wholly to wreck. They could not have worked in his province any
more; nay perhaps they could not now have worked in their own province.
It is the inevitable position of a great man among small men. Small men,
most active, useful, are to be seen everywhere, whose whole activity
depends on some conviction which to you is palpably a limited one;
imperfect, what we call an _error_. But would it be a kindness always,
is it a duty always or often, to disturb them in that? Many a man,
doing loud work in the world, stands only on some thin traditionality,
conventionality; to him indubitable, to you incredible: break that
beneath him, he sinks to endless depths! "I might have my hand full of
truth," said Fontenelle, "and open only my little finger."

And if this be the fact even in matters of doctrine, how much more in
all departments of practice! He that cannot withal _keep his mind to
himself_ cannot practice any considerable thing whatever. And we call it
"dissimulation," all this? What would you think of calling the general
of an army a dissembler because he did not tell every corporal and
private soldier, who pleased to put the question, what his thoughts were
about everything?--Cromwell, I should rather say, managed all this in
a manner we must admire for its perfection. An endless vortex of such
questioning "corporals" rolled confusedly round him through his whole
course; whom he did answer. It must have been as a great true-seeing man
that he managed this too. Not one proved falsehood, as I said; not one!
Of what man that ever wound himself through such a coil of things will
you say so much?--


But in fact there are two errors, widely prevalent, which pervert to the
very basis our judgments formed about such men as Cromwell; about their
"ambition," "falsity," and such like. The first is what I might
call substituting the _goal_ of their career for the course and
starting-point of it. The vulgar Historian of a Cromwell fancies that
he had determined on being Protector of England, at the time when he was
ploughing the marsh lands of Cambridgeshire. His career lay all
mapped out: a program of the whole drama; which he then step by step
dramatically unfolded, with all manner of cunning, deceptive dramaturgy,
as he went on,--the hollow, scheming [Gr.] _Upokrites_, or Play-actor,
that he was! This is a radical perversion; all but universal in such
cases. And think for an instant how different the fact is! How much does
one of us foresee of his own life? Short way ahead of us it is all dim;
an unwound skein of possibilities, of apprehensions, attemptabilities,
vague-looming hopes. This Cromwell had _not_ his life lying all in that
fashion of Program, which he needed then, with that unfathomable cunning
of his, only to enact dramatically, scene after scene! Not so. We see it
so; but to him it was in no measure so. What absurdities would fall away
of themselves, were this one undeniable fact kept honestly in view
by History! Historians indeed will tell you that they do keep it in
view;--but look whether such is practically the fact! Vulgar History,
as in this Cromwell's case, omits it altogether; even the best kinds of
History only remember it now and then. To remember it duly with rigorous
perfection, as in the fact it _stood_, requires indeed a rare faculty;
rare, nay impossible. A very Shakspeare for faculty; or more than
Shakspeare; who could _enact_ a brother man's biography, see with the
brother man's eyes at all points of his course what things _he_ saw; in
short, _know_ his course and him, as few "Historians" are like to do.
Half or more of all the thick-plied perversions which distort our image
of Cromwell, will disappear, if we honestly so much as try to represent
them so; in sequence, as they _were_; not in the lump, as they are
thrown down before us.

But a second error, which I think the generality commit, refers to this
same "ambition" itself. We exaggerate the ambition of Great Men; we
mistake what the nature of it is. Great Men are not ambitious in that
sense; he is a small poor man that is ambitious so. Examine the man
who lives in misery because he does not shine above other men; who goes
about producing himself, pruriently anxious about his gifts and claims;
struggling to force everybody, as it were begging everybody for God's
sake, to acknowledge him a great man, and set him over the heads of men!
Such a creature is among the wretchedest sights seen under this sun. A
_great_ man? A poor morbid prurient empty man; fitter for the ward of a
hospital, than for a throne among men. I advise you to keep out of his
way. He cannot walk on quiet paths; unless you will look at him,
wonder at him, write paragraphs about him, he cannot live. It is the
_emptiness_ of the man, not his greatness. Because there is nothing in
himself, he hungers and thirsts that you would find something in him. In
good truth, I believe no great man, not so much as a genuine man who had
health and real substance in him of whatever magnitude, was ever much
tormented in this way.

Your Cromwell, what good could it do him to be "noticed" by noisy crowds
of people? God his Maker already noticed him. He, Cromwell, was already
there; no notice would make _him_ other than he already was. Till his
hair was grown gray; and Life from the down-hill slope was all seen to
be limited, not infinite but finite, and all a measurable matter _how_
it went,--he had been content to plough the ground, and read his Bible.
He in his old days could not support it any longer, without selling
himself to Falsehood, that he might ride in gilt carriages to Whitehall,
and have clerks with bundles of papers haunting him, "Decide this,
decide that," which in utmost sorrow of heart no man can perfectly
decide! What could gilt carriages do for this man? From of old, was
there not in his life a weight of meaning, a terror and a splendor as
of Heaven itself? His existence there as man set him beyond the need
of gilding. Death, Judgment and Eternity: these already lay as the
background of whatsoever he thought or did. All his life lay begirt as
in a sea of nameless Thoughts, which no speech of a mortal could name.
God's Word, as the Puritan prophets of that time had read it: this was
great, and all else was little to him. To call such a man "ambitious,"
to figure him as the prurient wind-bag described above, seems to me the
poorest solecism. Such a man will say: "Keep your gilt carriages and
huzzaing mobs, keep your red-tape clerks, your influentialities, your
important businesses. Leave me alone, leave me alone; there is _too
much of life_ in me already!" Old Samuel Johnson, the greatest soul in
England in his day, was not ambitious. "Corsica Boswell" flaunted at
public shows with printed ribbons round his hat; but the great old
Samuel stayed at home. The world-wide soul wrapt up in its thoughts, in
its sorrows;--what could paradings, and ribbons in the hat, do for it?

Ah yes, I will say again: The great _silent_ men! Looking round on the
noisy inanity of the world, words with little meaning, actions with
little worth, one loves to reflect on the great Empire of _Silence_.
The noble silent men, scattered here and there, each in his department;
silently thinking, silently working; whom no Morning Newspaper makes
mention of! They are the salt of the Earth. A country that has none or
few of these is in a bad way. Like a forest which had no _roots_; which
had all turned into leaves and boughs;--which must soon wither and be no
forest. Woe for us if we had nothing but what we can _show_, or speak.
Silence, the great Empire of Silence: higher than the stars; deeper than
the Kingdoms of Death! It alone is great; all else is small.--I hope
we English will long maintain our _grand talent pour le silence_. Let
others that cannot do without standing on barrel-heads, to spout, and
be seen of all the market-place, cultivate speech exclusively,--become a
most green forest without roots! Solomon says, There is a time to speak;
but also a time to keep silence. Of some great silent Samuel, not urged
to writing, as old Samuel Johnson says he was, by _want of money_, and
nothing other, one might ask, "Why do not you too get up and speak;
promulgate your system, found your sect?" "Truly," he will answer, "I am
_continent_ of my thought hitherto; happily I have yet had the ability
to keep it in me, no compulsion strong enough to speak it. My 'system'
is not for promulgation first of all; it is for serving myself to live
by. That is the great purpose of it to me. And then the 'honor'? Alas,
yes;--but as Cato said of the statue: So many statues in that Forum of
yours, may it not be better if they ask, Where is Cato's statue?"--

But now, by way of counterpoise to this of Silence, let me say that
there are two kinds of ambition; one wholly blamable, the other laudable
and inevitable. Nature has provided that the great silent Samuel shall
not be silent too long. The selfish wish to shine over others, let it
be accounted altogether poor and miserable. "Seekest thou great
things, seek them not:" this is most true. And yet, I say, there is an
irrepressible tendency in every man to develop himself according to the
magnitude which Nature has made him of; to speak out, to act out, what
nature has laid in him. This is proper, fit, inevitable; nay it is a
duty, and even the summary of duties for a man. The meaning of life here
on earth might be defined as consisting in this: To unfold your _self_,
to work what thing you have the faculty for. It is a necessity for
the human being, the first law of our existence. Coleridge beautifully
remarks that the infant learns to _speak_ by this necessity it
feels.--We will say therefore: To decide about ambition, whether it is
bad or not, you have two things to take into view. Not the coveting of
the place alone, but the fitness of the man for the place withal: that
is the question. Perhaps the place was _his_; perhaps he had a natural
right, and even obligation, to seek the place! Mirabeau's ambition to
be Prime Minister, how shall we blame it, if he were "the only man in
France that could have done any good there"? Hopefuler perhaps had he
not so clearly _felt_ how much good he could do! But a poor Necker, who
could do no good, and had even felt that he could do none, yet sitting
broken-hearted because they had flung him out, and he was now quit of
it, well might Gibbon mourn over him.--Nature, I say, has provided amply
that the silent great man shall strive to speak withal; _too_ amply,
rather!

Fancy, for example, you had revealed to the brave old Samuel Johnson, in
his shrouded-up existence, that it was possible for him to do priceless
divine work for his country and the whole world. That the perfect
Heavenly Law might be made Law on this Earth; that the prayer he prayed
daily, "Thy kingdom come," was at length to be fulfilled! If you had
convinced his judgment of this; that it was possible, practicable; that
he the mournful silent Samuel was called to take a part in it! Would not
the whole soul of the man have flamed up into a divine clearness,
into noble utterance and determination to act; casting all sorrows and
misgivings under his feet, counting all affliction and contradiction
small,--the whole dark element of his existence blazing into articulate
radiance of light and lightning? It were a true ambition this! And think
now how it actually was with Cromwell. From of old, the sufferings of
God's Church, true zealous Preachers of the truth flung into dungeons,
whips, set on pillories, their ears crops off, God's Gospel-cause
trodden under foot of the unworthy: all this had lain heavy on his
soul. Long years he had looked upon it, in silence, in prayer; seeing no
remedy on Earth; trusting well that a remedy in Heaven's goodness would
come,--that such a course was false, unjust, and could not last forever.
And now behold the dawn of it; after twelve years silent waiting, all
England stirs itself; there is to be once more a Parliament, the Right
will get a voice for itself: inexpressible well-grounded hope has come
again into the Earth. Was not such a Parliament worth being a member of?
Cromwell threw down his ploughs, and hastened thither.

He spoke there,--rugged bursts of earnestness, of a self-seen truth,
where we get a glimpse of them. He worked there; he fought and strove,
like a strong true giant of a man, through cannon-tumult and all
else,--on and on, till the Cause _triumphed_, its once so formidable
enemies all swept from before it, and the dawn of hope had become clear
light of victory and certainty. That _he_ stood there as the strongest
soul of England, the undisputed Hero of all England,--what of this? It
was possible that the Law of Christ's Gospel could now establish itself
in the world! The Theocracy which John Knox in his pulpit might dream of
as a "devout imagination," this practical man, experienced in the whole
chaos of most rough practice, dared to consider as capable of being
_realized_. Those that were highest in Christ's Church, the devoutest
wisest men, were to rule the land: in some considerable degree, it might
be so and should be so. Was it not _true_, God's truth? And if _true_,
was it not then the very thing to do? The strongest practical intellect
in England dared to answer, Yes! This I call a noble true purpose; is it
not, in its own dialect, the noblest that could enter into the heart
of Statesman or man? For a Knox to take it up was something; but for a
Cromwell, with his great sound sense and experience of what our world
_was_,--History, I think, shows it only this once in such a degree.
I account it the culminating point of Protestantism; the most heroic
phasis that "Faith in the Bible" was appointed to exhibit here below.
Fancy it: that it were made manifest to one of us, how we could make the
Right supremely victorious over Wrong, and all that we had longed and
prayed for, as the highest good to England and all lands, an attainable
fact!

Well, I must say, the _vulpine_ intellect, with its knowingness, its
alertness and expertness in "detecting hypocrites," seems to me a rather
sorry business. We have had but one such Statesman in England; one
man, that I can get sight of, who ever had in the heart of him any such
purpose at all. One man, in the course of fifteen hundred years; and
this was his welcome. He had adherents by the hundred or the ten;
opponents by the million. Had England rallied all round him,--why,
then, England might have been a _Christian_ land! As it is, vulpine
knowingness sits yet at its hopeless problem, "Given a world of Knaves,
to educe an Honesty from their united action;"--how cumbrous a problem,
you may see in Chancery Law-Courts, and some other places! Till at
length, by Heaven's just anger, but also by Heaven's great grace, the
matter begins to stagnate; and this problem is becoming to all men a
_palpably_ hopeless one.--


But with regard to Cromwell and his purposes: Hume, and a multitude
following him, come upon me here with an admission that Cromwell _was_
sincere at first; a sincere "Fanatic" at first, but gradually became a
"Hypocrite" as things opened round him. This of the Fanatic-Hypocrite
is Hume's theory of it; extensively applied since,--to Mahomet and many
others. Think of it seriously, you will find something in it; not much,
not all, very far from all. Sincere hero hearts do not sink in this
miserable manner. The Sun flings forth impurities, gets balefully
incrusted with spots; but it does not quench itself, and become no Sun
at all, but a mass of Darkness! I will venture to say that such never
befell a great deep Cromwell; I think, never. Nature's own lionhearted
Son; Antaeus-like, his strength is got by _touching the Earth_, his
Mother; lift him up from the Earth, lift him up into Hypocrisy, Inanity,
his strength is gone. We will not assert that Cromwell was an immaculate
man; that he fell into no faults, no insincerities among the rest. He
was no dilettante professor of "perfections," "immaculate conducts."
He was a rugged Orson, rending his rough way through actual true
_work_,--_doubtless_ with many a _fall_ therein. Insincerities, faults,
very many faults daily and hourly: it was too well known to him; known
to God and him! The Sun was dimmed many a time; but the Sun had not
himself grown a Dimness. Cromwell's last words, as he lay waiting for
death, are those of a Christian heroic man. Broken prayers to God, that
He would judge him and this Cause, He since man could not, in justice
yet in pity. They are most touching words. He breathed out his wild
great soul, its toils and sins all ended now, into the presence of his
Maker, in this manner.

I, for one, will not call the man a Hypocrite! Hypocrite, mummer, the
life of him a mere theatricality; empty barren quack, hungry for the
shouts of mobs? The man had made obscurity do very well for him till his
head was gray; and now he _was_, there as he stood recognized unblamed,
the virtual King of England. Cannot a man do without King's Coaches and
Cloaks? Is it such a blessedness to have clerks forever pestering you
with bundles of papers in red tape? A simple Diocletian prefers planting
of cabbages; a George Washington, no very immeasurable man, does the
like. One would say, it is what any genuine man could do; and would do.
The instant his real work were out in the matter of Kingship,--away with
it!

Let us remark, meanwhile, how indispensable everywhere a _King_ is, in
all movements of men. It is strikingly shown, in this very War, what
becomes of men when they cannot find a Chief Man, and their enemies can.
The Scotch Nation was all but unanimous in Puritanism; zealous and of
one mind about it, as in this English end of the Island was always far
from being the case. But there was no great Cromwell among them; poor
tremulous, hesitating, diplomatic Argyles and such like: none of them
had a heart true enough for the truth, or durst commit himself to the
truth. They had no leader; and the scattered Cavalier party in that
country had one: Montrose, the noblest of all the Cavaliers; an
accomplished, gallant-hearted, splendid man; what one may call the
Hero-Cavalier. Well, look at it; on the one hand subjects without a
King; on the other a King without subjects! The subjects without King
can do nothing; the subjectless King can do something. This Montrose,
with a handful of Irish or Highland savages, few of them so much as
guns in their hands, dashes at the drilled Puritan armies like a wild
whirlwind; sweeps them, time after time, some five times over, from the
field before him. He was at one period, for a short while, master of all
Scotland. One man; but he was a man; a million zealous men, but without
the one; they against him were powerless! Perhaps of all the persons in
that Puritan struggle, from first to last, the single indispensable one
was verily Cromwell. To see and dare, and decide; to be a fixed pillar
in the welter of uncertainty;--a King among them, whether they called
him so or not.


Precisely here, however, lies the rub for Cromwell. His other
proceedings have all found advocates, and stand generally justified;
but this dismissal of the Rump Parliament and assumption of the
Protectorship, is what no one can pardon him. He had fairly grown to be
King in England; Chief Man of the victorious party in England: but it
seems he could not do without the King's Cloak, and sold himself to
perdition in order to get it. Let us see a little how this was.

England, Scotland, Ireland, all lying now subdued at the feet of the
Puritan Parliament, the practical question arose, What was to be done
with it? How will you govern these Nations, which Providence in a
wondrous way has given up to your disposal? Clearly those hundred
surviving members of the Long Parliament, who sit there as supreme
authority, cannot continue forever to sit. What _is_ to be done?--It
was a question which theoretical constitution-builders may find easy to
answer; but to Cromwell, looking there into the real practical facts of
it, there could be none more complicated. He asked of the Parliament,
What it was they would decide upon? It was for the Parliament to
say. Yet the Soldiers too, however contrary to Formula, they who had
purchased this victory with their blood, it seemed to them that they
also should have something to say in it! We will not "for all our
fighting have nothing but a little piece of paper." We understand that
the Law of God's Gospel, to which He through us has given the victory,
shall establish itself, or try to establish itself, in this land!

For three years, Cromwell says, this question had been sounded in the
ears of the Parliament. They could make no answer; nothing but talk,
talk. Perhaps it lies in the nature of parliamentary bodies; perhaps
no Parliament could in such case make any answer but even that of talk,
talk! Nevertheless the question must and shall be answered. You sixty
men there, becoming fast odious, even despicable, to the whole nation,
whom the nation already calls Rump Parliament, you cannot continue to
sit there: who or what then is to follow? "Free Parliament," right of
Election, Constitutional Formulas of one sort or the other,--the thing
is a hungry Fact coming on us, which we must answer or be devoured by
it! And who are you that prate of Constitutional Formulas, rights of
Parliament? You have had to kill your King, to make Pride's Purges, to
expel and banish by the law of the stronger whosoever would not let
your Cause prosper: there are but fifty or threescore of you left there,
debating in these days. Tell us what we shall do; not in the way of
Formula, but of practicable Fact!

How they did finally answer, remains obscure to this day. The diligent
Godwin himself admits that he cannot make it out. The likeliest is, that
this poor Parliament still would not, and indeed could not dissolve and
disperse; that when it came to the point of actually dispersing, they
again, for the tenth or twentieth time, adjourned it,--and Cromwell's
patience failed him. But we will take the favorablest hypothesis ever
started for the Parliament; the favorablest, though I believe it is not
the true one, but too favorable.

According to this version: At the uttermost crisis, when Cromwell and
his Officers were met on the one hand, and the fifty or sixty Rump
Members on the other, it was suddenly told Cromwell that the Rump in its
despair _was_ answering in a very singular way; that in their splenetic
envious despair, to keep out the Army at least, these men were hurrying
through the House a kind of Reform Bill,--Parliament to be chosen by
the whole of England; equable electoral division into districts; free
suffrage, and the rest of it! A very questionable, or indeed for _them_
an unquestionable thing. Reform Bill, free suffrage of Englishmen? Why,
the Royalists themselves, silenced indeed but not exterminated, perhaps
_outnumber_ us; the great numerical majority of England was always
indifferent to our Cause, merely looked at it and submitted to it. It is
in weight and force, not by counting of heads, that we are the majority!
And now with your Formulas and Reform Bills, the whole matter, sorely
won by our swords, shall again launch itself to sea; become a mere
hope, and likelihood, _small_ even as a likelihood? And it is not a
likelihood; it is a certainty, which we have won, by God's strength and
our own right hands, and do now hold _here_. Cromwell walked down to
these refractory Members; interrupted them in that rapid speed of their
Reform Bill;--ordered them to begone, and talk there no more.--Can we
not forgive him? Can we not understand him? John Milton, who looked
on it all near at hand, could applaud him. The Reality had swept the
Formulas away before it. I fancy, most men who were realities in England
might see into the necessity of that.

The strong daring man, therefore, has set all manner of Formulas and
logical superficialities against him; has dared appeal to the genuine
Fact of this England, Whether it will support him or not? It is curious
to see how he struggles to govern in some constitutional way; find some
Parliament to support him; but cannot. His first Parliament, the one
they call Barebones's Parliament, is, so to speak, a _Convocation of the
Notables_. From all quarters of England the leading Ministers and chief
Puritan Officials nominate the men most distinguished by religious
reputation, influence and attachment to the true Cause: these are
assembled to shape out a plan. They sanctioned what was past; shaped as
they could what was to come. They were scornfully called _Barebones's
Parliament_: the man's name, it seems, was not _Barebones_, but
Barbone,--a good enough man. Nor was it a jest, their work; it was a
most serious reality,--a trial on the part of these Puritan Notables how
far the Law of Christ could become the Law of this England. There
were men of sense among them, men of some quality; men of deep piety I
suppose the most of them were. They failed, it seems, and broke down,
endeavoring to reform the Court of Chancery! They dissolved themselves,
as incompetent; delivered up their power again into the hands of the
Lord General Cromwell, to do with it what he liked and could.

What _will_ he do with it? The Lord General Cromwell,
"Commander-in-chief of all the Forces raised and to be raised;" he
hereby sees himself, at this unexampled juncture, as it were the one
available Authority left in England, nothing between England and utter
Anarchy but him alone. Such is the undeniable Fact of his position and
England's, there and then. What will he do with it? After deliberation,
he decides that he will _accept_ it; will formally, with public
solemnity, say and vow before God and men, "Yes, the Fact is so, and
I will do the best I can with it!" Protectorship, Instrument of
Government,--these are the external forms of the thing; worked out and
sanctioned as they could in the circumstances be, by the Judges, by the
leading Official people, "Council of Officers and Persons of interest in
the Nation:" and as for the thing itself, undeniably enough, at the pass
matters had now come to, there _was_ no alternative but Anarchy or that.
Puritan England might accept it or not; but Puritan England was, in real
truth, saved from suicide thereby!--I believe the Puritan People did,
in an inarticulate, grumbling, yet on the whole grateful and real way,
accept this anomalous act of Oliver's; at least, he and they together
made it good, and always better to the last. But in their Parliamentary
_articulate_ way, they had their difficulties, and never knew fully what
to say to it--!

Oliver's second Parliament, properly his _first_ regular Parliament,
chosen by the rule laid down in the Instrument of Government, did
assemble, and worked;--but got, before long, into bottomless questions
as to the Protector's _right_, as to "usurpation," and so forth; and had
at the earliest legal day to be dismissed. Cromwell's concluding Speech
to these men is a remarkable one. So likewise to his third Parliament,
in similar rebuke for their pedantries and obstinacies. Most rude,
chaotic, all these Speeches are; but most earnest-looking. You would
say, it was a sincere helpless man; not used to _speak_ the great
inorganic thought of him, but to act it rather! A helplessness of
utterance, in such bursting fulness of meaning. He talks much about
"births of Providence:" All these changes, so many victories and events,
were not forethoughts, and theatrical contrivances of men, of _me_ or
of men; it is blind blasphemers that will persist in calling them so!
He insists with a heavy sulphurous wrathful emphasis on this. As he well
might. As if a Cromwell in that dark huge game he had been playing, the
world wholly thrown into chaos round him, had _foreseen_ it all, and
played it all off like a precontrived puppet-show by wood and wire!
These things were foreseen by no man, he says; no man could tell what
a day would bring forth: they were "births of Providence," God's finger
guided us on, and we came at last to clear height of victory, God's
Cause triumphant in these Nations; and you as a Parliament could
assemble together, and say in what manner all this could be _organized_,
reduced into rational feasibility among the affairs of men. You were
to help with your wise counsel in doing that. "You have had such an
opportunity as no Parliament in England ever had." Christ's Law, the
Right and True, was to be in some measure made the Law of this land.
In place of that, you have got into your idle pedantries,
constitutionalities, bottomless cavillings and questionings about
written laws for my coming here;--and would send the whole matter into
Chaos again, because I have no Notary's parchment, but only God's
voice from the battle-whirlwind, for being President among you! That
opportunity is gone; and we know not when it will return. You have had
your constitutional Logic; and Mammon's Law, not Christ's Law, rules
yet in this land. "God be judge between you and me!" These are his final
words to them: Take you your constitution-formulas in your hand; and I
my informal struggles, purposes, realities and acts; and "God be judge
between you and me!"--

We said above what shapeless, involved chaotic things the printed
Speeches of Cromwell are. _Wilfully_ ambiguous, unintelligible, say the
most: a hypocrite shrouding himself in confused Jesuitic jargon! To me
they do not seem so. I will say rather, they afforded the first glimpses
I could ever get into the reality of this Cromwell, nay into the
possibility of him. Try to believe that he means something, search
lovingly what that may be: you will find a real _speech_ lying
imprisoned in these broken rude tortuous utterances; a meaning in the
great heart of this inarticulate man! You will, for thc first time,
begin to see that he was a man; not an enigmatic chimera, unintelligible
to you, incredible to you. The Histories and Biographies written of this
Cromwell, written in shallow sceptical generations that could not
know or conceive of a deep believing man, are far more _obscure_ than
Cromwell's Speeches. You look through them only into the infinite vague
of Black and the Inane. "Heats and jealousies," says Lord Clarendon
himself: "heats and jealousies," mere crabbed whims, theories and
crotchets; these induced slow sober quiet Englishmen to lay down their
ploughs and work; and fly into red fury of confused war against the
best-conditioned of Kings! _Try_ if you can find that true. Scepticism
writing about Belief may have great gifts; but it is really _ultra
vires_ there. It is Blindness laying down the Laws of Optics.--

Cromwell's third Parliament split on the same rock as his second. Ever
the constitutional Formula: How came you there? Show us some Notary
parchment! Blind pedants:--"Why, surely the same power which makes you
a Parliament, that, and something more, made me a Protector!" If
my Protectorship is nothing, what in the name of wonder is your
Parliamenteership, a reflex and creation of that?--

Parliaments having failed, there remained nothing but the way of
Despotism. Military Dictators, each with his district, to _coerce_
the Royalist and other gainsayers, to govern them, if not by act of
Parliament, then by the sword. Formula shall _not_ carry it, while the
Reality is here! I will go on, protecting oppressed Protestants abroad,
appointing just judges, wise managers, at home, cherishing true Gospel
ministers; doing the best I can to make England a Christian England,
greater than old Rome, the Queen of Protestant Christianity; I, since
you will not help me; I while God leaves me life!--Why did he not give
it up; retire into obscurity again, since the Law would not acknowledge
him? cry several. That is where they mistake. For him there was no
giving of it up! Prime ministers have governed countries, Pitt, Pombal,
Choiseul; and their word was a law while it held: but this Prime
Minister was one that _could not get resigned_. Let him once resign,
Charles Stuart and the Cavaliers waited to kill him; to kill the Cause
_and_ him. Once embarked, there is no retreat, no return. This Prime
Minister could _retire_ no-whither except into his tomb.

One is sorry for Cromwell in his old days. His complaint is incessant of
the heavy burden Providence has laid on him. Heavy; which he must bear
till death. Old Colonel Hutchinson, as his wife relates it, Hutchinson,
his old battle-mate, coming to see him on some indispensable business,
much against his will,--Cromwell "follows him to the door," in a
most fraternal, domestic, conciliatory style; begs that he would be
reconciled to him, his old brother in arms; says how much it grieves him
to be misunderstood, deserted by true fellow-soldiers, dear to him
from of old: the rigorous Hutchinson, cased in his Republican formula,
sullenly goes his way.--And the man's head now white; his strong arm
growing weary with its long work! I think always too of his poor Mother,
now very old, living in that Palace of his; a right brave woman; as
indeed they lived all an honest God-fearing Household there: if she
heard a shot go off, she thought it was her son killed. He had to come
to her at least once a day, that she might see with her own eyes that he
was yet living. The poor old Mother!--What had this man gained; what had
he gained? He had a life of sore strife and toil, to his last day. Fame,
ambition, place in History? His dead body was hung in chains, his "place
in History,"--place in History forsooth!--has been a place of ignominy,
accusation, blackness and disgrace; and here, this day, who knows if it
is not rash in me to be among the first that ever ventured to pronounce
him not a knave and liar, but a genuinely honest man! Peace to him. Did
he not, in spite of all, accomplish much for us? _We_ walk smoothly over
his great rough heroic life; step over his body sunk in the ditch there.
We need not _spurn_ it, as we step on it!--Let the Hero rest. It was not
to _men's_ judgment that he appealed; nor have men judged him very well.


Precisely a century and a year after this of Puritanism had got itself
hushed up into decent composure, and its results made smooth, in 1688,
there broke out a far deeper explosion, much more difficult to hush up,
known to all mortals, and like to be long known, by the name of French
Revolution. It is properly the third and final act of Protestantism; the
explosive confused return of mankind to Reality and Fact, now that they
were perishing of Semblance and Sham. We call our English Puritanism the
second act: "Well then, the Bible is true; let us go by the Bible!" "In
Church," said Luther; "In Church and State," said Cromwell, "let us go
by what actually _is_ God's Truth." Men have to return to reality; they
cannot live on semblance. The French Revolution, or third act, we may
well call the final one; for lower than that savage _Sansculottism_ men
cannot go. They stand there on the nakedest haggard Fact, undeniable in
all seasons and circumstances; and may and must begin again confidently
to build up from that. The French explosion, like the English one, got
its King,--who had no Notary parchment to show for himself. We have
still to glance for a moment at Napoleon, our second modern King.

Napoleon does by no means seem to me so great a man as Cromwell. His
enormous victories which reached over all Europe, while Cromwell abode
mainly in our little England, are but as the high _stilts_ on which the
man is seen standing; the stature of the man is not altered thereby.
I find in him no such _sincerity_ as in Cromwell; only a far inferior
sort. No silent walking, through long years, with the Awful Unnamable
of this Universe; "walking with God," as he called it; and faith and
strength in that alone: _latent_ thought and valor, content to lie
latent, then burst out as in blaze of Heaven's lightning! Napoleon lived
in an age when God was no longer believed; the meaning of all Silence,
Latency, was thought to be Nonentity: he had to begin not out of the
Puritan Bible, but out of poor Sceptical _Encyclopedies_. This was
the length the man carried it. Meritorious to get so far. His compact,
prompt, every way articulate character is in itself perhaps small,
compared with our great chaotic inarticulate Cromwell's. Instead of
"dumb Prophet struggling to speak," we have a portentous mixture of the
Quack withal! Hume's notion of the Fanatic-Hypocrite, with such truth as
it has, will apply much better to Napoleon than it did to Cromwell,
to Mahomet or the like,--where indeed taken strictly it has hardly any
truth at all. An element of blamable ambition shows itself, from the
first, in this man; gets the victory over him at last, and involves him
and his work in ruin.

"False as a bulletin" became a proverb in Napoleon's time. He makes what
excuse he could for it: that it was necessary to mislead the enemy, to
keep up his own men's courage, and so forth. On the whole, there are no
excuses. A man in no case has liberty to tell lies. It had been, in the
long-run, _better_ for Napoleon too if he had not told any. In fact,
if a man have any purpose reaching beyond the hour and day, meant to be
found extant _next_ day, what good can it ever be to promulgate lies?
The lies are found out; ruinous penalty is exacted for them. No man will
believe the liar next time even when he speaks truth, when it is of
the last importance that he be believed. The old cry of wolf!--A Lie is
no-thing; you cannot of nothing make something; you make _nothing_ at
last, and lose your labor into the bargain.

Yet Napoleon _had_ a sincerity: we are to distinguish between what is
superficial and what is fundamental in insincerity. Across these outer
manoeuverings and quackeries of his, which were many and most
blamable, let us discern withal that the man had a certain instinctive
ineradicable feeling for reality; and did base himself upon fact, so
long as he had any basis. He has an instinct of Nature better than his
culture was. His _savans_, Bourrienne tells us, in that voyage to Egypt
were one evening busily occupied arguing that there could be no God.
They had proved it, to their satisfaction, by all manner of logic.
Napoleon looking up into the stars, answers, "Very ingenious, Messieurs:
but _who made_ all that?" The Atheistic logic runs off from him like
water; the great Fact stares him in the face: "Who made all that?" So
too in Practice: he, as every man that can be great, or have victory in
this world, sees, through all entanglements, the practical heart of the
matter; drives straight towards that. When the steward of his
Tuileries Palace was exhibiting the new upholstery, with praises, and
demonstration how glorious it was, and how cheap withal, Napoleon,
making little answer, asked for a pair of scissors, clips one of the
gold tassels from a window-curtain, put it in his pocket, and walked on.
Some days afterwards, he produced it at the right moment, to the horror
of his upholstery functionary; it was not gold but tinsel! In St.
Helena, it is notable how he still, to his last days, insists on the
practical, the real. "Why talk and complain; above all, why quarrel with
one another? There is no _result_ in it; it comes to nothing that one
can _do_. Say nothing, if one can do nothing!" He speaks often so, to
his poor discontented followers; he is like a piece of silent strength
in the middle of their morbid querulousness there.

And accordingly was there not what we can call a _faith_ in him, genuine
so far as it went? That this new enormous Democracy asserting itself
here in the French Revolution is an unsuppressible Fact, which the whole
world, with its old forces and institutions, cannot put down; this was
a true insight of his, and took his conscience and enthusiasm along with
it,--a _faith_. And did he not interpret the dim purport of it well?
"_La carriere ouverte aux talens_, The implements to him who can handle
them:" this actually is the truth, and even the whole truth; it includes
whatever the French Revolution or any Revolution, could mean. Napoleon,
in his first period, was a true Democrat. And yet by the nature of him,
fostered too by his military trade, he knew that Democracy, if it were
a true thing at all, could not be an anarchy: the man had a heart-hatred
for anarchy. On that Twentieth of June (1792), Bourrienne and he sat
in a coffee-house, as the mob rolled by: Napoleon expresses the deepest
contempt for persons in authority that they do not restrain this rabble.
On the Tenth of August he wonders why there is no man to command these
poor Swiss; they would conquer if there were. Such a faith in Democracy,
yet hatred of anarchy, it is that carries Napoleon through all his great
work. Through his brilliant Italian Campaigns, onwards to the Peace
of Leoben, one would say, his inspiration is: "Triumph to the French
Revolution; assertion of it against these Austrian Simulacra that
pretend to call it a Simulacrum!" Withal, however, he feels, and has a
right to feel, how necessary a strong Authority is; how the Revolution
cannot prosper or last without such. To bridle in that great devouring,
self-devouring French Revolution; to _tame_ it, so that its intrinsic
purpose can be made good, that it may become _organic_, and be able
to live among other organisms and _formed_ things, not as a wasting
destruction alone: is not this still what he partly aimed at, as the
true purport of his life; nay what he actually managed to do? Through
Wagrams, Austerlitzes; triumph after triumph,--he triumphed so far.
There was an eye to see in this man, a soul to dare and do. He rose
naturally to be the King. All men saw that he _was_ such. The common
soldiers used to say on the march: "These babbling _Avocats_, up at
Paris; all talk and no work! What wonder it runs all wrong? We shall
have to go and put our _Petit Caporal_ there!" They went, and put him
there; they and France at large. Chief-consulship, Emperorship, victory
over Europe;--till the poor Lieutenant of _La Fere_, not unnaturally,
might seem to himself the greatest of all men that had been in the world
for some ages.

But at this point, I think, the fatal charlatan-element got the upper
hand. He apostatized from his old faith in Facts, took to believing in
Semblances; strove to connect himself with Austrian Dynasties,
Popedoms, with the old false Feudalities which he once saw clearly to
be false;--considered that _he_ would found "his Dynasty" and so forth;
that the enormous French Revolution meant only that! The man was "given
up to strong delusion, that he should believe a lie;" a fearful but
most sure thing. He did not know true from false now when he looked
at them,--the fearfulest penalty a man pays for yielding to untruth of
heart. _Self_ and false ambition had now become his god: self-deception
once yielded to, _all_ other deceptions follow naturally more and more.
What a paltry patchwork of theatrical paper-mantles, tinsel and mummery,
had this man wrapt his own great reality in, thinking to make it
more real thereby! His hollow _Pope's-Concordat_, pretending to be a
re-establishment of Catholicism, felt by himself to be the method
of extirpating it, "_la vaccine de la religion_:" his ceremonial
Coronations, consecrations by the old Italian Chimera in
Notre-Dame,--"wanting nothing to complete the pomp of it," as Augereau
said, "nothing but the half-million of men who had died to put an end to
all that"! Cromwell's Inauguration was by the Sword and Bible; what we
must call a genuinely _true_ one. Sword and Bible were borne before him,
without any chimera: were not these the _real_ emblems of Puritanism;
its true decoration and insignia? It had used them both in a very real
manner, and pretended to stand by them now! But this poor Napoleon
mistook: he believed too much in the _Dupability_ of men; saw no fact
deeper in man than Hunger and this! He was mistaken. Like a man that
should build upon cloud; his house and he fall down in confused wreck,
and depart out of the world.

Alas, in all of us this charlatan-element exists; and _might_ be
developed, were the temptation strong enough. "Lead us not into
temptation"! But it is fatal, I say, that it _be_ developed. The
thing into which it enters as a cognizable ingredient is doomed to be
altogether transitory; and, however huge it may _look_, is in itself
small. Napoleon's working, accordingly, what was it with all the noise
it made? A flash as of gunpowder wide-spread; a blazing-up as of dry
heath. For an hour the whole Universe seems wrapt in smoke and flame;
but only for an hour. It goes out: the Universe with its old mountains
and streams, its stars above and kind soil beneath, is still there.

The Duke of Weimar told his friends always, To be of courage; this
Napoleonism was _unjust_, a falsehood, and could not last. It is true
doctrine. The heavier this Napoleon trampled on the world, holding it
tyrannously down, the fiercer would the world's recoil against him be,
one day. Injustice pays itself with frightful compound-interest. I am
not sure but he had better have lost his best park of artillery, or
had his best regiment drowned in the sea, than shot that poor German
Bookseller, Palm! It was a palpable tyrannous murderous injustice, which
no man, let him paint an inch thick, could make out to be other. It
burnt deep into the hearts of men, it and the like of it; suppressed
fire flashed in the eyes of men, as they thought of it,--waiting their
day! Which day _came_: Germany rose round him.--What Napoleon _did_ will
in the long-run amount to what he did justly; what Nature with her laws
will sanction. To what of reality was in him; to that and nothing more.
The rest was all smoke and waste. _La carriere ouverte aux talens_:
that great true Message, which has yet to articulate and fulfil itself
everywhere, he left in a most inarticulate state. He was a great
_ebauche_, a rude-draught never completed; as indeed what great man is
other? Left in _too_ rude a state, alas!

His notions of the world, as he expresses them there at St. Helena,
are almost tragical to consider. He seems to feel the most unaffected
surprise that it has all gone so; that he is flung out on the rock
here, and the World is still moving on its axis. France is great, and
all-great: and at bottom, he is France. England itself, he says, is by
Nature only an appendage of France; "another Isle of Oleron to
France." So it was by _Nature_, by Napoleon-Nature; and yet look how in
fact--HERE AM I! He cannot understand it: inconceivable that the
reality has not corresponded to his program of it; that France was not
all-great, that he was not France. "Strong delusion," that he should
believe the thing to be which _is_ not! The compact, clear-seeing,
decisive Italian nature of him, strong, genuine, which he once had,
has enveloped itself, half-dissolved itself, in a turbid atmosphere
of French fanfaronade. The world was not disposed to be trodden down
underfoot; to be bound into masses, and built together, as _he_ liked,
for a pedestal to France and him: the world had quite other purposes in
view! Napoleon's astonishment is extreme. But alas, what help now? He
had gone that way of his; and Nature also had gone her way. Having once
parted with Reality, he tumbles helpless in Vacuity; no rescue for him.
He had to sink there, mournfully as man seldom did; and break his great
heart, and die,--this poor Napoleon: a great implement too soon wasted,
till it was useless: our last Great Man!

Our last, in a double sense. For here finally these wide roamings of
ours through so many times and places, in search and study of Heroes,
are to terminate. I am sorry for it: there was pleasure for me in this
business, if also much pain. It is a great subject, and a most grave
and wide one, this which, not to be too grave about it, I have named
_Hero-worship_. It enters deeply, as I think, into the secret of
Mankind's ways and vitalest interests in this world, and is well worth
explaining at present. With six months, instead of six days, we might
have done better. I promised to break ground on it; I know not whether
I have even managed to do that. I have had to tear it up in the rudest
manner in order to get into it at all. Often enough, with these abrupt
utterances thrown out isolated, unexplained, has your tolerance been put
to the trial. Tolerance, patient candor, all-hoping favor and
kindness, which I will not speak of at present. The accomplished and
distinguished, the beautiful, the wise, something of what is best in
England, have listened patiently to my rude words. With many feelings, I
heartily thank you all; and say, Good be with you all!

========================================
========================================

LIFE OF JOHN STERLING

By Thomas Carlyle


Transcriber's Note: Italics in the text are indicated by the use of an
underscore as delimiter, _thusly_. All footnotes have been collected at
the end of the text, and numbered sequentially in brackets, [thusly].
One illustration has been omitted. The "pound" symbol has been replaced
by the word "pounds". Otherwise, all spelling, punctuation, etc., have
been left as in the printed text.

Taken from volume 2 of Carlyle's Complete Works, which additionally
contains the Latter-Day Pamphlets, to be provided as a separate etext.




PART I.



CHAPTER I. INTRODUCTORY.

Near seven years ago, a short while before his death in 1844, John
Sterling committed the care of his literary Character and printed
Writings to two friends, Archdeacon Hare and myself. His estimate of the
bequest was far from overweening; to few men could the small sum-total
of his activities in this world seem more inconsiderable than, in those
last solemn days, it did to him. He had burnt much; found much unworthy;
looking steadfastly into the silent continents of Death and Eternity, a
brave man's judgments about his own sorry work in the field of Time are
not apt to be too lenient. But, in fine, here was some portion of his
work which the world had already got hold of, and which he could not
burn. This too, since it was not to be abolished and annihilated, but
must still for some time live and act, he wished to be wisely settled,
as the rest had been. And so it was left in charge to us, the survivors,
to do for it what we judged fittest, if indeed doing nothing did not
seem the fittest to us. This message, communicated after his decease,
was naturally a sacred one to Mr. Hare and me.

After some consultation on it, and survey of the difficulties and
delicate considerations involved in it, Archdeacon Hare and I agreed
that the whole task, of selecting what Writings were to be reprinted,
and of drawing up a Biography to introduce them, should be left to him
alone; and done without interference of mine:--as accordingly it was, [1]
in a manner surely far superior to the common, in every good quality of
editing; and visibly everywhere bearing testimony to the friendliness,
the piety, perspicacity and other gifts and virtues of that eminent and
amiable man.

In one respect, however, if in one only, the arrangement had been
unfortunate. Archdeacon Hare, both by natural tendency and by his
position as a Churchman, had been led, in editing a Work not free from
ecclesiastical heresies, and especially in writing a Life very full of
such, to dwell with preponderating emphasis on that part of his subject;
by no means extenuating the fact, nor yet passing lightly over it (which
a layman could have done) as needing no extenuation; but carefully
searching into it, with the view of excusing and explaining it; dwelling
on it, presenting all the documents of it, and as it were spreading it
over the whole field of his delineation; as if religious heterodoxy had
been the grand fact of Sterling's life, which even to the Archdeacon's
mind it could by no means seem to be. _Hinc illae lachrymae_. For the
Religious Newspapers, and Periodical Heresy-hunters, getting very lively
in those years, were prompt to seize the cue; and have prosecuted
and perhaps still prosecute it, in their sad way, to all lengths and
breadths. John Sterling's character and writings, which had little
business to be spoken of in any Church-court, have hereby been carried
thither as if for an exclusive trial; and the mournfulest set of
pleadings, out of which nothing but a misjudgment _can_ be formed,
prevail there ever since. The noble Sterling, a radiant child of the
empyrean, clad in bright auroral hues in the memory of all that knew
him,--what is he doing here in inquisitorial _sanbenito_, with nothing
but ghastly spectralities prowling round him, and inarticulately
screeching and gibbering what they call their judgment on him!

"The sin of Hare's Book," says one of my Correspondents in those years,
"is easily defined, and not very condemnable, but it is nevertheless
ruinous to his task as Biographer. He takes up Sterling as a clergyman
merely. Sterling, I find, was a curate for exactly eight months; during
eight months and no more had he any special relation to the Church. But
he was a man, and had relation to the Universe, for eight-and-thirty
years: and it is in this latter character, to which all the others were
but features and transitory hues, that we wish to know him. His battle
with hereditary Church formulas was severe; but it was by no means his
one battle with things inherited, nor indeed his chief battle;
neither, according to my observation of what it was, is it successfully
delineated or summed up in this Book. The truth is, nobody that had
known Sterling would recognize a feature of him here; you would never
dream that this Book treated of _him_ at all. A pale sickly shadow in
torn surplice is presented to us here; weltering bewildered amid
heaps of what you call 'Hebrew Old-clothes;' wrestling, with impotent
impetuosity, to free itself from the baleful imbroglio, as if that
had been its one function in life: who in this miserable figure would
recognize the brilliant, beautiful and cheerful John Sterling, with
his ever-flowing wealth of ideas, fancies, imaginations; with his frank
affections, inexhaustible hopes, audacities, activities, and general
radiant vivacity of heart and intelligence, which made the presence of
him an illumination and inspiration wherever he went? It is too bad.
Let a man be honestly forgotten when his life ends; but let him not be
misremembered in this way. To be hung up as an ecclesiastical scarecrow,
as a target for heterodox and orthodox to practice archery upon, is no
fate that can be due to the memory of Sterling. It was not as a ghastly
phantasm, choked in Thirty-nine-article controversies, or miserable
Semitic, Anti-Semitic street-riots,--in scepticisms, agonized
self-seekings, that this man appeared in life; nor as such, if the world
still wishes to look at him should you suffer the world's memory of him
now to be. Once for all, it is unjust; emphatically untrue as an image
of John Sterling: perhaps to few men that lived along with him could
such an interpretation of their existence be more inapplicable."


Whatever truth there might be in these rather passionate
representations, and to myself there wanted not a painful feeling of
their truth, it by no means appeared what help or remedy any friend of
Sterling's, and especially one so related to the matter as myself, could
attempt in the interim. Perhaps endure in patience till the dust
laid itself again, as all dust does if you leave it well alone? Much
obscuration would thus of its own accord fall away; and, in Mr. Hare's
narrative itself, apart from his commentary, many features of Sterling's
true character would become decipherable to such as sought them.
Censure, blame of this Work of Mr. Hare's was naturally far from my
thoughts. A work which distinguishes itself by human piety and candid
intelligence; which, in all details, is careful, lucid, exact; and which
offers, as we say, to the observant reader that will interpret facts,
many traits of Sterling besides his heterodoxy. Censure of it, from me
especially, is not the thing due; from me a far other thing is due!--

On the whole, my private thought was: First, How happy it comparatively
is, for a man of any earnestness of life, to have no Biography written
of him; but to return silently, with his small, sorely foiled bit of
work, to the Supreme Silences, who alone can judge of it or him; and not
to trouble the reviewers, and greater or lesser public, with attempting
to judge it! The idea of "fame," as they call it, posthumous or
other, does not inspire one with much ecstasy in these points of
view.--Secondly, That Sterling's performance and real or seeming
importance in this world was actually not of a kind to demand an express
Biography, even according to the world's usages. His character was not
supremely original; neither was his fate in the world wonderful. What
he did was inconsiderable enough; and as to what it lay in him to have
done, this was but a problem, now beyond possibility of settlement. Why
had a Biography been inflicted on this man; why had not No-biography,
and the privilege of all the weary, been his lot?--Thirdly, That such
lot, however, could now no longer be my good Sterling's; a tumult having
risen around his name, enough to impress some pretended likeness of him
(about as like as the Guy-Fauxes are, on Gunpowder-Day) upon the minds
of many men: so that he could not be forgotten, and could only be
misremembered, as matters now stood.

Whereupon, as practical conclusion to the whole, arose by degrees this
final thought, That, at some calmer season, when the theological dust
had well fallen, and both the matter itself, and my feelings on it, were
in a suitabler condition, I ought to give my testimony about this friend
whom I had known so well, and record clearly what my knowledge of him
was. This has ever since seemed a kind of duty I had to do in the world
before leaving it.


And so, having on my hands some leisure at this time, and being bound to
it by evident considerations, one of which ought to be especially
sacred to me, I decide to fling down on paper some outline of what
my recollections and reflections contain in reference to this most
friendly, bright and beautiful human soul; who walked with me for a
season in this world, and remains to me very memorable while I continue
in it. Gradually, if facts simple enough in themselves can be narrated
as they came to pass, it will be seen what kind of man this was; to what
extent condemnable for imaginary heresy and other crimes, to what
extent laudable and lovable for noble manful _orthodoxy_ and other
virtues;--and whether the lesson his life had to teach us is not much
the reverse of what the Religious Newspapers hitherto educe from it.

Certainly it was not as a "sceptic" that you could define him, whatever
his definition might be. Belief, not doubt, attended him at all points
of his progress; rather a tendency to too hasty and headlong belief.
Of all men he was the least prone to what you could call scepticism:
diseased self-listenings, self-questionings, impotently painful
dubitations, all this fatal nosology of spiritual maladies, so rife
in our day, was eminently foreign to him. Quite on the other side lay
Sterling's faults, such as they were. In fact, you could observe, in
spite of his sleepless intellectual vivacity, he was not properly a
thinker at all; his faculties were of the active, not of the passive or
contemplative sort. A brilliant _improvisatore_; rapid in thought, in
word and in act; everywhere the promptest and least hesitating of men.
I likened him often, in my banterings, to sheet-lightning; and
reproachfully prayed that he would concentrate himself into a bolt, and
rive the mountain-barriers for us, instead of merely playing on them and
irradiating them.

True, he had his "religion" to seek, and painfully shape together for
himself, out of the abysses of conflicting disbelief and sham-belief and
bedlam delusion, now filling the world, as all men of reflection have;
and in this respect too,--more especially as his lot in the battle
appointed for us all was, if you can understand it, victory and not
defeat,--he is an expressive emblem of his time, and an instruction and
possession to his contemporaries. For, I say, it is by no means as a
vanquished _doubter_ that he figures in the memory of those who knew
him; but rather as a victorious _believer_, and under great difficulties
a victorious doer. An example to us all, not of lamed misery, helpless
spiritual bewilderment and sprawling despair, or any kind of _drownage_
in the foul welter of our so-called religious or other controversies and
confusions; but of a swift and valiant vanquisher of all these; a noble
asserter of himself, as worker and speaker, in spite of all these.
Continually, so far as he went, he was a teacher, by act and word, of
hope, clearness, activity, veracity, and human courage and nobleness:
the preacher of a good gospel to all men, not of a bad to any man. The
man, whether in priest's cassock or other costume of men, who is the
enemy or hater of John Sterling, may assure himself that he does not yet
know him,--that miserable differences of mere costume and dialect still
divide him, whatsoever is worthy, catholic and perennial in him, from a
brother soul who, more than most in his day, was his brother and not his
adversary in regard to all that.

Nor shall the irremediable drawback that Sterling was not current in the
Newspapers, that he achieved neither what the world calls greatness nor
what intrinsically is such, altogether discourage me. What his natural
size, and natural and accidental limits were, will gradually appear, if
my sketching be successful. And I have remarked that a true delineation
of the smallest man, and his scene of pilgrimage through life, is
capable of interesting the greatest man; that all men are to an
unspeakable degree brothers, each man's life a strange emblem of every
man's; and that Human Portraits, faithfully drawn, are of all pictures
the welcomest on human walls. Monitions and moralities enough may lie
in this small Work, if honestly written and honestly read;--and, in
particular, if any image of John Sterling and his Pilgrimage through
our poor Nineteenth Century be one day wanted by the world, and they can
find some shadow of a true image here, my swift scribbling (which shall
be very swift and immediate) may prove useful by and by.



CHAPTER II. BIRTH AND PARENTAGE.

John Sterling was born at Kaimes Castle, a kind of dilapidated baronial
residence to which a small farm was then attached, rented by his Father,
in the Isle of Bute,--on the 20th July, 1806. Both his parents were
Irish by birth, Scotch by extraction; and became, as he himself did,
essentially English by long residence and habit. Of John himself
Scotland has little or nothing to claim except the birth and genealogy,
for he left it almost before the years of memory; and in his mature days
regarded it, if with a little more recognition and intelligence, yet
without more participation in any of its accents outward or inward,
than others natives of Middlesex or Surrey, where the scene of his chief
education lay.

The climate of Bute is rainy, soft of temperature; with skies of unusual
depth and brilliancy, while the weather is fair. In that soft rainy
climate, on that wild-wooded rocky coast, with its gnarled mountains and
green silent valleys, with its seething rain-storms and many-sounding
seas, was young Sterling ushered into his first schooling in this world.
I remember one little anecdote his Father told me of those first
years: One of the cows had calved; young John, still in petticoats, was
permitted to go, holding by his father's hand, and look at the newly
arrived calf; a mystery which he surveyed with open intent eyes, and the
silent exercise of all the scientific faculties he had;--very strange
mystery indeed, this new arrival, and fresh denizen of our Universe:
"Wull't eat a-body?" said John in his first practical Scotch, inquiring
into the tendencies this mystery might have to fall upon a little fellow
and consume him as provision: "Will it eat one, Father?"--Poor little
open-eyed John: the family long bantered him with this anecdote; and
we, in far other years, laughed heartily on hearing it.--Simple peasant
laborers, ploughers, house-servants, occasional fisher-people too; and
the sight of ships, and crops, and Nature's doings where Art has little
meddled with her: this was the kind of schooling our young friend had,
first of all; on this bench of the grand world-school did he sit, for
the first four years of his life.

Edward Sterling his Father, a man who subsequently came to considerable
notice in the world, was originally of Waterford in Munster; son of the
Episcopalian Clergyman there; and chief representative of a family of
some standing in those parts. Family founded, it appears, by a
Colonel Robert Sterling, called also Sir Robert Sterling; a Scottish
Gustavus-Adolphus soldier, whom the breaking out of the Civil War had
recalled from his German campaignings, and had before long, though not
till after some waverings on his part, attached firmly to the Duke
of Ormond and to the King's Party in that quarrel. A little bit of
genealogy, since it lies ready to my hand, gathered long ago out of
wider studies, and pleasantly connects things individual and present
with the dim universal crowd of things past,--may as well be inserted
here as thrown away.

This Colonel Robert designates himself Sterling "of Glorat;" I believe,
a younger branch of the well-known Stirlings of Keir in Stirlingshire.
It appears he prospered in his soldiering and other business, in
those bad Ormond times; being a man of energy, ardor and
intelligence,--probably prompt enough both with his word and with his
stroke. There survives yet, in the Commons Journals, [2] dim notice of
his controversies and adventures; especially of one controversy he had
got into with certain victorious Parliamentary official parties,
while his own party lay vanquished, during what was called the Ormond
Cessation, or Temporary Peace made by Ormond with the Parliament in
1646:--in which controversy Colonel Robert, after repeated applications,
journeyings to London, attendances upon committees, and such like, finds
himself worsted, declared to be in the wrong; and so vanishes from the
Commons Journals.

What became of him when Cromwell got to Ireland, and to Munster, I
have not heard: his knighthood, dating from the very year of Cromwell's
Invasion (1649), indicates a man expected to do his best on the
occasion:--as in all probability he did; had not Tredah Storm proved
ruinous, and the neck of this Irish War been broken at once. Doubtless
the Colonel Sir Robert followed or attended his Duke of Ormond into
foreign parts, and gave up his management of Munster, while it was yet
time: for after the Restoration we find him again, safe, and as was
natural, flourishing with new splendor; gifted, recompensed with
lands;--settled, in short, on fair revenues in those Munster regions.
He appears to have had no children; but to have left his property to
William, a younger brother who had followed him into Ireland. From this
William descends the family which, in the years we treat of, had Edward
Sterling, Father of our John, for its representative. And now enough of
genealogy.


Of Edward Sterling, Captain Edward Sterling as his title was, who in the
latter period of his life became well known in London political society,
whom indeed all England, with a curious mixture of mockery and respect
and even fear, knew well as "the Thunderer of the Times Newspaper,"
there were much to be said, did the present task and its limits permit.
As perhaps it might, on certain terms? What is indispensable let us not
omit to say. The history of a man's childhood is the description of his
parents and environment: this is his inarticulate but highly important
history, in those first times, while of articulate he has yet none.

Edward Sterling had now just entered on his thirty-fourth year; and was
already a man experienced in fortunes and changes. A native of Waterford
in Munster, as already mentioned; born in the "Deanery House of
Waterford, 27th February, 1773," say the registers. For his Father, as
we learn, resided in the Deanery House, though he was not himself Dean,
but only "Curate of the Cathedral" (whatever that may mean); he was
withal rector of two other livings, and the Dean's friend,--friend
indeed of the Dean's kinsmen the Beresfords generally; whose grand house
of Curraghmore, near by Waterford, was a familiar haunt of his and his
children's. This reverend gentleman, along with his three livings and
high acquaintanceships, had inherited political connections;--inherited
especially a Government Pension, with survivorship for still one life
beyond his own; his father having been Clerk of the Irish House of
Commons at the time of the Union, of which office the lost salary was
compensated in this way. The Pension was of two hundred pounds; and only
expired with the life of Edward, John's Father, in 1847. There were,
and still are, daughters of the family; but Edward was the only
son;--descended, too, from the Scottish hero Wallace, as the old
gentleman would sometimes admonish him; his own wife, Edward's mother,
being of that name, and boasting herself, as most Scotch Wallaces do, to
have that blood in her veins.

This Edward had picked up, at Waterford, and among the young Beresfords
of Curraghmore and elsewhere, a thoroughly Irish form of character: fire
and fervor, vitality of all kinds, in genial abundance; but in a much
more loquacious, ostentatious, much _louder_ style than is freely
patronized on this side of the Channel. Of Irish accent in speech he had
entirely divested himself, so as not to be traced by any vestige in that
respect; but his Irish accent of character, in all manner of other more
important respects, was very recognizable. An impetuous man, full
of real energy, and immensely conscious of the same; who transacted
everything not with the minimum of fuss and noise, but with the maximum:
a very Captain Whirlwind, as one was tempted to call him.

In youth, he had studied at Trinity College, Dublin; visited the Inns
of Court here, and trained himself for the Irish Bar. To the Bar he
had been duly called, and was waiting for the results,--when, in his
twenty-fifth year, the Irish Rebellion broke out; whereupon the Irish
Barristers decided to raise a corps of loyal Volunteers, and a complete
change introduced itself into Edward Sterling's way of life. For,
naturally, he had joined the array of Volunteers;--fought, I have
heard, "in three actions with the rebels" (Vinegar Hill, for one); and
doubtless fought well: but in the mess-rooms, among the young military
and civil officials, with all of whom he was a favorite, he had acquired
a taste for soldier life, and perhaps high hopes of succeeding in it: at
all events, having a commission in the Lancashire Militia offered
him, he accepted that; altogether quitted the Bar, and became Captain
Sterling thenceforth. From the Militia, it appears, he had volunteered
with his Company into the Line; and, under some disappointments, and
official delays of expected promotion, was continuing to serve as
Captain there, "Captain of the Eighth Battalion of Reserve," say the
Military Almanacs of 1803,--in which year the quarters happened to be
Derry, where new events awaited him. At a ball in Derry he met with Miss
Hester Coningham, the queen of the scene, and of the fair world in Derry
at that time. The acquaintance, in spite of some Opposition, grew with
vigor, and rapidly ripened: and "at Fehan Church, Diocese of Derry,"
where the Bride's father had a country-house, "on Thursday 5th April,
1804, Hester Coningham, only daughter of John Coningham, Esquire,
Merchant in Derry, and of Elizabeth Campbell his wife," was wedded to
Captain Sterling; she happiest to him happiest,--as by Nature's kind law
it is arranged.

Mrs. Sterling, even in her later days, had still traces of the old
beauty: then and always she was a woman of delicate, pious, affectionate
character; exemplary as a wife, a mother and a friend. A refined female
nature; something tremulous in it, timid, and with a certain rural
freshness still unweakened by long converse with the world. The tall
slim figure, always of a kind of quaker neatness; the innocent anxious
face, anxious bright hazel eyes; the timid, yet gracefully cordial
ways, the natural intelligence, instinctive sense and worth, were very
characteristic. Her voice too; with its something of soft querulousness,
easily adapting itself to a light thin-flowing style of mirth on
occasion, was characteristic: she had retained her Ulster intonations,
and was withal somewhat copious in speech. A fine tremulously sensitive
nature, strong chiefly on the side of the affections, and the graceful
insights and activities that depend on these:--truly a beautiful,
much-suffering, much-loving house-mother. From her chiefly, as one could
discern, John Sterling had derived the delicate _aroma_ of his nature,
its piety, clearness, sincerity; as from his Father, the ready practical
gifts, the impetuosities and the audacities, were also (though in
strange new form) visibly inherited. A man was lucky to have such a
Mother; to have such Parents as both his were.

Meanwhile the new Wife appears to have had, for the present, no
marriage-portion; neither was Edward Sterling rich,--according to
his own ideas and aims, far from it. Of course he soon found that
the fluctuating barrack-life, especially with no outlooks of speedy
promotion, was little suited to his new circumstances: but how change
it? His father was now dead; from whom he had inherited the Speaker
Pension of two hundred pounds; but of available probably little or
nothing more. The rents of the small family estate, I suppose, and other
property, had gone to portion sisters. Two hundred pounds, and the pay
of a marching captain: within the limits of that revenue all plans of
his had to restrict themselves at present.

He continued for some time longer in the Army; his wife undivided from
him by the hardships, of that way of life. Their first son Anthony
(Captain Anthony Sterling, the only child who now survives) was born
to them in this position, while lying at Dundalk, in January, 1805. Two
months later, some eleven months after their marriage, the regiment was
broken; and Captain Sterling, declining to serve elsewhere on the
terms offered, and willingly accepting such decision of his doubts, was
reduced to half-pay. This was the end of his soldiering: some five
or six years in all; from which he had derived for life, among other
things, a decided military bearing, whereof he was rather proud; an
incapacity for practicing law;--and considerable uncertainty as to what
his next course of life was now to be.

For the present, his views lay towards farming: to establish himself,
if not as country gentleman, which was an unattainable ambition, then
at least as some kind of gentleman-farmer which had a flattering
resemblance to that. Kaimes Castle with a reasonable extent of land,
which, in his inquiries after farms, had turned up, was his first place
of settlement in this new capacity; and here, for some few months, he
had established himself when John his second child was born. This was
Captain Sterling's first attempt towards a fixed course of life; not
a very wise one, I have understood:--yet on the whole, who, then and
there, could have pointed out to him a wiser?

A fixed course of life and activity he could never attain, or not till
very late; and this doubtless was among the important points of his
destiny, and acted both on his own character and that of those who had
to attend him on his wayfarings.



CHAPTER III. SCHOOLS: LLANBLETHIAN; PARIS; LONDON.

Edward Sterling never shone in farming; indeed I believe he never took
heartily to it, or tried it except in fits. His Bute farm was, at
best, a kind of apology for some far different ideal of a country
establishment which could not be realized; practically a temporary
landing-place from which he could make sallies and excursions in search
of some more generous field of enterprise. Stormy brief efforts at
energetic husbandry, at agricultural improvement and rapid field-labor,
alternated with sudden flights to Dublin, to London, whithersoever any
flush of bright outlook which he could denominate practical, or any
gleam of hope which his impatient ennui could represent as such,
allured him. This latter was often enough the case. In wet hay-times and
harvest-times, the dripping outdoor world, and lounging indoor one, in
the absence of the master, offered far from a satisfactory appearance!
Here was, in fact, a man much imprisoned; haunted, I doubt not, by
demons enough; though ever brisk and brave withal,--iracund, but
cheerfully vigorous, opulent in wise or unwise hope. A fiery energetic
soul consciously and unconsciously storming for deliverance into better
arenas; and this in a restless, rapid, impetuous, rather than in a
strong, silent and deliberate way.

In rainy Bute and the dilapidated Kaimes Castle, it was evident, there
lay no Goshen for such a man. The lease, originally but for some three
years and a half, drawing now to a close, he resolved to quit Bute; had
heard, I know not where, of an eligible cottage without farm attached,
in the pleasant little village of Llanblethian close by Cowbridge in
Glamorganshire; of this he took a lease, and thither with his family he
moved in search of new fortunes. Glamorganshire was at least a better
climate than Bute; no groups of idle or of busy reapers could here stand
waiting on the guidance of a master, for there was no farm here;--and
among its other and probably its chief though secret advantages,
Llanblethian was much more convenient both for Dublin and London than
Kaimes Castle had been.

The removal thither took place in the autumn of 1809. Chief part of the
journey (perhaps from Greenock to Swansea or Bristol) was by sea: John,
just turned of three years, could in after-times remember nothing of
this voyage; Anthony, some eighteen months older, has still a vivid
recollection of the gray splashing tumult, and dim sorrow, uncertainty,
regret and distress he underwent: to him a "dissolving-view" which not
only left its effect on the _plate_ (as all views and dissolving-views
doubtless do on that kind of "plate"), but remained consciously present
there. John, in the close of his twenty-first year, professes not
to remember anything whatever of Bute; his whole existence, in that
earliest scene of it, had faded away from him: Bute also, with its
shaggy mountains, moaning woods, and summer and winter seas, had been
wholly a dissolving-view for him, and had left no conscious impression,
but only, like this voyage, an effect.

Llanblethian hangs pleasantly, with its white cottages, and orchard and
other trees, on the western slope of a green hill looking far and wide
over green meadows and little or bigger hills, in the pleasant plain of
Glamorgan; a short mile to the south of Cowbridge, to which smart little
town it is properly a kind of suburb. Plain of Glamorgan, some ten
miles wide and thirty or forty long, which they call the Vale of
Glamorgan;--though properly it is not quite a Vale, there being only one
range of mountains to it, if even one: certainly the central Mountains
of Wales do gradually rise, in a miscellaneous manner, on the north
side of it; but on the south are no mountains, not even land, only
the Bristol Channel, and far off, the Hills of Devonshire, for
boundary,--the "English Hills," as the natives call them, visible from
every eminence in those parts. On such wide terms is it called Vale of
Glamorgan. But called by whatever name, it is a most pleasant fruitful
region: kind to the native, interesting to the visitor. A waving grassy
region; cut with innumerable ragged lanes; dotted with sleepy unswept
human hamlets, old ruinous castles with their ivy and their daws, gray
sleepy churches with their ditto ditto: for ivy everywhere abounds; and
generally a rank fragrant vegetation clothes all things; hanging, in
rude many-colored festoons and fringed odoriferous tapestries, on your
right and on your left, in every lane. A country kinder to the sluggard
husbandman than any I have ever seen. For it lies all on limestone,
needs no draining; the soil, everywhere of handsome depth and finest
quality, will grow good crops for you with the most imperfect tilling.
At a safe distance of a day's riding lie the tartarean copper-forges of
Swansea, the tartarean iron-forges of Merthyr; their sooty battle far
away, and not, at such safe distance, a defilement to the face of
the earth and sky, but rather an encouragement to the earth at least;
encouraging the husbandman to plough better, if he only would.

The peasantry seem indolent and stagnant, but peaceable and
well-provided; much given to Methodism when they have any
character;--for the rest, an innocent good-humored people, who all drink
home-brewed beer, and have brown loaves of the most excellent home-baked
bread. The native peasant village is not generally beautiful, though
it might be, were it swept and trimmed; it gives one rather the idea
of sluttish stagnancy,--an interesting peep into the Welsh Paradise of
Sleepy Hollow. Stones, old kettles, naves of wheels, all kinds of broken
litter, with live pigs and etceteras, lie about the street: for, as
a rule, no rubbish is removed, but waits patiently the action of mere
natural chemistry and accident; if even a house is burnt or falls, you
will find it there after half a century, only cloaked by the ever-ready
ivy. Sluggish man seems never to have struck a pick into it; his new hut
is built close by on ground not encumbered, and the old stones are still
left lying.

This is the ordinary Welsh village; but there are exceptions,
where people of more cultivated tastes have been led to settle, and
Llanblethian is one of the more signal of these. A decidedly cheerful
group of human homes, the greater part of them indeed belonging to
persons of refined habits; trimness, shady shelter, whitewash, neither
conveniency nor decoration has been neglected here. Its effect from
the distance on the eastward is very pretty: you see it like a little
sleeping cataract of white houses, with trees overshadowing and fringing
it; and there the cataract hangs, and does not rush away from you.

John Sterling spent his next five years in this locality. He did not
again see it for a quarter of a century; but retained, all his life, a
lively remembrance of it; and, just in the end of his twenty-first year,
among his earliest printed pieces, we find an elaborate and diffuse
description of it and its relations to him,--part of which piece, in
spite of its otherwise insignificant quality, may find place here:--

"The fields on which I first looked, and the sands which were marked by
my earliest footsteps, are completely lost to my memory; and of those
ancient walls among which I began to breathe, I retain no recollection
more clear than the outlines of a cloud in a moonless sky. But of L----,
the village where I afterwards lived, I persuade myself that every line
and hue is more deeply and accurately fixed than those of any spot
I have since beheld, even though borne in upon the heart by the
association of the strongest feelings.

"My home was built upon the slope of a hill, with a little orchard
stretching down before it, and a garden rising behind. At a considerable
distance beyond and beneath the orchard, a rivulet flowed through
meadows and turned a mill; while, above the garden, the summit of
the hill was crowned by a few gray rocks, from which a yew-tree grew,
solitary and bare. Extending at each side of the orchard, toward
the brook, two scattered patches of cottages lay nestled among their
gardens; and beyond this streamlet and the little mill and bridge,
another slight eminence arose, divided into green fields, tufted and
bordered with copsewood, and crested by a ruined castle, contemporary,
as was said, with the Conquest. I know not whether these things in truth
made up a prospect of much beauty. Since I was eight years old, I have
never seen them; but I well know that no landscape I have since beheld,
no picture of Claude or Salvator, gave me half the impression of living,
heartfelt, perfect beauty which fills my mind when I think of that green
valley, that sparkling rivulet, that broken fortress of dark antiquity,
and that hill with its aged yew and breezy summit, from which I have
so often looked over the broad stretch of verdure beneath it, and the
country-town, and church-tower, silent and white beyond.

"In that little town there was, and I believe is, a school where the
elements of human knowledge were communicated to me, for some hours of
every day, during a considerable time. The path to it lay across the
rivulet and past the mill; from which point we could either journey
through the fields below the old castle, and the wood which surrounded
it, or along a road at the other side of the ruin, close to the gateway
of which it passed. The former track led through two or three beautiful
fields, the sylvan domain of the keep on one hand, and the brook on the
other; while an oak or two, like giant warders advanced from the wood,
broke the sunshine of the green with a soft and graceful shadow. How
often, on my way to school, have I stopped beneath the tree to collect
the fallen acorns; how often run down to the stream to pluck a branch of
the hawthorn which hung over the water! The road which passed the castle
joined, beyond these fields, the path which traversed them. It took, I
well remember, a certain solemn and mysterious interest from the ruin.
The shadow of the archway, the discolorizations of time on all the
walls, the dimness of the little thicket which encircled it, the
traditions of its immeasurable age, made St. Quentin's Castle a
wonderful and awful fabric in the imagination of a child; and long after
I last saw its mouldering roughness, I never read of fortresses, or
heights, or spectres, or banditti, without connecting them with the one
ruin of my childhood.

"It was close to this spot that one of the few adventures occurred
which marked, in my mind, my boyish days with importance. When loitering
beyond the castle, on the way to school, with a brother somewhat older
than myself, who was uniformly my champion and protector, we espied a
round sloe high up in the hedge-row. We determined to obtain it; and
I do not remember whether both of us, or only my brother, climbed the
tree. However, when the prize was all but reached,--and no alchemist
ever looked more eagerly for the moment of projection which was to give
him immortality and omnipotence,--a gruff voice startled us with an
oath, and an order to desist; and I well recollect looking back, for
long after, with terror to the vision of an old and ill-tempered
farmer, armed with a bill-hook, and vowing our decapitation; nor did I
subsequently remember without triumph the eloquence whereby alone, in my
firm belief, my brother and myself had been rescued from instant death.

"At the entrance of the little town stood an old gateway, with a pointed
arch and decaying battlements. It gave admittance to the street which
contained the church, and which terminated in another street, the
principal one in the town of C----. In this was situated the school to
which I daily wended. I cannot now recall to mind the face of its good
conductor, nor of any of his scholars; but I have before me a strong
general image of the interior of his establishment. I remember the
reverence with which I was wont to carry to his seat a well-thumbed
duodecimo, the _History of Greece_ by Oliver Goldsmith. I remember the
mental agonies I endured in attempting to master the art and mystery of
penmanship; a craft in which, alas, I remained too short a time under
Mr. R---- to become as great a proficient as he made his other scholars,
and which my awkwardness has prevented me from attaining in any
considerable perfection under my various subsequent pedagogues. But that
which has left behind it a brilliant trait of light was the exhibition
of what are called 'Christmas pieces;' things unknown in aristocratic
seminaries, but constantly used at the comparatively humble academy
which supplied the best knowledge of reading, writing, and arithmetic to
be attained in that remote neighborhood.

"The long desks covered from end to end with those painted masterpieces,
the Life of Robinson Crusoe, the Hunting of Chevy-Chase, the History
of Jack the Giant-Killer, and all the little eager faces and trembling
hands bent over these, and filling them up with some choice quotation,
sacred or profane;--no, the galleries of art, the theatrical
exhibitions, the reviews and processions,--which are only not childish
because they are practiced and admired by men instead of children,--all
the pomps and vanities of great cities, have shown me no revelation of
glory such as did that crowded school-room the week before the Christmas
holidays. But these were the splendors of life. The truest and the
strongest feelings do not connect themselves with any scenes of gorgeous
and gaudy magnificence; they are bound up in the remembrances of home.

"The narrow orchard, with its grove of old apple-trees against one of
which I used to lean, and while I brandished a beanstalk, roar out with
Fitzjames,--

     'Come one, come all; this rock shall fly
     From its firm base as soon as I!'--

while I was ready to squall at the sight of a cur, and run valorously
away from a casually approaching cow; the field close beside it, where
I rolled about in summer among the hay; the brook in which, despite
of maid and mother, I waded by the hour; the garden where I sowed
flower-seeds, and then turned up the ground again and planted potatoes,
and then rooted out the potatoes to insert acorns and apple-pips, and
at last, as may be supposed, reaped neither roses, nor potatoes, nor
oak-trees, nor apples; the grass-plots on which I played among those
with whom I never can play nor work again: all these are places and
employments,--and, alas, playmates,--such as, if it were worth while to
weep at all, it would be worth weeping that I enjoy no longer.

"I remember the house where I first grew familiar with peacocks; and the
mill-stream into which I once fell; and the religious awe wherewith I
heard, in the warm twilight, the psalm-singing around the house of the
Methodist miller; and the door-post against which I discharged my brazen
artillery; I remember the window by which I sat while my mother taught
me French; and the patch of garden which I dug for-- But her name is
best left blank; it was indeed writ in water. These recollections are
to me like the wealth of a departed friend, a mournful treasure. But the
public has heard enough of them; to it they are worthless: they are
a coin which only circulates at its true value between the different
periods of an individual's existence, and good for nothing but to keep
up a commerce between boyhood and manhood. I have for years looked
forward to the possibility of visiting L----; but I am told that it is
a changed village; and not only has man been at work, but the old yew on
the hill has fallen, and scarcely a low stump remains of the tree which
I delighted in childhood to think might have furnished bows for the
Norman archers." [3]

In Cowbridge is some kind of free school, or grammar-school, of a
certain distinction; and this to Captain Sterling was probably a motive
for settling in the neighborhood of it with his children. Of this
however, as it turned out, there was no use made: the Sterling family,
during its continuance in those parts, did not need more than a primary
school. The worthy master who presided over these Christmas galas, and
had the honor to teach John Sterling his reading and writing, was an
elderly Mr. Reece of Cowbridge, who still (in 1851) survives, or lately
did; and is still remembered by his old pupils as a worthy, ingenious
and kindly man, "who wore drab breeches and white stockings." Beyond the
Reece sphere of tuition John Sterling did not go in this locality.

In fact the Sterling household was still fluctuating; the problem of a
task for Edward Sterling's powers, and of anchorage for his affairs in
any sense, was restlessly struggling to solve itself, but was still a
good way from being solved. Anthony, in revisiting these scenes with
John in 1839, mentions going to the spot "where we used to stand with
our Father, looking out for the arrival of the London mail:" a little
chink through which is disclosed to us a big restless section of a human
life. The Hill of Welsh Llanblethian, then, is like the mythic Caucasus
in its degree (as indeed all hills and habitations where men sojourn
are); and here too, on a small scale, is a Prometheus Chained! Edward
Sterling, I can well understand, was a man to tug at the chains that
held him idle in those the prime of his years; and to ask restlessly,
yet not in anger and remorse, so much as in hope, locomotive
speculation, and ever-new adventure and attempt, Is there no task nearer
my own natural size, then? So he looks out from the Hill-side "for
the arrival of the London mail;" thence hurries into Cowbridge to the
Post-office; and has a wide web, of threads and gossamers, upon his
loom, and many shuttles flying, in this world.

By the Marquis of Bute's appointment he had, very shortly after his
arrival in that region, become Adjutant of the Glamorganshire Militia,
"Local Militia," I suppose; and was, in this way, turning his military
capabilities to some use. The office involved pretty frequent absences,
in Cardiff and elsewhere. This doubtless was a welcome outlet, though
a small one. He had also begun to try writing, especially on public
subjects; a much more copious outlet,--which indeed, gradually widening
itself, became the final solution for him. Of the year 1811 we have a
Pamphlet of his, entitled _Military Reform_; this is the second edition,
"dedicated to the Duke of Kent;" the first appears to have come out the
year before, and had thus attained a certain notice, which of course was
encouraging. He now furthermore opened a correspondence with the _Times_
Newspaper; wrote to it, in 1812, a series of Letters under the signature
_Vetus_: voluntary Letters I suppose, without payment or pre-engagement,
one successful Letter calling out another; till _Vetus_ and his
doctrines came to be a distinguishable entity, and the business amounted
to something. Out of my own earliest Newspaper reading, I can remember
the name _Vetus_, as a kind of editorial hacklog on which able-editors
were wont to chop straw now and then. Nay the Letters were collected and
reprinted; both this first series, of 1812, and then a second of next
year: two very thin, very dim-colored cheap octavos; stray copies of
which still exist, and may one day become distillable into a drop of
History (should such be wanted of our poor "Scavenger Age" in
time coming), though the reading of them has long ceased in this
generation.[4] The first series, we perceive, had even gone to a second
edition. The tone, wherever one timidly glances into this extinct
cockpit, is trenchant and emphatic: the name of _Vetus_, strenuously
fighting there, had become considerable in the talking political world;
and, no doubt, was especially of mark, as that of a writer who might
otherwise be important, with the proprietors of the _Times_. The
connection continued: widened and deepened itself,--in a slow tentative
manner; passing naturally from voluntary into remunerated: and indeed
proving more and more to be the true ultimate arena, and battle-field
and seed-field, for the exuberant impetuosities and faculties of this
man.

What the _Letters of Vetus_ treated of I do not know; doubtless they ran
upon Napoleon, Catholic Emancipation, true methods of national defence,
of effective foreign Anti-gallicism, and of domestic ditto; which
formed the staple of editorial speculation at that time. I have heard
in general that Captain Sterling, then and afterwards, advocated "the
Marquis of Wellesley's policy;" but that also, what it was, I have
forgotten, and the world has been willing to forget. Enough, the heads
of the _Times_ establishment, perhaps already the Marquis of Wellesley
and other important persons, had their eye on this writer; and it began
to be surmised by him that here at last was the career he had been
seeking.


Accordingly, in 1814, when victorious Peace unexpectedly arrived; and
the gates of the Continent after five-and-twenty years of fierce closure
were suddenly thrown open; and the hearts of all English and European
men awoke staggering as if from a nightmare suddenly removed, and ran
hither and thither,--Edward Sterling also determined on a new adventure,
that of crossing to Paris, and trying what might lie in store for him.
For curiosity, in its idler sense, there was evidently pabulum enough.
But he had hopes moreover of learning much that might perhaps avail him
afterwards;--hopes withal, I have understood, of getting to be Foreign
Correspondent of the _Times_ Newspaper, and so adding to his income in
the mean while. He left Llanblethian in May; dates from Dieppe the 27th
of that month. He lived in occasional contact with Parisian notabilities
(all of them except Madame de Stael forgotten now), all summer,
diligently surveying his ground;--returned for his family, who were
still in Wales but ready to move, in the beginning of August; took them
immediately across with him; a house in the neighborhood of Paris, in
the pleasant village of Passy at once town and country, being now ready;
and so, under foreign skies, again set up his household there.

Here was a strange new "school" for our friend John now in his eighth
year! Out of which the little Anthony and he drank doubtless at all
pores, vigorously as they had done in no school before. A change total
and immediate. Somniferous green Llanblethian has suddenly been blotted
out; presto, here are wakeful Passy and the noises of paved Paris
instead. Innocent ingenious Mr. Reece in drab breeches and white
stockings, he with his mild Christmas galas and peaceable rules of
Dilworth and Butterworth, has given place to such a saturnalia of
panoramic, symbolic and other teachers and monitors, addressing all the
five senses at once. Who John's express tutors were, at Passy, I never
heard; nor indeed, especially in his case, was it much worth inquiring.
To him and to all of us, the expressly appointed schoolmasters and
schoolings we get are as nothing, compared with the unappointed
incidental and continual ones, whose school-hours are all the days and
nights of our existence, and whose lessons, noticed or unnoticed, stream
in upon us with every breath we draw. Anthony says they attended a
French school, though only for about three months; and he well remembers
the last scene of it, "the boys shouting _Vive l'Empereur_ when Napoleon
came back."

Of John Sterling's express schooling, perhaps the most important
feature, and by no means a favorable one to him, was the excessive
fluctuation that prevailed in it. Change of scene, change of teacher,
_both_ express and implied, was incessant with him; and gave his
young life a nomadic character,--which surely, of all the adventitious
tendencies that could have been impressed upon him, so volatile,
swift and airy a being as him, was the one he needed least. His gentle
pious-hearted Mother, ever watching over him in all outward changes, and
assiduously keeping human pieties and good affections alive in him, was
probably the best counteracting element in his lot. And on the whole,
have we not all to run our chance in that respect; and take, the most
victoriously we can, such schooling as pleases to be attainable in
our year and place? Not very victoriously, the most of us! A wise
well-calculated breeding of a young genial soul in this world, or
alas of any young soul in it, lies fatally over the horizon in these
epochs!--This French scene of things, a grand school of its sort, and
also a perpetual banquet for the young soul, naturally captivated John
Sterling; he said afterwards, "New things and experiences here were
poured upon his mind and sense, not in streams, but in a Niagara
cataract." This too, however, was but a scene; lasted only some six or
seven months; and in the spring of the next year terminated as abruptly
as any of the rest could do.

For in the spring of the next year, Napoleon abruptly emerged from
Elba; and set all the populations of the world in motion, in a strange
manner;--set the Sterling household afloat, in particular; the big
European tide rushing into all smallest creeks, at Passy and elsewhere.
In brief, on the 20th of March, 1815, the family had to shift, almost
to fly, towards home and the sea-coast; and for a day or two were under
apprehension of being detained and not reaching home. Mrs. Sterling,
with her children and effects, all in one big carriage with two horses,
made the journey to Dieppe; in perfect safety, though in continual
tremor: here they were joined by Captain Sterling, who had stayed behind
at Paris to see the actual advent of Napoleon, and to report what
the aspect of affairs was, "Downcast looks of citizens, with fierce
saturnalian acclaim of soldiery:" after which they proceeded together to
London without farther apprehension;--there to witness, in due time, the
tar-barrels of Waterloo, and other phenomena that followed.


Captain Sterling never quitted London as a residence any more; and
indeed was never absent from it, except on autumnal or other excursions
of a few weeks, till the end of his life. Nevertheless his course there
was as yet by no means clear; nor had his relations with the heads of
the _Times_, or with other high heads, assumed a form which could be
called definite, but were hanging as a cloudy maze of possibilities,
firm substance not yet divided from shadow. It continued so for some
years. The Sterling household shifted twice or thrice to new streets
or localities,--Russell Square or Queen Square, Blackfriars Road,
and longest at the Grove, Blackheath,--before the vapors of Wellesley
promotions and such like slowly sank as useless precipitate, and
the firm rock, which was definite employment, ending in lucrative
co-proprietorship and more and more important connection with the
_Times_ Newspaper, slowly disclosed itself.

These changes of place naturally brought changes in John Sterling's
schoolmasters: nor were domestic tragedies wanting, still more important
to him. New brothers and sisters had been born; two little brothers
more, three little sisters he had in all; some of whom came to their
eleventh year beside him, some passed away in their second or fourth:
but from his ninth to his sixteenth year they all died; and in 1821 only
Anthony and John were left. [5] How many tears, and passionate pangs,
and soft infinite regrets; such as are appointed to all mortals! In one
year, I find, indeed in one half-year, he lost three little playmates,
two of them within one month. His own age was not yet quite twelve. For
one of these three, for little Edward, his next younger, who died now
at the age of nine, Mr. Hare records that John copied out, in large
school-hand, a _History of Valentine and Orson_, to beguile the poor
child's sickness, which ended in death soon, leaving a sad cloud on
John.


Of his grammar and other schools, which, as I said, are hardly worth
enumerating in comparison, the most important seems to have been a Dr.
Burney's at Greenwich; a large day-school and boarding-school, where
Anthony and John gave their attendance for a year or two (1818-19) from
Blackheath. "John frequently did themes for the boys," says Anthony,
"and for myself when I was aground." His progress in all school learning
was certain to be rapid, if he even moderately took to it. A lean,
tallish, loose-made boy of twelve; strange alacrity, rapidity and joyous
eagerness looking out of his eyes, and of all his ways and movements.
I have a Picture of him at this stage; a little portrait, which carries
its verification with it. In manhood too, the chief expression of his
eyes and physiognomy was what I might call alacrity, cheerful rapidity.
You could see, here looked forth a soul which was winged; which dwelt
in hope and action, not in hesitation or fear. Anthony says, he was "an
affectionate and gallant kind of boy, adventurous and generous, daring
to a singular degree." Apt enough withal to be "petulant now and then;"
on the whole, "very self-willed;" doubtless not a little discursive in
his thoughts and ways, and "difficult to manage."

I rather think Anthony, as the steadier, more substantial boy, was
the Mother's favorite; and that John, though the quicker and cleverer,
perhaps cost her many anxieties. Among the Papers given me, is an old
browned half-sheet in stiff school hand, unpunctuated, occasionally ill
spelt,--John Sterling's earliest remaining Letter,--which gives record
of a crowning escapade of his, the first and the last of its kind; and
so may be inserted here. A very headlong adventure on the boy's part; so
hasty and so futile, at once audacious and impracticable; emblematic of
much that befell in the history of the man!

                   "_To Mrs. Sterling, Blackheath_.
                                                "21st September, 1818.

"DEAR MAMMA,--I am now at Dover, where I arrived this morning about
seven o'clock. When you thought I was going to church, I went down the
Kent Road, and walked on till I came to Gravesend, which is upwards of
twenty miles from Blackheath; at about seven o'clock in the evening,
without having eat anything the whole time. I applied to an inkeeper
(_sic_) there, pretending that I had served a haberdasher in London, who
left of (_sic_) business, and turned me away. He believed me; and got
me a passage in the coach here, for I said that I had an Uncle here, and
that my Father and Mother were dead;--when I wandered about the quays
for some time, till I met Captain Keys, whom I asked to give me a
passage to Boulogne; which he promised to do, and took me home to
breakfast with him: but Mrs. Keys questioned me a good deal; when I not
being able to make my story good, I was obliged to confess to her that
I had run away from you. Captain Keys says that he will keep me at his
house till you answer my letter.

                                                        "J. STERLING."

Anthony remembers the business well; but can assign no origin to
it,--some penalty, indignity or cross put suddenly on John, which the
hasty John considered unbearable. His Mother's inconsolable weeping, and
then his own astonishment at such a culprit's being forgiven, are all
that remain with Anthony. The steady historical style of the young
runaway of twelve, narrating merely, not in the least apologizing, is
also noticeable.

This was some six months after his little brother Edward's death; three
months after that of Hester, his little sister next in the family series
to him: troubled days for the poor Mother in that small household on
Blackheath, as there are for mothers in so many households in this
world! I have heard that Mrs. Sterling passed much of her time alone, at
this period. Her husband's pursuits, with his Wellesleys and the like,
often carrying him into Town and detaining him late there, she would
sit among her sleeping children, such of them as death had still spared,
perhaps thriftily plying her needle, full of mournful affectionate
night-thoughts,--apprehensive too, in her tremulous heart, that the head
of the house might have fallen among robbers in his way homeward.



CHAPTER IV. UNIVERSITIES: GLASGOW; CAMBRIDGE.

At a later stage, John had some instruction from a Dr. Waite at
Blackheath; and lastly, the family having now removed into Town, to
Seymour Street in the fashionable region there, he "read for a while
with Dr. Trollope, Master of Christ's Hospital;" which ended his school
history.

In this his ever-changing course, from Reece at Cowbridge to Trollope
in Christ's, which was passed so nomadically, under ferulas of various
color, the boy had, on the whole, snatched successfully a fair share
of what was going. Competent skill in construing Latin, I think also an
elementary knowledge of Greek; add ciphering to a small extent, Euclid
perhaps in a rather imaginary condition; a swift but not very legible or
handsome penmanship, and the copious prompt habit of employing it in all
manner of unconscious English prose composition, or even occasionally
in verse itself: this, or something like this, he had gained from his
grammar-schools: this is the most of what they offer to the poor young
soul in general, in these indigent times. The express schoolmaster is
not equal to much at present,--while the _un_express, for good or
for evil, is so busy with a poor little fellow! Other departments of
schooling had been infinitely more productive, for our young friend,
than the gerund-grinding one. A voracious reader I believe he all along
was,--had "read the whole Edinburgh Review" in these boyish years, and
out of the circulating libraries one knows not what cartloads; wading
like Ulysses towards his palace "through infinite dung." A voracious
observer and participator in all things he likewise all along was; and
had had his sights, and reflections, and sorrows and adventures, from
Kaimes Castle onward,--and had gone at least to Dover on his own score.
_Puer bonae spei_, as the school-albums say; a boy of whom much may be
hoped? Surely, in many senses, yes. A frank veracity is in him, truth
and courage, as the basis of all; and of wild gifts and graces there is
abundance. I figure him a brilliant, swift, voluble, affectionate and
pleasant creature; out of whom, if it were not that symptoms of delicate
health already show themselves, great things might be made. Promotions
at least, especially in this country and epoch of parliaments and
eloquent palavers, are surely very possible for such a one!


Being now turned of sixteen, and the family economics getting yearly
more propitious and flourishing, he, as his brother had already
been, was sent to Glasgow University, in which city their Mother had
connections. His brother and he were now all that remained of the
young family; much attached to one another in their College years as
afterwards. Glasgow, however, was not properly their College scene:
here, except that they had some tuition from Mr. Jacobson, then a senior
fellow-student, now (1851) the learned editor of St. Basil, and Regius
Professor of Divinity in Oxford, who continued ever afterwards a valued
intimate of John's, I find nothing special recorded of them. The Glasgow
curriculum, for John especially, lasted but one year; who, after some
farther tutorage from Mr. Jacobson or Dr. Trollope, was appointed for a
more ambitious sphere of education.

In the beginning of his nineteenth year, "in the autumn of 1824," he
went to Trinity College, Cambridge. His brother Anthony, who had already
been there a year, had just quitted this Establishment, and entered on
a military life under good omens; I think, at Dublin under the Lord
Lieutenant's patronage, to whose service he was, in some capacity,
attached. The two brothers, ever in company hitherto, parted roads
at this point; and, except on holiday visits and by frequent
correspondence, did not again live together; but they continued in a
true fraternal attachment while life lasted, and I believe never had
any even temporary estrangement, or on either side a cause for such. The
family, as I said, was now, for the last three years, reduced to these
two; the rest of the young ones, with their laughter and their
sorrows, all gone. The parents otherwise were prosperous in outward
circumstances; the Father's position more and more developing itself
into affluent security, an agreeable circle of acquaintance, and a
certain real influence, though of a peculiar sort, according to his
gifts for work in this world.


Sterling's Tutor at Trinity College was Julius Hare, now the
distinguished Archdeacon of Lewes:--who soon conceived a great esteem
for him, and continued ever afterwards, in looser or closer connection,
his loved and loving friend. As the Biographical and Editorial work
above alluded to abundantly evinces. Mr. Hare celebrates the wonderful
and beautiful gifts, the sparkling ingenuity, ready logic, eloquent
utterance, and noble generosities and pieties of his pupil;--records
in particular how once, on a sudden alarm of fire in some neighboring
College edifice while his lecture was proceeding, all hands rushed out
to help; how the undergraduates instantly formed themselves in lines
from the fire to the river, and in swift continuance kept passing
buckets as was needful, till the enemy was visibly fast yielding,--when
Mr. Hare, going along the line, was astonished to find Sterling, at the
river-end of it, standing up to his waist in water, deftly dealing with
the buckets as they came and went. You in the river, Sterling; you with
your coughs, and dangerous tendencies of health!--"Somebody must be
in it," answered Sterling; "why not I, as well as another?" Sterling's
friends may remember many traits of that kind. The swiftest in all
things, he was apt to be found at the head of the column, whithersoever
the march might be; if towards any brunt of danger, there was he surest
to be at the head; and of himself and his peculiar risks or impediments
he was negligent at all times, even to an excessive and plainly
unreasonable degree.

Mr. Hare justly refuses him the character of an exact scholar, or
technical proficient at any time in either of the ancient literatures.
But he freely read in Greek and Latin, as in various modern languages;
and in all fields, in the classical as well, his lively faculty of
recognition and assimilation had given him large booty in proportion to
his labor. One cannot under any circumstances conceive of Sterling as
a steady dictionary philologue, historian, or archaeologist; nor did he
here, nor could he well, attempt that course. At the same time, Greek
and the Greeks being here before him, he could not fail to gather
somewhat from it, to take some hue and shape from it. Accordingly there
is, to a singular extent, especially in his early writings, a
certain tinge of Grecism and Heathen classicality traceable in
him;--Classicality, indeed, which does not satisfy one's sense as real
or truly living, but which glitters with a certain genial, if perhaps
almost meretricious half-_japannish_ splendor,--greatly distinguishable
from mere gerund-grinding, and death in longs and shorts. If
Classicality mean the practical conception, or attempt to conceive, what
human life was in the epoch called classical,--perhaps few or none of
Sterling's contemporaries in that Cambridge establishment carried away
more of available Classicality than even he.

But here, as in his former schools, his studies and inquiries,
diligently prosecuted I believe, were of the most discursive
wide-flowing character; not steadily advancing along beaten roads
towards College honors, but pulsing out with impetuous irregularity
now on this tract, now on that, towards whatever spiritual Delphi might
promise to unfold the mystery of this world, and announce to him
what was, in our new day, the authentic message of the gods. His
speculations, readings, inferences, glances and conclusions were
doubtless sufficiently encyclopedic; his grand tutors the multifarious
set of Books he devoured. And perhaps,--as is the singular case in most
schools and educational establishments of this unexampled epoch,--it
was not the express set of arrangements in this or any extant University
that could essentially forward him, but only the implied and silent
ones; less in the prescribed "course of study," which seems to tend
no-whither, than--if you will consider it--in the generous (not
ungenerous) rebellion against said prescribed course, and the voluntary
spirit of endeavor and adventure excited thereby, does help lie for
a brave youth in such places. Curious to consider. The fagging, the
illicit boating, and the things _forbidden_ by the schoolmaster,--these,
I often notice in my Eton acquaintances, are the things that have done
them good; these, and not their inconsiderable or considerable knowledge
of the Greek accidence almost at all! What is Greek accidence, compared
to Spartan discipline, if it can be had? That latter is a real and grand
attainment. Certainly, if rebellion is unfortunately needful, and you
can rebel in a generous manner, several things may be acquired in that
operation,--rigorous mutual fidelity, reticence, steadfastness, mild
stoicism, and other virtues far transcending your Greek accidence.
Nor can the unwisest "prescribed course of study" be considered quite
useless, if it have incited you to try nobly on all sides for a course
of your own. A singular condition of Schools and High-schools, which
have come down, in their strange old clothes and "courses of study,"
from the monkish ages into this highly unmonkish one;--tragical
condition, at which the intelligent observer makes deep pause!

One benefit, not to be dissevered from the most obsolete University
still frequented by young ingenuous living souls, is that of manifold
collision and communication with the said young souls; which, to every
one of these coevals, is undoubtedly the most important branch of
breeding for him. In this point, as the learned Huber has insisted, [6]
the two English Universities,--their studies otherwise being granted to
be nearly useless, and even ill done of their kind,--far excel all other
Universities: so valuable are the rules of human behavior which from of
old have tacitly established themselves there; so manful, with all its
sad drawbacks, is the style of English character, "frank, simple,
rugged and yet courteous," which has tacitly but imperatively got itself
sanctioned and prescribed there. Such, in full sight of Continental and
other Universities, is Huber's opinion. Alas, the question of University
Reform goes deep at present; deep as the world;--and the real University
of these new epochs is yet a great way from us! Another judge in whom
I have confidence declares further, That of these two Universities,
Cambridge is decidedly the more catholic (not Roman catholic, but Human
catholic) in its tendencies and habitudes; and that in fact, of all the
miserable Schools and High-schools in the England of these years, he,
if reduced to choose from them, would choose Cambridge as a place
of culture for the young idea. So that, in these bad circumstances,
Sterling had perhaps rather made a hit than otherwise?


Sterling at Cambridge had undoubtedly a wide and rather genial circle of
comrades; and could not fail to be regarded and beloved by many of them.
Their life seems to have been an ardently speculating and talking one;
by no means excessively restrained within limits; and, in the more
adventurous heads like Sterling's, decidedly tending towards the
latitudinarian in most things. They had among them a Debating Society
called The Union; where on stated evenings was much logic, and other
spiritual fencing and ingenuous collision,--probably of a really
superior quality in that kind; for not a few of the then disputants have
since proved themselves men of parts, and attained distinction in the
intellectual walks of life. Frederic Maurice, Richard Trench, John
Kemble, Spedding, Venables, Charles Buller, Richard Milnes and
others:--I have heard that in speaking and arguing, Sterling was the
acknowledged chief in this Union Club; and that "none even came near
him, except the late Charles Buller," whose distinction in this and
higher respects was also already notable.

The questions agitated seem occasionally to have touched on the
political department, and even on the ecclesiastical. I have heard one
trait of Sterling's eloquence, which survived on the wings of grinning
rumor, and had evidently borne upon Church Conservatism in some form:
"Have they not,"--or perhaps it was, Has she (the Church) not,--"a
black dragoon in every parish, on good pay and rations, horse-meat and
man's-meat, to patrol and battle for these things?" The "black dragoon,"
which naturally at the moment ruffled the general young imagination
into stormy laughter, points towards important conclusions in respect
to Sterling at this time. I conclude he had, with his usual alacrity and
impetuous daring, frankly adopted the anti-superstitious side of things;
and stood scornfully prepared to repel all aggressions or pretensions
from the opposite quarter. In short, that he was already, what
afterwards there is no doubt about his being, at all points a Radical,
as the name or nickname then went. In other words, a young ardent soul
looking with hope and joy into a world which was infinitely beautiful to
him, though overhung with falsities and foul cobwebs as world never was
before; overloaded, overclouded, to the zenith and the nadir of it,
by incredible uncredited traditions, solemnly sordid hypocrisies, and
beggarly deliriums old and new; which latter class of objects it was
clearly the part of every noble heart to expend all its lightnings and
energies in burning up without delay, and sweeping into their native
Chaos out of such a Cosmos as this. Which process, it did not then seem
to him could be very difficult; or attended with much other than heroic
joy, and enthusiasm of victory or of battle, to the gallant operator, in
his part of it. This was, with modifications such as might be, the
humor and creed of College Radicalism five-and-twenty years ago. Rather
horrible at that time; seen to be not so horrible now, at least to have
grown very universal, and to need no concealment now. The natural
humor and attitude, we may well regret to say,--and honorable not
dishonorable, for a brave young soul such as Sterling's, in those years
in those localities!

I do not find that Sterling had, at that stage, adopted the then
prevalent Utilitarian theory of human things. But neither, apparently,
had he rejected it; still less did he yet at all denounce it with the
damnatory vehemence we were used to in him at a later period. Probably
he, so much occupied with the negative side of things, had not yet
thought seriously of any positive basis for his world; or asked himself,
too earnestly, What, then, is the noble rule of living for a man?
In this world so eclipsed and scandalously overhung with fable and
hypocrisy, what is the eternal fact, on which a man may front the
Destinies and the Immensities? The day for such questions, sure enough
to come in his case, was still but coming. Sufficient for this day
be the work thereof; that of blasting into merited annihilation the
innumerable and immeasurable recognized deliriums, and extirpating or
coercing to the due pitch those legions of "black dragoons," of all
varieties and purposes, who patrol, with horse-meat and man's-meat, this
afflicted earth, so hugely to the detriment of it.


Sterling, it appears, after above a year of Trinity College, followed
his friend Maurice into Trinity Hall, with the intention of taking
a degree in Law; which intention, like many others with him, came to
nothing; and in 1827 he left Trinity Hall and Cambridge altogether; here
ending, after two years, his brief University life.



CHAPTER V. A PROFESSION.

Here, then, is a young soul, brought to the years of legal majority,
furnished from his training-schools with such and such shining
capabilities, and ushered on the scene of things to inquire practically,
What he will do there? Piety is in the man, noble human valor, bright
intelligence, ardent proud veracity; light and fire, in none of their
many senses, wanting for him, but abundantly bestowed: a kingly kind of
man;--whose "kingdom," however, in this bewildered place and epoch of
the world will probably be difficult to find and conquer!

For, alas, the world, as we said, already stands convicted to this young
soul of being an untrue, unblessed world; its high dignitaries many
of them phantasms and players'-masks; its worthships and worships
unworshipful: from Dan to Beersheba, a mad world, my masters. And surely
we may say, and none will now gainsay, this his idea of the world at
that epoch was nearer to the fact than at most other epochs it has been.
Truly, in all times and places, the young ardent soul that enters on
this world with heroic purpose, with veracious insight, and the
yet unclouded "inspiration of the Almighty" which has given us our
intelligence, will find this world a very mad one: why else is he, with
his little outfit of heroisms and inspirations, come hither into it,
except to make it diligently a little saner? Of him there would have
been no need, had it been quite sane. This is true; this will, in all
centuries and countries, be true.

And yet perhaps of no time or country, for the last two thousand years,
was it _so_ true as here in this waste-weltering epoch of Sterling's and
ours. A world all rocking and plunging, like that old Roman one when the
measure of its iniquities was full; the abysses, and subterranean and
supernal deluges, plainly broken loose; in the wild dim-lighted chaos
all stars of Heaven gone out. No star of Heaven visible, hardly now to
any man; the pestiferous fogs, and foul exhalations grown continual,
have, except on the highest mountaintops, blotted out all stars:
will-o'-wisps, of various course and color, take the place of stars.
Over the wild-surging chaos, in the leaden air, are only sudden glares
of revolutionary lightning; then mere darkness, with philanthropistic
phosphorescences, empty meteoric lights; here and there an
ecclesiastical luminary still hovering, hanging on to its old quaking
fixtures, pretending still to be a Moon or Sun,--though visibly it is
but a Chinese lantern made of _paper_ mainly, with candle-end foully
dying in the heart of it. Surely as mad a world as you could wish!

If you want to make sudden fortunes in it, and achieve the temporary
hallelujah of flunkies for yourself, renouncing the perennial esteem
of wise men; if you can believe that the chief end of man is to collect
about him a bigger heap of gold than ever before, in a shorter time than
ever before, you will find it a most handy and every way furthersome,
blessed and felicitous world. But for any other human aim, I think you
will find it not furthersome. If you in any way ask practically, How a
noble life is to be led in it? you will be luckier than Sterling or I if
you get any credible answer, or find any made road whatever. Alas, it is
even so. Your heart's question, if it be of that sort, most things and
persons will answer with a "Nonsense! Noble life is in Drury Lane,
and wears yellow boots. You fool, compose yourself to your
pudding!"--Surely, in these times, if ever in any, the young heroic soul
entering on life, so opulent, full of sunny hope, of noble valor and
divine intention, is tragical as well as beautiful to us.

Of the three learned Professions none offered any likelihood for
Sterling. From the Church his notions of the "black dragoon," had there
been no other obstacle, were sufficient to exclude him. Law he had just
renounced, his own Radical philosophies disheartening him, in face of
the ponderous impediments, continual up-hill struggles and formidable
toils inherent in such a pursuit: with Medicine he had never been in
any contiguity, that he should dream of it as a course for him. Clearly
enough the professions were unsuitable; they to him, he to them.
Professions, built so largely on speciosity instead of performance;
clogged, in this bad epoch, and defaced under such suspicions of fatal
imposture, were hateful not lovable to the young radical soul, scornful
of gross profit, and intent on ideals and human noblenesses. Again, the
professions, were they never so perfect and veracious, will require slow
steady pulling, to which this individual young radical, with his swift,
far-darting brilliancies, and nomadic desultory ways, is of all men the
most averse and unfitted. No profession could, in any case, have well
gained the early love of Sterling. And perhaps withal the most tragic
element of his life is even this, That there now was none to which
he could fitly, by those wiser than himself, have been bound and
constrained, that he might learn to love it. So swift, light-limbed and
fiery an Arab courser ought, for all manner of reasons, to have
been trained to saddle and harness. Roaming at full gallop over the
heaths,--especially when your heath was London, and English and
European life, in the nineteenth century,--he suffered much, and did
comparatively little. I have known few creatures whom it was more
wasteful to send forth with the bridle thrown up, and to set to
steeple-hunting instead of running on highways! But it is the lot of
many such, in this dislocated time,--Heaven mend it! In a better time
there will be other "professions" than those three extremely cramp,
confused and indeed almost obsolete ones: professions, if possible,
that are true, and do _not_ require you at the threshold to constitute
yourself an impostor. Human association,--which will mean discipline,
vigorous wise subordination and co-ordination,--is so unspeakably
important. Professions, "regimented human pursuits," how many of
honorable and manful might be possible for men; and which should _not_,
in their results to society, need to stumble along, in such an unwieldy
futile manner, with legs swollen into such enormous elephantiasis and no
go at all in them! Men will one day think of the force they squander in
every generation, and the fatal damage they encounter, by this neglect.


The career likeliest for Sterling, in his and the world's circumstances,
would have been what is called public life: some secretarial, diplomatic
or other official training, to issue if possible in Parliament as the
true field for him. And here, beyond question, had the gross material
conditions been allowed, his spiritual capabilities were first-rate.
In any arena where eloquence and argument was the point, this man
was calculated to have borne the bell from all competitors. In lucid
ingenious talk and logic, in all manner of brilliant utterance and
tongue-fence, I have hardly known his fellow. So ready lay his store of
knowledge round him, so perfect was his ready utterance of the same,--in
coruscating wit, in jocund drollery, in compact articulated clearness
or high poignant emphasis, as the case required,--he was a match for any
man in argument before a crowd of men. One of the most supple-wristed,
dexterous, graceful and successful fencers in that kind. A man, as Mr.
Hare has said, "able to argue with four or five at once;" could do the
parrying all round, in a succession swift as light, and plant his hits
wherever a chance offered. In Parliament, such a soul put into a body of
the due toughness might have carried it far. If ours is to be called, as
I hear some call it, the Talking Era, Sterling of all men had the talent
to excel in it.

Probably it was with some vague view towards chances in this direction
that Sterling's first engagement was entered upon; a brief connection as
Secretary to some Club or Association into which certain public men, of
the reforming sort, Mr. Crawford (the Oriental Diplomatist and Writer),
Mr. Kirkman Finlay (then Member for Glasgow), and other political
notabilities had now formed themselves,--with what specific objects I do
not know, nor with what result if any. I have heard vaguely, it was "to
open the trade to India." Of course they intended to stir up the public
mind into co-operation, whatever their goal or object was: Mr. Crawford,
an intimate in the Sterling household, recognized the fine literary
gift of John; and might think it a lucky hit that he had caught such a
Secretary for three hundred pounds a year. That was the salary agreed
upon; and for some months actually worked for and paid; Sterling
becoming for the time an intimate and almost an inmate in Mr. Crawford's
circle, doubtless not without results to himself beyond the secretarial
work and pounds sterling: so much is certain. But neither the
Secretaryship nor the Association itself had any continuance; nor can
I now learn accurately more of it than what is here stated;--in which
vague state it must vanish from Sterling's history again, as it in great
measure did from his life. From himself in after-years I never heard
mention of it; nor were his pursuits connected afterwards with those of
Mr. Crawford, though the mutual good-will continued unbroken.

In fact, however splendid and indubitable Sterling's qualifications for
a parliamentary life, there was that in him withal which flatly put
a negative on any such project. He had not the slow steady-pulling
diligence which is indispensable in that, as in all important pursuits
and strenuous human competitions whatsoever. In every sense, his
momentum depended on velocity of stroke, rather than on weight of metal;
"beautifulest sheet-lightning," as I often said, "not to be condensed
into thunder-bolts." Add to this,--what indeed is perhaps but the same
phenomenon in another form,--his bodily frame was thin, excitable,
already manifesting pulmonary symptoms; a body which the tear and wear
of Parliament would infallibly in few months have wrecked and ended.
By this path there was clearly no mounting. The far-darting, restlessly
coruscating soul, equips beyond all others to shine in the Talking
Era, and lead National Palavers with their _spolia opima_ captive, is
imprisoned in a fragile hectic body which quite forbids the adventure.
"_Es ist dafur gesorgt_," says Goethe, "Provision has been made that the
trees do not grow into the sky;"--means are always there to stop them
short of the sky.



CHAPTER VI. LITERATURE: THE ATHENAEUM.

Of all forms of public life, in the Talking Era, it was clear that only
one completely suited Sterling,--the anarchic, nomadic, entirely aerial
and unconditional one, called Literature. To this all his tendencies,
and fine gifts positive and negative, were evidently pointing; and here,
after such brief attempting or thoughts to attempt at other posts, he
already in this same year arrives. As many do, and ever more must do,
in these our years and times. This is the chaotic haven of so many
frustrate activities; where all manner of good gifts go up in far-seen
smoke or conflagration; and whole fleets, that might have been
war-fleets to conquer kingdoms, are _consumed_ (too truly, often), amid
"fame" enough, and the admiring shouts of the vulgar, which is always
fond to see fire going on. The true Canaan and Mount Zion of a
Talking Era must ever be Literature: the extraneous, miscellaneous,
self-elected, indescribable _Parliamentum_, or Talking Apparatus, which
talks by books and printed papers.

A literary Newspaper called _The Athenaeum_, the same which still
subsists, had been founded in those years by Mr. Buckingham; James Silk
Buckingham, who has since continued notable under various figures.
Mr. Buckingham's _Athenaeum_ had not as yet got into a flourishing
condition; and he was willing to sell the copyright of it for a
consideration. Perhaps Sterling and old Cambridge friends of his had
been already writing for it. At all events, Sterling, who had already
privately begun writing a Novel, and was clearly looking towards
Literature, perceived that his gifted Cambridge friend, Frederic
Maurice, was now also at large in a somewhat similar situation; and that
here was an opening for both of them, and for other gifted friends. The
copyright was purchased for I know not what sum, nor with whose money,
but guess it may have been Sterling's, and no great sum;--and so, under
free auspices, themselves their own captains, Maurice and he spread sail
for this new voyage of adventure into all the world. It was about the
end of 1828 that readers of periodical literature, and quidnuncs in
those departments, began to report the appearance, in a Paper called the
_Athenaeum, of_ writings showing a superior brilliancy, and height
of aim; one or perhaps two slight specimens of which came into my own
hands, in my remote corner, about that time, and were duly recognized by
me, while the authors were still far off and hidden behind deep veils.

Some of Sterling's best Papers from the _Athenaeum_ have been published
by Archdeacon Hare: first-fruits by a young man of twenty-two; crude,
imperfect, yet singularly beautiful and attractive; which will still
testify what high literary promise lay in him. The ruddiest glow of
young enthusiasm, of noble incipient spiritual manhood reigns over them;
once more a divine Universe unveiling itself in gloom and splendor, in
auroral firelight and many-tinted shadow, full of hope and full of awe,
to a young melodious pious heart just arrived upon it. Often enough the
delineation has a certain flowing completeness, not to be expected from
so young an artist; here and there is a decided felicity of insight;
everywhere the point of view adopted is a high and noble one, and the
result worked out a result to be sympathized with, and accepted so far
as it will go. Good reading still, those Papers, for the less-furnished
mind,--thrice-excellent reading compared with what is usually going.
For the rest, a grand melancholy is the prevailing impression they
leave;--partly as if, while the surface was so blooming and opulent,
the heart of them was still vacant, sad and cold. Here is a beautiful
mirage, in the dry wilderness; but you cannot quench your thirst there!
The writer's heart is indeed still too vacant, except of beautiful
shadows and reflexes and resonances; and is far from joyful, though it
wears commonly a smile.

In some of the Greek delineations (_The Lycian Painter_, for example),
we have already noticed a strange opulence of splendor, characterizable
as half-legitimate, half-meretricious,--a splendor hovering between the
raffaelesque and the japannish. What other things Sterling wrote there,
I never knew; nor would he in any mood, in those later days, have told
you, had you asked. This period of his life he always rather accounted,
as the Arabs do the idolatrous times before Mahomet's advent, the
"period of darkness."



CHAPTER VII. REGENT STREET.

On the commercial side the _Athenaeum_ still lacked success; nor was
like to find it under the highly uncommercial management it had now got
into. This, by and by, began to be a serious consideration. For money
is the sinews of Periodical Literature almost as much as of war itself;
without money, and under a constant drain of loss, Periodical Literature
is one of the things that cannot be carried on. In no long time Sterling
began to be practically sensible of this truth, and that an unpleasant
resolution in accordance with it would be necessary. By him also, after
a while, the _Athenaeum_ was transferred to other hands, better fitted
in that respect; and under these it did take vigorous root, and still
bears fruit according to its kind.

For the present, it brought him into the thick of London Literature,
especially of young London Literature and speculation; in which turbid
exciting element he swam and revelled, nothing loath, for certain months
longer,--a period short of two years in all. He had lodgings in
Regent Street: his Father's house, now a flourishing and stirring
establishment, in South Place, Knightsbridge, where, under the warmth of
increasing revenue and success, miscellaneous cheerful socialities and
abundant speculations, chiefly political (and not John's kind, but
that of the _Times_ Newspaper and the Clubs), were rife, he could visit
daily, and yet be master of his own studies and pursuits. Maurice,
Trench, John Mill, Charles Buller: these, and some few others, among
a wide circle of a transitory phantasmal character, whom he speedily
forgot and cared not to remember, were much about him; with these he in
all ways employed and disported himself: a first favorite with them all.

No pleasanter companion, I suppose, had any of them. So frank, open,
guileless, fearless, a brother to all worthy souls whatsoever. Come when
you might, here is he open-hearted, rich in cheerful fancies, in grave
logic, in all kinds of bright activity. If perceptibly or imperceptibly
there is a touch of ostentation in him, blame it not; it is so innocent,
so good and childlike. He is still fonder of jingling publicly, and
spreading on the table, your big purse of opulences than his own. Abrupt
too he is, cares little for big-wigs and garnitures; perhaps laughs
more than the real fun he has would order; but of arrogance there is
no vestige, of insincerity or of ill-nature none. These must have been
pleasant evenings in Regent Street, when the circle chanced to be well
adjusted there. At other times, Philistines would enter, what we call
bores, dullards, Children of Darkness; and then,--except in a hunt of
dullards, and a _bore-baiting_, which might be permissible,--the evening
was dark. Sterling, of course, had innumerable cares withal; and was
toiling like a slave; his very recreations almost a kind of work. An
enormous activity was in the man;--sufficient, in a body that could
have held it without breaking, to have gone far, even under the unstable
guidance it was like to have!

Thus, too, an extensive, very variegated circle of connections was
forming round him. Besides his _Athenaeum_ work, and evenings in Regent
Street and elsewhere, he makes visits to country-houses, the Bullers'
and others; converses with established gentlemen, with honorable women
not a few; is gay and welcome with the young of his own age; knows also
religious, witty, and other distinguished ladies, and is admiringly
known by them. On the whole, he is already locomotive; visits hither
and thither in a very rapid flying manner. Thus I find he had made one
flying visit to the Cumberland Lake-region in 1828, and got sight of
Wordsworth; and in the same year another flying one to Paris, and seen
with no undue enthusiasm the Saint-Simonian Portent just beginning
to preach for itself, and France in general simmering under a scum of
impieties, levities, Saint-Simonisms, and frothy fantasticalities of all
kinds, towards the boiling-over which soon made the Three Days of July
famous. But by far the most important foreign home he visited was that
of Coleridge on the Hill of Highgate,--if it were not rather a foreign
shrine and Dodona-Oracle, as he then reckoned,--to which (onwards from
1828, as would appear) he was already an assiduous pilgrim. Concerning
whom, and Sterling's all-important connection with him, there will be
much to say anon.

Here, from this period, is a Letter of Sterling's, which the glimpses
it affords of bright scenes and figures now sunk, so many of them,
sorrowfully to the realm of shadows, will render interesting to some of
my readers. To me on the mere Letter, not on its contents alone, there
is accidentally a kind of fateful stamp. A few months after Charles
Buller's death, while his loss was mourned by many hearts, and to his
poor Mother all light except what hung upon his memory had gone out in
the world, a certain delicate and friendly hand, hoping to give the poor
bereaved lady a good moment, sought out this Letter of Sterling's, one
morning, and called, with intent to read it to her:--alas, the poor lady
had herself fallen suddenly into the languors of death, help of another
grander sort now close at hand; and to her this Letter was never read!

On "Fanny Kemble," it appears, there is an Essay by Sterling in the
_Athenaeum_ of this year: "16th December, 1829." Very laudatory, I
conclude. He much admired her genius, nay was thought at one time to
be vaguely on the edge of still more chivalrous feelings. As the Letter
itself may perhaps indicate.

         "_To Anthony Sterling, Esq., 24th Regiment, Dublin_.
                                      "KNIGHTSBRIDGE, 10th Nov., 1829.

"MY DEAR ANTHONY,--Here in the Capital of England and of Europe,
there is less, so far as I hear, of movement and variety than in your
provincial Dublin, or among the Wicklow Mountains. We have the old
prospect of bricks and smoke, the old crowd of busy stupid faces, the
old occupations, the old sleepy amusements; and the latest news that
reaches us daily has an air of tiresome, doting antiquity. The world has
nothing for it but to exclaim with Faust, "Give me my youth again." And
as for me, my month of Cornish amusement is over; and I must tie myself
to my old employments. I have not much to tell you about these; but
perhaps you may like to hear of my expedition to the West.

"I wrote to Polvellan (Mr. Buller's) to announce the day on which I
intended to be there, so shortly before setting out, that there was
no time to receive an answer; and when I reached Devonport, which is
fifteen or sixteen miles from my place of destination, I found a letter
from Mrs. Buller, saying that she was coming in two days to a Ball at
Plymouth, and if I chose to stay in the mean while and look about me,
she would take me back with her. She added an introduction to a relation
of her husband's, a certain Captain Buller of the Rifles, who was with
the Depot there,--a pleasant person, who I believe had been
acquainted with Charlotte, [7] or at least had seen her. Under his
superintendence--...

"On leaving Devonport with Mrs. Buller, I went some of the way by water,
up the harbor and river; and the prospects are certainly very beautiful;
to say nothing of the large ships, which I admire almost as much as you,
though without knowing so much about them. There is a great deal of
fine scenery all along the road to Looe; and the House itself, a very
unpretending Gothic cottage, stands beautifully among trees, hills and
water, with the sea at the distance of a quarter of a mile.

"And here, among pleasant, good-natured, well-informed and clever
people, I spent an idle month. I dined at one or two Corporation
dinners; spent a few days at the old Mansion of Mr. Buller of Morval,
the patron of West Looe; and during the rest of the time, read, wrote,
played chess, lounged, and ate red mullet (he who has not done this
has not begun to live); talked of cookery to the philosophers, and of
metaphysics to Mrs. Buller; and altogether cultivated indolence,
and developed the faculty of nonsense with considerable pleasure and
unexampled success. Charles Buller you know: he has just come to town,
but I have not yet seen him. Arthur, his younger brother, I take to
be one of the handsomest men in England; and he too has considerable
talent. Mr. Buller the father is rather a clever man of sense, and
particularly good-natured and gentlemanly; and his wife, who was a
renowned beauty and queen of Calcutta, has still many striking and
delicate traces of what she was. Her conversation is more brilliant and
pleasant than that of any one I know; and, at all events, I am bound to
admire her for the kindness with which she patronizes me. I hope that,
some day or other, you may be acquainted with her.

"I believe I have seen no one in London about whom you would care to
hear,--unless the fame of Fanny Kemble has passed the Channel, and
astonished the Irish Barbarians in the midst of their bloody-minded
politics. Young Kemble, whom you have seen, is in Germany: but I have
the happiness of being also acquainted with his sister, the divine
Fanny; and I have seen her twice on the stage, and three or four times
in private, since my return from Cornwall. I had seen some beautiful
verses of hers, long before she was an actress; and her conversation
is full of spirit and talent. She never was taught to act at all; and
though there are many faults in her performance of Juliet, there is more
power than in any female playing I ever saw, except Pasta's Medea. She
is not handsome, rather short, and by no means delicately formed;
but her face is marked, and the eyes are brilliant, dark, and full of
character. She has far more ability than she ever can display on the
stage; but I have no doubt that, by practice and self-culture, she will
be a far finer actress at least than any one since Mrs. Siddons. I was
at Charles Kemble's a few evenings ago, when a drawing of Miss Kemble,
by Sir Thomas Lawrence, was brought in; and I have no doubt that you
will shortly see, even in Dublin, an engraving of her from it, very
unlike the caricatures that have hitherto appeared. I hate the stage;
and but for her, should very likely never have gone to a theatre again.
Even as it is, the annoyance is much more than the pleasure; but I
suppose I must go to see her in every character in which she acts. If
Charlotte cares for plays, let me know, and I will write in more detail
about this new Melpomene. I fear there are very few subjects on which I
can say anything that will in the least interest her.

                      "Ever affectionately yours,
                                                        "J. STERLING."

Sterling and his circle, as their ardent speculation and activity
fermented along, were in all things clear for progress, liberalism;
their politics, and view of the Universe, decisively of the Radical
sort. As indeed that of England then was, more than ever; the crust of
old hide-bound Toryism being now openly cracking towards some incurable
disruption, which accordingly ensued as the Reform Bill before long.
The Reform Bill already hung in the wind. Old hide-bound Toryism, long
recognized by all the world, and now at last obliged to recognize its
very self, for an overgrown Imposture, supporting itself not by human
reason, but by flunky blustering and brazen lying, superadded to mere
brute force, could be no creed for young Sterling and his friends. In
all things he and they were liberals, and, as was natural at this
stage, democrats; contemplating root-and-branch innovation by aid of the
hustings and ballot-box. Hustings and ballot-box had speedily to
vanish out of Sterling's thoughts: but the character of root-and-branch
innovator, essentially of "Radical Reformer," was indelible with him,
and under all forms could be traced as his character through life.

For the present, his and those young people's aim was: By democracy,
or what means there are, be all impostures put down. Speedy end to
Superstition,--a gentle one if you can contrive it, but an end. What can
it profit any mortal to adopt locutions and imaginations which do not
correspond to fact; which no sane mortal can deliberately adopt in his
soul as true; which the most orthodox of mortals can only, and this
after infinite essentially _impious_ effort to put out the eyes of his
mind, persuade himself to "believe that he believes"? Away with it; in
the name of God, come out of it, all true men!

Piety of heart, a certain reality of religious faith, was always
Sterling's, the gift of nature to him which he would not and could
not throw away; but I find at this time his religion is as good as
altogether Ethnic, Greekish, what Goethe calls the Heathen form of
religion. The Church, with her articles, is without relation to him.
And along with obsolete spiritualisms, he sees all manner of obsolete
thrones and big-wigged temporalities; and for them also can prophesy,
and wish, only a speedy doom. Doom inevitable, registered in Heaven's
Chancery from the beginning of days, doom unalterable as the pillars of
the world; the gods are angry, and all nature groans, till this doom of
eternal justice be fulfilled.

With gay audacity, with enthusiasm tempered by mockery, as is the manner
of young gifted men, this faith, grounded for the present on democracy
and hustings operations, and giving to all life the aspect of a
chivalrous battle-field, or almost of a gay though perilous tournament,
and bout of "A hundred knights against all comers,"--was maintained
by Sterling and his friends. And in fine, after whatever loud
remonstrances, and solemn considerations, and such shaking of our wigs
as is undoubtedly natural in the case, let us be just to it and him. We
shall have to admit, nay it will behoove us to see and practically know,
for ourselves and him and others, that the essence of this creed, in
times like ours, was right and not wrong. That, however the ground and
form of it might change, essentially it was the monition of his natal
genius to this as it is to every brave man; the behest of all his clear
insight into this Universe, the message of Heaven through him, which
he could not suppress, but was inspired and compelled to utter in
this world by such methods as he had. There for him lay the first
commandment; _this_ is what it would have been the unforgivable sin to
swerve from and desert: the treason of treasons for him, it were there;
compared with which all other sins are venial!

The message did not cease at all, as we shall see; the message was
ardently, if fitfully, continued to the end: but the methods, the tone
and dialect and all outer conditions of uttering it, underwent most
important modifications!



CHAPTER VIII. COLERIDGE.

Coleridge sat on the brow of Highgate Hill, in those years, looking down
on London and its smoke-tumult, like a sage escaped from the inanity of
life's battle; attracting towards him the thoughts of innumerable
brave souls still engaged there. His express contributions to
poetry, philosophy, or any specific province of human literature or
enlightenment, had been small and sadly intermittent; but he had,
especially among young inquiring men, a higher than literary, a kind
of prophetic or magician character. He was thought to hold, he alone
in England, the key of German and other Transcendentalisms; knew the
sublime secret of believing by "the reason" what "the understanding" had
been obliged to fling out as incredible; and could still, after Hume
and Voltaire had done their best and worst with him, profess himself an
orthodox Christian, and say and print to the Church of England, with its
singular old rubrics and surplices at Allhallowtide, _Esto perpetua_.
A sublime man; who, alone in those dark days, had saved his crown
of spiritual manhood; escaping from the black materialisms, and
revolutionary deluges, with "God, Freedom, Immortality" still his: a
king of men. The practical intellects of the world did not much heed
him, or carelessly reckoned him a metaphysical dreamer: but to the
rising spirits of the young generation he had this dusky sublime
character; and sat there as a kind of _Magus_, girt in mystery and
enigma; his Dodona oak-grove (Mr. Gilman's house at Highgate) whispering
strange things, uncertain whether oracles or jargon.

The Gilmans did not encourage much company, or excitation of any sort,
round their sage; nevertheless access to him, if a youth did reverently
wish it, was not difficult. He would stroll about the pleasant garden
with you, sit in the pleasant rooms of the place,--perhaps take you
to his own peculiar room, high up, with a rearward view, which was the
chief view of all. A really charming outlook, in fine weather. Close
at hand, wide sweep of flowery leafy gardens, their few houses mostly
hidden, the very chimney-pots veiled under blossomy umbrage, flowed
gloriously down hill; gloriously issuing in wide-tufted undulating
plain-country, rich in all charms of field and town. Waving blooming
country of the brightest green; dotted all over with handsome villas,
handsome groves; crossed by roads and human traffic, here inaudible or
heard only as a musical hum: and behind all swam, under olive-tinted
haze, the illimitable limitary ocean of London, with its domes and
steeples definite in the sun, big Paul's and the many memories attached
to it hanging high over all. Nowhere, of its kind, could you see a
grander prospect on a bright summer day, with the set of the air going
southward,--southward, and so draping with the city-smoke not you
but the city. Here for hours would Coleridge talk, concerning all
conceivable or inconceivable things; and liked nothing better than to
have an intelligent, or failing that, even a silent and patient human
listener. He distinguished himself to all that ever heard him as at
least the most surprising talker extant in this world,--and to some
small minority, by no means to all, as the most excellent.

The good man, he was now getting old, towards sixty perhaps; and
gave you the idea of a life that had been full of sufferings; a life
heavy-laden, half-vanquished, still swimming painfully in seas of
manifold physical and other bewilderment. Brow and head were round,
and of massive weight, but the face was flabby and irresolute. The
deep eyes, of a light hazel, were as full of sorrow as of inspiration;
confused pain looked mildly from them, as in a kind of mild
astonishment. The whole figure and air, good and amiable otherwise,
might be called flabby and irresolute; expressive of weakness under
possibility of strength. He hung loosely on his limbs, with knees bent,
and stooping attitude; in walking, he rather shuffled than decisively
steps; and a lady once remarked, he never could fix which side of the
garden walk would suit him best, but continually shifted, in corkscrew
fashion, and kept trying both. A heavy-laden, high-aspiring and surely
much-suffering man. His voice, naturally soft and good, had contracted
itself into a plaintive snuffle and singsong; he spoke as if
preaching,--you would have said, preaching earnestly and also hopelessly
the weightiest things. I still recollect his "object" and "subject,"
terms of continual recurrence in the Kantean province; and how he sang
and snuffled them into "om-m-mject" and "sum-m-mject," with a kind of
solemn shake or quaver, as he rolled along. No talk, in his century or
in any other, could be more surprising.

Sterling, who assiduously attended him, with profound reverence, and
was often with him by himself, for a good many months, gives a record
of their first colloquy. [8] Their colloquies were numerous, and he
had taken note of many; but they are all gone to the fire, except this
first, which Mr. Hare has printed,--unluckily without date. It contains
a number of ingenious, true and half-true observations, and is of
course a faithful epitome of the things said; but it gives small idea
of Coleridge's way of talking;--this one feature is perhaps the most
recognizable, "Our interview lasted for three hours, during which he
talked two hours and three quarters." Nothing could be more copious than
his talk; and furthermore it was always, virtually or literally, of
the nature of a monologue; suffering no interruption, however reverent;
hastily putting aside all foreign additions, annotations, or most
ingenuous desires for elucidation, as well-meant superfluities which
would never do. Besides, it was talk not flowing any-whither like
a river, but spreading every-whither in inextricable currents and
regurgitations like a lake or sea; terribly deficient in definite goal
or aim, nay often in logical intelligibility; _what_ you were to believe
or do, on any earthly or heavenly thing, obstinately refusing to appear
from it. So that, most times, you felt logically lost; swamped near to
drowning in this tide of ingenious vocables, spreading out boundless as
if to submerge the world.

To sit as a passive bucket and be pumped into, whether you consent or
not, can in the long-run be exhilarating to no creature; how eloquent
soever the flood of utterance that is descending. But if it be withal a
confused unintelligible flood of utterance, threatening to submerge all
known landmarks of thought, and drown the world and you!--I have heard
Coleridge talk, with eager musical energy, two stricken hours, his
face radiant and moist, and communicate no meaning whatsoever to any
individual of his hearers,--certain of whom, I for one, still kept
eagerly listening in hope; the most had long before given up, and formed
(if the room were large enough) secondary humming groups of their own.
He began anywhere: you put some question to him, made some suggestive
observation: instead of answering this, or decidedly setting out
towards answer of it, he would accumulate formidable apparatus, logical
swim-bladders, transcendental life-preservers and other precautionary
and vehiculatory gear, for setting out; perhaps did at last get under
way,--but was swiftly solicited, turned aside by the glance of some
radiant new game on this hand or that, into new courses; and ever into
new; and before long into all the Universe, where it was uncertain what
game you would catch, or whether any.

His talk, alas, was distinguished, like himself, by irresolution:
it disliked to be troubled with conditions, abstinences, definite
fulfilments;--loved to wander at its own sweet will, and make its
auditor and his claims and humble wishes a mere passive bucket for
itself! He had knowledge about many things and topics, much curious
reading; but generally all topics led him, after a pass or two, into
the high seas of theosophic philosophy, the hazy infinitude of Kantean
transcendentalism, with its "sum-m-mjects" and "om-m-mjects." Sad
enough; for with such indolent impatience of the claims and ignorances
of others, he had not the least talent for explaining this or anything
unknown to them; and you swam and fluttered in the mistiest wide
unintelligible deluge of things, for most part in a rather profitless
uncomfortable manner.

Glorious islets, too, I have seen rise out of the haze; but they were
few, and soon swallowed in the general element again. Balmy sunny
islets, islets of the blest and the intelligible:--on which occasions
those secondary humming groups would all cease humming, and hang
breathless upon the eloquent words; till once your islet got wrapt in
the mist again, and they could recommence humming. Eloquent artistically
expressive words you always had; piercing radiances of a most subtle
insight came at intervals; tones of noble pious sympathy, recognizable
as pious though strangely colored, were never wanting long: but in
general you could not call this aimless, cloud-capt, cloud-based,
lawlessly meandering human discourse of reason by the name of "excellent
talk," but only of "surprising;" and were reminded bitterly of Hazlitt's
account of it: "Excellent talker, very,--if you let him start from no
premises and come to no conclusion." Coleridge was not without what
talkers call wit, and there were touches of prickly sarcasm in him,
contemptuous enough of the world and its idols and popular dignitaries;
he had traits even of poetic humor: but in general he seemed deficient
in laughter; or indeed in sympathy for concrete human things either on
the sunny or on the stormy side. One right peal of concrete laughter at
some convicted flesh-and-blood absurdity, one burst of noble indignation
at some injustice or depravity, rubbing elbows with us on this solid
Earth, how strange would it have been in that Kantean haze-world, and
how infinitely cheering amid its vacant air-castles and dim-melting
ghosts and shadows! None such ever came. His life had been an abstract
thinking and dreaming, idealistic, passed amid the ghosts of
defunct bodies and of unborn ones. The moaning singsong of that
theosophico-metaphysical monotony left on you, at last, a very dreary
feeling.

In close colloquy, flowing within narrower banks, I suppose he was more
definite and apprehensible; Sterling in after-times did not complain of
his unintelligibility, or imputed it only to the abtruse high nature of
the topics handled. Let us hope so, let us try to believe so! There
is no doubt but Coleridge could speak plain words on things plain: his
observations and responses on the trivial matters that occurred were as
simple as the commonest man's, or were even distinguished by superior
simplicity as well as pertinency. "Ah, your tea is too cold, Mr.
Coleridge!" mourned the good Mrs. Gilman once, in her kind, reverential
and yet protective manner, handing him a very tolerable though belated
cup.--"It's better than I deserve!" snuffled he, in a low hoarse murmur,
partly courteous, chiefly pious, the tone of which still abides with me:
"It's better than I deserve!"

But indeed, to the young ardent mind, instinct with pious nobleness, yet
driven to the grim deserts of Radicalism for a faith, his speculations
had a charm much more than literary, a charm almost religious and
prophetic. The constant gist of his discourse was lamentation over
the sunk condition of the world; which he recognized to be given up to
Atheism and Materialism, full of mere sordid misbeliefs, mispursuits and
misresults. All Science had become mechanical; the science not of men,
but of a kind of human beavers. Churches themselves had died away into a
godless mechanical condition; and stood there as mere Cases of Articles,
mere Forms of Churches; like the dried carcasses of once swift
camels, which you find left withering in the thirst of the universal
desert,--ghastly portents for the present, beneficent ships of the
desert no more. Men's souls were blinded, hebetated; and sunk under the
influence of Atheism and Materialism, and Hume and Voltaire: the world
for the present was as an extinct world, deserted of God, and incapable
of well-doing till it changed its heart and spirit. This, expressed
I think with less of indignation and with more of long-drawn
querulousness, was always recognizable as the ground-tone:--in which
truly a pious young heart, driven into Radicalism and the opposition
party, could not but recognize a too sorrowful truth; and ask of the
Oracle, with all earnestness, What remedy, then?

The remedy, though Coleridge himself professed to see it as in sunbeams,
could not, except by processes unspeakably difficult, be described to
you at all. On the whole, those dead Churches, this dead English Church
especially, must be brought to life again. Why not? It was not dead;
the soul of it, in this parched-up body, was tragically asleep only.
Atheistic Philosophy was true on its side, and Hume and Voltaire could
on their own ground speak irrefragably for themselves against any
Church: but lift the Church and them into a higher sphere. Of argument,
_they_ died into inanition, the Church revivified itself into pristine
florid vigor,--became once more a living ship of the desert, and
invincibly bore you over stock and stone. But how, but how! By attending
to the "reason" of man, said Coleridge, and duly chaining up the
"understanding" of man: the _Vernunft_ (Reason) and _Verstand_
(Understanding) of the Germans, it all turned upon these, if you could
well understand them,--which you couldn't. For the rest, Mr. Coleridge
had on the anvil various Books, especially was about to write one grand
Book _On the Logos_, which would help to bridge the chasm for us.
So much appeared, however: Churches, though proved false (as you had
imagined), were still true (as you were to imagine): here was an Artist
who could burn you up an old Church, root and branch; and then as the
Alchemists professed to do with organic substances in general, distil
you an "Astral Spirit" from the ashes, which was the very image of the
old burnt article, its air-drawn counterpart,--this you still had, or
might get, and draw uses from, if you could. Wait till the Book on the
Logos were done;--alas, till your own terrene eyes, blind with conceit
and the dust of logic, were purged, subtilized and spiritualized
into the sharpness of vision requisite for discerning such an
"om-m-mject."--The ingenuous young English head, of those days, stood
strangely puzzled by such revelations; uncertain whether it were getting
inspired, or getting infatuated into flat imbecility; and strange
effulgence, of new day or else of deeper meteoric night, colored the
horizon of the future for it.

Let me not be unjust to this memorable man. Surely there was here,
in his pious, ever-laboring, subtle mind, a precious truth, or
prefigurement of truth; and yet a fatal delusion withal. Prefigurement
that, in spite of beaver sciences and temporary spiritual hebetude and
cecity, man and his Universe were eternally divine; and that no past
nobleness, or revelation of the divine, could or would ever be lost to
him. Most true, surely, and worthy of all acceptance. Good also to do
what you can with old Churches and practical Symbols of the Noble: nay
quit not the burnt ruins of them while you find there is still gold
to be dug there. But, on the whole, do not think you can, by logical
alchemy, distil astral spirits from them; or if you could, that said
astral spirits, or defunct logical phantasms, could serve you in
anything. What the light of your mind, which is the direct inspiration
of the Almighty, pronounces incredible,--that, in God's name, leave
uncredited; at your peril do not try believing that. No subtlest
hocus-pocus of "reason" versus "understanding" will avail for that
feat;--and it is terribly perilous to try it in these provinces!

The truth is, I now see, Coleridge's talk and speculation was the emblem
of himself: in it as in him, a ray of heavenly inspiration struggled, in
a tragically ineffectual degree, with the weakness of flesh and blood.
He says once, he "had skirted the howling deserts of Infidelity;" this
was evident enough: but he had not had the courage, in defiance of pain
and terror, to press resolutely across said deserts to the new firm
lands of Faith beyond; he preferred to create logical fata-morganas for
himself on this hither side, and laboriously solace himself with these.

To the man himself Nature had given, in high measure, the seeds of
a noble endowment; and to unfold it had been forbidden him. A subtle
lynx-eyed intellect, tremulous pious sensibility to all good and all
beautiful; truly a ray of empyrean light;--but embedded in such weak
laxity of character, in such indolences and esuriences as had made
strange work with it. Once more, the tragic story of a high endowment
with an insufficient will. An eye to discern the divineness of the
Heaven's spendors and lightnings, the insatiable wish to revel in their
godlike radiances and brilliances; but no heart to front the scathing
terrors of them, which is the first condition of your conquering an
abiding place there. The courage necessary for him, above all things,
had been denied this man. His life, with such ray of the empyrean in it,
was great and terrible to him; and he had not valiantly grappled with
it, he had fled from it; sought refuge in vague daydreams, hollow
compromises, in opium, in theosophic metaphysics. Harsh pain, danger,
necessity, slavish harnessed toil, were of all things abhorrent to him.
And so the empyrean element, lying smothered under the terrene, and
yet inextinguishable there, made sad writhings. For pain, danger,
difficulty, steady slaving toil, and other highly disagreeable behests
of destiny, shall in nowise be shirked by any brightest mortal that will
approve himself loyal to his mission in this world; nay precisely
the higher he is, the deeper will be the disagreeableness, and the
detestability to flesh and blood, of the tasks laid on him; and the
heavier too, and more tragic, his penalties if he neglect them.

For the old Eternal Powers do live forever; nor do their laws know any
change, however we in our poor wigs and church-tippets may attempt
to read their laws. To _steal_ into Heaven,--by the modern method, of
sticking ostrich-like your head into fallacies on Earth, equally as
by the ancient and by all conceivable methods,--is forever forbidden.
High-treason is the name of that attempt; and it continues to be
punished as such. Strange enough: here once more was a kind of
Heaven-scaling Ixion; and to him, as to the old one, the just gods were
very stern! The ever-revolving, never-advancing Wheel (of a kind) was
his, through life; and from his Cloud-Juno did not he too procreate
strange Centaurs, spectral Puseyisms, monstrous illusory Hybrids, and
ecclesiastical Chimeras,--which now roam the earth in a very lamentable
manner!



CHAPTER IX. SPANISH EXILES.

This magical ingredient thrown into the wild caldron of such a mind,
which we have seen occupied hitherto with mere Ethnicism, Radicalism and
revolutionary tumult, but hungering all along for something higher and
better, was sure to be eagerly welcomed and imbibed, and could not fail
to produce important fermentations there. Fermentations; important new
directions, and withal important new perversions, in the spiritual life
of this man, as it has since done in the lives of so many. Here then
is the new celestial manna we were all in quest of? This thrice-refined
pabulum of transcendental moonshine? Whoso eateth thereof,--yes, what,
on the whole, will _he_ probably grow to?

Sterling never spoke much to me of his intercourse with Coleridge; and
when we did compare notes about him, it was usually rather in the way
of controversial discussion than of narrative. So that, from my own
resources, I can give no details of the business, nor specify anything
in it, except the general fact of an ardent attendance at Highgate
continued for many months, which was impressively known to all
Sterling's friends; and am unable to assign even the limitary dates,
Sterling's own papers on the subject having all been destroyed by
him. Inferences point to the end of 1828 as the beginning of this
intercourse; perhaps in 1829 it was at the highest point; and already in
1830, when the intercourse itself was about to terminate, we have proof
of the influences it was producing,--in the Novel of _Arthur Coningsby_,
then on hand, the first and only Book that Sterling ever wrote. His
writings hitherto had been sketches, criticisms, brief essays; he was
now trying it on a wider scale; but not yet with satisfactory results,
and it proved to be his only trial in that form.

He had already, as was intimated, given up his brief proprietorship of
the _Athenaeum_; the commercial indications, and state of sales and of
costs, peremptorily ordering him to do so; the copyright went by sale or
gift, I know not at what precise date, into other fitter hands; and with
the copyright all connection on the part of Sterling. To _Athenaeum_
Sketches had now (in 1829-30) succeeded _Arthur Coningsby_, a Novel
in three volumes; indicating (when it came to light, a year or
two afterwards) equally hasty and much more ambitious aims in
Literature;--giving strong evidence, too, of internal spiritual
revulsions going painfully forward, and in particular of the impression
Coleridge was producing on him. Without and within, it was a wild tide
of things this ardent light young soul was afloat upon, at present;
and his outlooks into the future, whether for his spiritual or economic
fortunes, were confused enough.

Among his familiars in this period, I might have mentioned one Charles
Barton, formerly his fellow-student at Cambridge, now an amiable,
cheerful, rather idle young fellow about Town; who led the way into
certain new experiences, and lighter fields, for Sterling. His Father,
Lieutenant-General Barton of the Life-guards, an Irish landlord, I think
in Fermanagh County, and a man of connections about Court, lived in
a certain figure here in Town; had a wife of fashionable habits, with
other sons, and also daughters, bred in this sphere. These, all of
them, were amiable, elegant and pleasant people;--such was especially
an eldest daughter, Susannah Barton, a stately blooming black-eyed young
woman, attractive enough in form and character; full of gay softness, of
indolent sense and enthusiasm; about Sterling's own age, if not a little
older. In this house, which opened to him, more decisively than
his Father's, a new stratum of society, and where his reception for
Charles's sake and his own was of the kindest, he liked very well to be;
and spent, I suppose, many of his vacant half-hours, lightly chatting
with the elders or the youngsters,--doubtless with the young lady too,
though as yet without particular intentions on either side.

Nor, with all the Coleridge fermentation, was democratic Radicalism
by any means given up;--though how it was to live if the Coleridgean
moonshine took effect, might have been an abtruse question. Hitherto,
while said moonshine was but taking effect, and coloring the outer
surface of things without quite penetrating into the heart, democratic
Liberalism, revolt against superstition and oppression, and help to
whosoever would revolt, was still the grand element in Sterling's creed;
and practically he stood, not ready only, but full of alacrity to fulfil
all its behests. We heard long since of the "black dragoons,"--whom
doubtless the new moonshine had considerably silvered-over into new
hues, by this time;--but here now, while Radicalism is tottering for him
and threatening to crumble, comes suddenly the grand consummation and
explosion of Radicalism in his life; whereby, all at once, Radicalism
exhausted and ended itself, and appeared no more there.


In those years a visible section of the London population, and
conspicuous out of all proportion to its size or value, was a small
knot of Spaniards, who had sought shelter here as Political Refugees.
"Political Refugees:" a tragic succession of that class is one of the
possessions of England in our time. Six-and-twenty years ago, when I
first saw London, I remember those unfortunate Spaniards among the new
phenomena. Daily in the cold spring air, under skies so unlike their
own, you could see a group of fifty or a hundred stately tragic figures,
in proud threadbare cloaks; perambulating, mostly with closed lips, the
broad pavements of Euston Square and the regions about St. Pancras new
Church. Their lodging was chiefly in Somers Town, as I understood: and
those open pavements about St. Pancras Church were the general place of
rendezvous. They spoke little or no English; knew nobody, could employ
themselves on nothing, in this new scene. Old steel-gray heads, many
of them; the shaggy, thick, blue-black hair of others struck you; their
brown complexion, dusky look of suppressed fire, in general their tragic
condition as of caged Numidian lions.

That particular Flight of Unfortunates has long since fled again, and
vanished; and new have come and fled. In this convulsed revolutionary
epoch, which already lasts above sixty years, what tragic flights of
such have we not seen arrive on the one safe coast which is open to
them, as they get successively vanquished, and chased into exile to
avoid worse! Swarm after swarm, of ever-new complexion, from Spain as
from other countries, is thrown off, in those ever-recurring paroxysms;
and will continue to be thrown off. As there could be (suggests
Linnaeus) a "flower-clock," measuring the hours of the day, and the
months of the year, by the kinds of flowers that go to sleep and awaken,
that blow into beauty and fade into dust: so in the great Revolutionary
Horologe, one might mark the years and epochs by the successive kinds of
exiles that walk London streets, and, in grim silent manner, demand
pity from us and reflections from us.--This then extant group of Spanish
Exiles was the Trocadero swarm, thrown off in 1823, in the Riego and
Quirogas quarrel. These were they whom Charles Tenth had, by sheer
force, driven from their constitutionalisms and their Trocadero
fortresses,--Charles Tenth, who himself was soon driven out, manifoldly
by sheer force; and had to head his own swarm of fugitives; and has now
himself quite vanished, and given place to others. For there is no end
of them; propelling and propelled!--

Of these poor Spanish Exiles, now vegetating about Somers Town, and
painfully beating the pavement in Euston Square, the acknowledged chief
was General Torrijos, a man of high qualities and fortunes, still in
the vigor of his years, and in these desperate circumstances refusing to
despair; with whom Sterling had, at this time, become intimate.



CHAPTER X. TORRIJOS.

Torrijos, who had now in 1829 been here some four or five years, having
come over in 1824, had from the first enjoyed a superior reception
in England. Possessing not only a language to speak, which few of the
others did, but manifold experiences courtly, military, diplomatic,
with fine natural faculties, and high Spanish manners tempered into
cosmopolitan, he had been welcomed in various circles of society;
and found, perhaps he alone of those Spaniards, a certain human
companionship among persons of some standing in this country. With the
elder Sterlings, among others, he had made acquaintance; became familiar
in the social circle at South Place, and was much esteemed there. With
Madam Torrijos, who also was a person of amiable and distinguished
qualities, an affectionate friendship grew up on the part of Mrs.
Sterling, which ended only with the death of these two ladies. John
Sterling, on arriving in London from his University work, naturally
inherited what he liked to take up of this relation: and in the lodgings
in Regent Street, and the democratico-literary element there, Torrijos
became a very prominent, and at length almost the central object.

The man himself, it is well known, was a valiant, gallant man; of
lively intellect, of noble chivalrous character: fine talents, fine
accomplishments, all grounding themselves on a certain rugged veracity,
recommended him to the discerning. He had begun youth in the Court of
Ferdinand; had gone on in Wellington and other arduous, victorious
and unvictorious, soldierings; familiar in camps and council-rooms,
in presence-chambers and in prisons. He knew romantic Spain;--he was
himself, standing withal in the vanguard of Freedom's fight, a kind of
living romance. Infinitely interesting to John Sterling, for one.

It was to Torrijos that the poor Spaniards of Somers Town looked mainly,
in their helplessness, for every species of help. Torrijos, it was
hoped, would yet lead them into Spain and glorious victory there;
meanwhile here in England, under defeat, he was their captain and
sovereign in another painfully inverse sense. To whom, in extremity,
everybody might apply. When all present resources failed, and the
exchequer was quite out, there still remained Torrijos. Torrijos has to
find new resources for his destitute patriots, find loans, find Spanish
lessons for them among his English friends: in all which charitable
operations, it need not be said, John Sterling was his foremost man;
zealous to empty his own purse for the object; impetuous in rushing
hither or thither to enlist the aid of others, and find lessons or
something that would do. His friends, of course, had to assist; the
Bartons, among others, were wont to assist;--and I have heard that the
fair Susan, stirring up her indolent enthusiasm into practicality, was
very successful in finding Spanish lessons, and the like, for these
distressed men. Sterling and his friends were yet new in this business;
but Torrijos and the others were getting old in it?--and doubtless weary
and almost desperate of it. They had now been seven years in it, many of
them; and were asking, When will the end be?

Torrijos is described as a man of excellent discernment: who knows how
long he had repressed the unreasonable schemes of his followers, and
turned a deaf ear to the temptings of fallacious hope? But there comes
at length a sum-total of oppressive burdens which is intolerable, which
tempts the wisest towards fallacies for relief. These weary groups,
pacing the Euston-Square pavements, had often said in their despair,
"Were not death in battle better? Here are we slowly mouldering into
nothingness; there we might reach it rapidly, in flaming splendor.
Flame, either of victory to Spain and us, or of a patriot death, the
sure harbinger of victory to Spain. Flame fit to kindle a fire which no
Ferdinand, with all his Inquisitions and Charles Tenths, could put
out." Enough, in the end of 1829, Torrijos himself had yielded to this
pressure; and hoping against hope, persuaded himself that if he could
but land in the South of Spain with a small patriot band well armed
and well resolved, a band carrying fire in its heart,--then Spain, all
inflammable as touchwood, and groaning indignantly under its brutal
tyrant, might blaze wholly into flame round him, and incalculable
victory be won. Such was his conclusion; not sudden, yet surely not
deliberate either,--desperate rather, and forced on by circumstances.
He thought with himself that, considering Somers Town and considering
Spain, the terrible chance was worth trying; that this big game of Fate,
go how it might, was one which the omens credibly declared he and these
poor Spaniards ought to play.

His whole industries and energies were thereupon bent towards starting
the said game; and his thought and continual speech and song now was,
That if he had a few thousand pounds to buy arms, to freight a ship and
make the other preparations, he and these poor gentlemen, and Spain and
the world, were made men and a saved Spain and world. What talks and
consultations in the apartment in Regent Street, during those winter
days of 1829-30; setting into open conflagration the young democracy
that was wont to assemble there! Of which there is now left next to
no remembrance. For Sterling never spoke a word of this affair in
after-days, nor was any of the actors much tempted to speak. We can
understand too well that here were young fervid hearts in an explosive
condition; young rash heads, sanctioned by a man's experienced head.
Here at last shall enthusiasm and theory become practice and fact; fiery
dreams are at last permitted to realize themselves; and now is the time
or never!--How the Coleridge moonshine comported itself amid these hot
telluric flames, or whether it had not yet begun to play there (which I
rather doubt), must be left to conjecture.

Mr. Hare speaks of Sterling "sailing over to St. Valery in an open
boat along with others," upon one occasion, in this enterprise;--in
the _final_ English scene of it, I suppose. Which is very possible.
Unquestionably there was adventure enough of other kinds for it, and
running to and fro with all his speed on behalf of it, during these
months of his history! Money was subscribed, collected: the young
Cambridge democrats were all ablaze to assist Torrijos; nay certain of
them decided to go with him,--and went. Only, as yet, the funds were
rather incomplete. And here, as I learn from a good hand, is the secret
history of their becoming complete. Which, as we are upon the subject,
I had better give. But for the following circumstance, they had perhaps
never been completed; nor had the rash enterprise, or its catastrophe,
so influential on the rest of Sterling's life, taken place at all.

A certain Lieutenant Robert Boyd, of the Indian Army, an Ulster
Irishman, a cousin of Sterling's, had received some affront, or
otherwise taken some disgust in that service; had thrown up his
commission in consequence; and returned home, about this time, with
intent to seek another course of life. Having only, for outfit, these
impatient ardors, some experience in Indian drill exercise, and five
thousand pounds of inheritance, he found the enterprise attended with
difficulties; and was somewhat at a loss how to dispose of himself. Some
young Ulster comrade, in a partly similar situation, had pointed out to
him that there lay in a certain neighboring creek of the Irish coast, a
worn-out royal gun-brig condemned to sale, to be had dog-cheap: this he
proposed that they two, or in fact Boyd with his five thousand pounds,
should buy; that they should refit and arm and man it;--and sail
a-privateering "to the Eastern Archipelago," Philippine Isles, or I know
not where; and _so_ conquer the golden fleece.

Boyd naturally paused a little at this great proposal; did not quite
reject it; came across, with it and other fine projects and impatiences
fermenting in his head, to London, there to see and consider. It was in
the months when the Torrijos enterprise was in the birth-throes; crying
wildly for capital, of all things. Boyd naturally spoke of his projects
to Sterling,--of his gun-brig lying in the Irish creek, among others.
Sterling naturally said, "If you want an adventure of the Sea-king sort,
and propose to lay your money and your life into such a game, here is
Torrijos and Spain at his back; here is a golden fleece to conquer,
worth twenty Eastern Archipelagoes."--Boyd and Torrijos quickly met;
quickly bargained. Boyd's money was to go in purchasing, and storing
with a certain stock of arms and etceteras, a small ship in the Thames,
which should carry Boyd with Torrijos and the adventurers to the south
coast of Spain; and there, the game once played and won, Boyd was to
have promotion enough,--"the colonelcy of a Spanish cavalry regiment,"
for one express thing. What exact share Sterling had in this
negotiation, or whether he did not even take the prudent side and
caution Boyd to be wary I know not; but it was he that brought the
parties together; and all his friends knew, in silence, that to the end
of his life he painfully remembered that fact.

And so a ship was hired, or purchased, in the Thames; due furnishings
began to be executed in it; arms and stores were gradually got on board;
Torrijos with his Fifty picked Spaniards, in the mean while, getting
ready. This was in the spring of 1830. Boyd's 5000 pounds was the grand
nucleus of finance; but vigorous subscription was carried on likewise
in Sterling's young democratic circle, or wherever a member of it could
find access; not without considerable result, and with a zeal that may
be imagined. Nay, as above hinted, certain of these young men decided,
not to give their money only, but themselves along with it, as
democratic volunteers and soldiers of progress; among whom, it need not
be said, Sterling intended to be foremost. Busy weeks with him, those
spring ones of the year 1830! Through this small Note, accidentally
preserved to us, addressed to his friend Barton, we obtain a curious
glance into the subterranean workshop:--

        "_To Charles Barton, Esq., Dorset Sq., Regent's Park_.
                        [No date; apparently March or February, 1830.]

"MY DEAR CHARLES,--I have wanted to see you to talk to you about my
Foreign affairs. If you are going to be in London for a few days, I
believe you can be very useful to me, at a considerable expense and
trouble to yourself, in the way of buying accoutrements; _inter alia_, a
sword and a saddle,--not, you will understand, for my own use.

"Things are going on very well, but are very, even frightfully near;
only be quiet! Pray would you, in case of necessity, take a free passage
to Holland, next week or the week after; stay two or three days, and
come back, all expenses paid? If you write to B---- at Cambridge, tell
him above all things to hold his tongue. If you are near Palace Yard
to-morrow before two, pray come to see me. Do not come on purpose;
especially as I may perhaps be away, and at all events shall not be
there until eleven, nor perhaps till rather later.

"I fear I shall have alarmed your Mother by my irruption. Forgive me
for that and all my exactions from you. If the next month were over, I
should not have to trouble any one.

                        "Yours affectionately,
                                                        "J. STERLING."

Busy weeks indeed; and a glowing smithy-light coming through the
chinks!--The romance of _Arthur Coningsby_ lay written, or half-written,
in his desk; and here, in his heart and among his hands, was an acted
romance and unknown catastrophes keeping pace with that.

Doubts from the doctors, for his health was getting ominous, threw some
shade over the adventure. Reproachful reminiscences of Coleridge and
Theosophy were natural too; then fond regrets for Literature and its
glories: if you act your romance, how can you also write it? Regrets,
and reproachful reminiscences, from Art and Theosophy; perhaps some
tenderer regrets withal. A crisis in life had come; when, of innumerable
possibilities one possibility was to be elected king, and to swallow all
the rest, the rest of course made noise enough, and swelled themselves
to their biggest.


Meanwhile the ship was fast getting ready: on a certain day, it was
to drop quietly down the Thames; then touch at Deal, and take on board
Torrijos and his adventurers, who were to be in waiting and on the
outlook for them there. Let every man lay in his accoutrements, then;
let every man make his packages, his arrangements and farewells.
Sterling went to take leave of Miss Barton. "You are going, then; to
Spain? To rough it amid the storms of war and perilous insurrection; and
with that weak health of yours; and--we shall never see you more, then!"
Miss Barton, all her gayety gone, the dimpling softness become liquid
sorrow, and the musical ringing voice one wail of woe, "burst into
tears,"--so I have it on authority:--here was one possibility about to
be strangled that made unexpected noise! Sterling's interview ended in
the offer of his hand, and the acceptance of it;--any sacrifice to get
rid of this horrid Spanish business, and save the health and life of a
gifted young man so precious to the world and to another!

"Ill-health," as often afterwards in Sterling's life, when the excuse
was real enough but not the chief excuse; "ill-health, and insuperable
obstacles and engagements," had to bear the chief brunt in apologizing:
and, as Sterling's actual presence, or that of any Englishman except
Boyd and his money, was not in the least vital to the adventure, his
excuse was at once accepted. The English connections and subscriptions
are a given fact, to be presided over by what English volunteers there
are: and as for Englishmen, the fewer Englishmen that go, the larger
will be the share of influence for each. The other adventurers, Torrijos
among them in due readiness, moved silently one by one down to Deal;
Sterling, superintending the naval hands, on board their ship in
the Thames, was to see the last finish given to everything in that
department; then, on the set evening, to drop down quietly to Deal, and
there say _Andad con Dios_, and return.

Behold! Just before the set evening came, the Spanish Envoy at this
Court has got notice of what is going on; the Spanish Envoy, and of
course the British Foreign Secretary, and of course also the Thames
Police. Armed men spring suddenly on board, one day, while Sterling is
there; declare the ship seized and embargoed in the King's name; nobody
on board to stir till he has given some account of himself in due time
and place! Huge consternation, naturally, from stem to stern. Sterling,
whose presence of mind seldom forsook him, casts his eye over the River
and its craft; sees a wherry, privately signals it, drops rapidly on
board of it: "Stop!" fiercely interjects the marine policeman from the
ship's deck.--"Why stop? What use have you for me, or I for you?" and
the oars begin playing.--"Stop, or I'll shoot you!" cries the marine
policeman, drawing a pistol.--"No, you won't."--"I will!"--"If you do
you'll be hanged at the next Maidstone assizes, then; that's all,"--and
Sterling's wherry shot rapidly ashore; and out of this perilous
adventure.

That same night he posted down to Deal; disclosed to the Torrijos party
what catastrophe had come. No passage Spainward from the Thames; well
if arrestment do not suddenly come from the Thames! It was on this
occasion, I suppose, that the passage in the open boat to St. Valery
occurred;--speedy flight in what boat or boats, open or shut, could
be got at Deal on the sudden. Sterling himself, according to Hare's
authority, actually went with them so far. Enough, they got shipping,
as private passengers in one craft or the other; and, by degrees or at
once, arrived all at Gibraltar,--Boyd, one or two young democrats of
Regent Street, the fifty picked Spaniards, and Torrijos,--safe, though
without arms; still in the early part of the year.



CHAPTER XI. MARRIAGE: ILL-HEALTH; WEST-INDIES.

Sterling's outlooks and occupations, now that his Spanish friends were
gone, must have been of a rather miscellaneous confused description.
He had the enterprise of a married life close before him; and as yet
no profession, no fixed pursuit whatever. His health was already very
threatening; often such as to disable him from present activity,
and occasion the gravest apprehensions; practically blocking up all
important courses whatsoever, and rendering the future, if even
life were lengthened and he had any future, an insolubility for him.
Parliament was shut, public life was shut: Literature,--if, alas, any
solid fruit could lie in literature!

Or perhaps one's health would mend, after all; and many things be better
than was hoped! Sterling was not of a despondent temper, or given in
any measure to lie down and indolently moan: I fancy he walked briskly
enough into this tempestuous-looking future; not heeding too much its
thunderous aspects; doing swiftly, for the day, what his hand found to
do. _Arthur Coningsby_, I suppose, lay on the anvil at present; visits
to Coleridge were now again more possible; grand news from Torrijos
might be looked for, though only small yet came:--nay here, in the hot
July, is France, at least, all thrown into volcano again! Here are the
miraculous Three Days; heralding, in thunder, great things to Torrijos
and others; filling with babblement and vaticination the mouths and
hearts of all democratic men.

So rolled along, in tumult of chaotic remembrance and uncertain hope,
in manifold emotion, and the confused struggle (for Sterling as for
the world) to extricate the New from the falling ruins of the Old, the
summer and autumn of 1830. From Gibraltar and Torrijos the tidings were
vague, unimportant and discouraging: attempt on Cadiz, attempt on the
lines of St. Roch, those attempts, or rather resolutions to attempt,
had died in the birth, or almost before it. Men blamed Torrijos, little
knowing his impediments. Boyd was still patient at his post: others of
the young English (on the strength of the subscribed moneys) were said
to be thinking of tours,--perhaps in the Sierra Morena and neighboring
Quixote regions. From that Torrijos enterprise it did not seem that
anything considerable would come.


On the edge of winter, here at home, Sterling was married: "at
Christchurch, Marylebone, 2d November, 1830," say the records. His
blooming, kindly and true-hearted Wife had not much money, nor had he as
yet any: but friends on both sides were bountiful and hopeful; had
made up, for the young couple, the foundations of a modestly effective
household; and in the future there lay more substantial prospects. On
the finance side Sterling never had anything to suffer. His Wife, though
somewhat languid, and of indolent humor, was a graceful, pious-minded,
honorable and affectionate woman; she could not much support him in the
ever-shifting struggles of his life, but she faithfully attended him in
them, and loyally marched by his side through the changes and nomadic
pilgrimings, of which many were appointed him in his short course.

Unhappily a few weeks after his marriage, and before any household was
yet set up, he fell dangerously ill; worse in health than he had ever
yet been: so many agitations crowded into the last few months had been
too much for him. He fell into dangerous pulmonary illness, sank ever
deeper; lay for many weeks in his Father's house utterly prostrate,
his young Wife and his Mother watching over him; friends, sparingly
admitted, long despairing of his life. All prospects in this world were
now apparently shut upon him.

After a while, came hope again, and kindlier symptoms: but the doctors
intimated that there lay consumption in the question, and that perfect
recovery was not to be looked for. For weeks he had been confined to
bed; it was several months before he could leave his sick-room,
where the visits of a few friends had much cheered him. And now when
delivered, readmitted to the air of day again,--weak as he was, and with
such a liability still lurking in him,--what his young partner and he
were to do, or whitherward to turn for a good course of life, was by no
means too apparent.


One of his Mother Mrs. Edward Sterling's Uncles, a Coningham from Derry,
had, in the course of his industrious and adventurous life, realized
large property in the West Indies,--a valuable Sugar-estate, with its
equipments, in the Island of St. Vincent;--from which Mrs. Sterling
and her family were now, and had been for some years before her Uncle's
decease, deriving important benefits. I have heard, it was then worth
some ten thousand pounds a year to the parties interested. Anthony
Sterling, John, and another a cousin of theirs were ultimately to be
heirs, in equal proportions. The old gentleman, always kind to his
kindred, and a brave and solid man though somewhat abrupt in his ways,
had lately died; leaving a settlement to this effect, not without some
intricacies, and almost caprices, in the conditions attached.

This property, which is still a valuable one, was Sterling's chief
pecuniary outlook for the distant future. Of course it well deserved
taking care of; and if the eye of the master were upon it, of course
too (according to the adage) the cattle would fatten better. As the
warm climate was favorable to pulmonary complaints, and Sterling's
occupations were so shattered to pieces and his outlooks here so waste
and vague, why should not he undertake this duty for himself and others?

It was fixed upon as the eligiblest course. A visit to St. Vincent,
perhaps a permanent residence there: he went into the project with his
customary impetuosity; his young Wife cheerfully consenting, and all
manner of new hopes clustering round it. There are the rich tropical
sceneries, the romance of the torrid zone with its new skies and
seas and lands; there are Blacks, and the Slavery question to be
investigated: there are the bronzed Whites and Yellows, and their
strange new way of life: by all means let us go and try!--Arrangements
being completed, so soon as his strength had sufficiently recovered, and
the harsh spring winds had sufficiently abated, Sterling with his small
household set sail for St. Vincent; and arrived without accident. His
first child, a son Edward, now living and grown to manhood, was born
there, "at Brighton in the Island of St. Vincent," in the fall of that
year 1831.



CHAPTER XII. ISLAND OF ST. VINCENT.

Sterling found a pleasant residence, with all its adjuncts, ready
for him, at Colonarie, in this "volcanic Isle" under the hot sun. An
interesting Isle: a place of rugged chasms, precipitous gnarled
heights, and the most fruitful hollows; shaggy everywhere with luxuriant
vegetation; set under magnificent skies, in the mirror of the summer
seas; offering everywhere the grandest sudden outlooks and contrasts.
His Letters represent a placidly cheerful riding life: a pensive humor,
but the thunder-clouds all sleeping in the distance. Good relations
with a few neighboring planters; indifference to the noisy political
and other agitations of the rest: friendly, by no means romantic
appreciation of the Blacks; quiet prosperity economic and domestic: on
the whole a healthy and recommendable way of life, with Literature very
much in abeyance in it.

He writes to Mr. Hare (date not given): "The landscapes around me here
are noble and lovely as any that can be conceived on Earth. How indeed
could it be otherwise, in a small Island of volcanic mountains,
far within the Tropics, and perpetually covered with the richest
vegetation?" The moral aspect of things is by no means so good; but
neither is that without its fair features. "So far as I see, the Slaves
here are cunning, deceitful and idle; without any great aptitude for
ferocious crimes, and with very little scruple at committing others. But
I have seen them much only in very favorable circumstances. They are,
as a body, decidedly unfit for freedom; and if left, as at present,
completely in the hands of their masters, will never become so, unless
through the agency of the Methodists." [9]

In the Autumn came an immense hurricane; with new and indeed quite
perilous experiences of West-Indian life. This hasty Letter, addressed
to his Mother, is not intrinsically his remarkablest from St. Vincent:
but the body of fact delineated in it being so much the greatest, we
will quote it in preference. A West-Indian tornado, as John Sterling
witnesses it, and with vivid authenticity describes it, may be
considered worth looking at.

       "_To Mrs. Sterling, South Place, Knightsbridge, London_.
                            "BRIGHTON, ST. VINCENT, 28th August, 1831.

"MY DEAR MOTHER,--The packet came in yesterday; bringing me some
Newspapers, a Letter from my Father, and one from Anthony, with a few
lines from you. I wrote, some days ago, a hasty Note to my Father,
on the chance of its reaching you through Grenada sooner than any
communication by the packet; and in it I spoke of the great misfortune
which had befallen this Island and Barbadoes, but from which all those
you take an interest in have happily escaped unhurt.

"From the day of our arrival in the West Indies until Thursday the 11th
instant, which will long be a memorable day with us, I had been doing my
best to get ourselves established comfortably; and I had at last bought
the materials for making some additions to the house. But on the morning
I have mentioned, all that I had exerted myself to do, nearly all the
property both of Susan and myself, and the very house we lived in, were
suddenly destroyed by a visitation of Providence far more terrible than
any I have ever witnessed.

"When Susan came from her room, to breakfast, at eight o'clock, I
pointed out to her the extraordinary height and violence of the surf,
and the singular appearance of the clouds of heavy rain sweeping down
the valleys before us. At this time I had so little apprehension of what
was coming, that I talked of riding down to the shore when the storm
should abate, as I had never seen so fierce a sea. In about a quarter of
an hour the House-Negroes came in, to close the outside shutters of the
windows. They knew that the plantain-trees about the Negro houses had
been blown down in the night; and had told the maid-servant Tyrrell, but
I had heard nothing of it. A very few minutes after the closing of the
windows, I found that the shutters of Tyrrell's room, at the south and
commonly the most sheltered end of the House, were giving way. I tried
to tie them; but the silk handkerchief which I used soon gave way;
and as I had neither hammer, boards nor nails in the house, I could do
nothing more to keep out the tempest. I found, in pushing at the leaf of
the shutter, that the wind resisted, more as if it had been a stone wall
or a mass of iron, than a mere current of air. There were one or two
people outside trying to fasten the windows, and I went out to help; but
we had no tools at hand: one man was blown down the hill in front of the
house, before my face; and the other and myself had great difficulty in
getting back again inside the door. The rain on my face and hands felt
like so much small shot from a gun. There was great exertion necessary
to shut the door of the house.

"The windows at the end of the large room were now giving way; and I
suppose it was about nine o'clock, when the hurricane burst them in, as
if it had been a discharge from a battery of heavy cannon. The shutters
were first forced open, and the wind fastened them back to the wall;
and then the panes of glass were smashed by the mere force of the gale,
without anything having touched them. Even now I was not at all sure the
house would go. My books, I saw, were lost; for the rain poured past the
bookcases, as if it had been the Colonarie River. But we carried a good
deal of furniture into the passage at the entrance; we set Susan there
on a sofa, and the Black Housekeeper was even attempting to get her some
breakfast. The house, however, began to shake so violently, and the rain
was so searching, that she could not stay there long. She went into her
own room and I stayed to see what could be done.

"Under the forepart of the house, there are cellars built of stone,
but not arched. To these, however, there was no access except on the
outside; and I knew from my own experience that Susan could not have
gone a step beyond the door, without being carried away by the storm,
and probably killed on the spot. The only chance seemed to be that of
breaking through the floor. But when the old Cook and myself resolved on
this, we found that we had no instrument with which it would be possible
to do it. It was now clear that we had only God to trust in. The front
windows were giving way with successive crashes, and the floor shook
as you may have seen a carpet on a gusty day in London. I went into
our bedroom; where I found Susan, Tyrrell, and a little Colored girl of
seven or eight years old; and told them that we should probably not
be alive in half an hour. I could have escaped, if I had chosen to go
alone, by crawling on the ground either into the kitchen, a separate
stone building at no great distance, or into the open fields away from
trees or houses; but Susan could not have gone a yard. She became quite
calm when she knew the worst; and she sat on my knee in what seemed the
safest corner of the room, while every blast was bringing nearer and
nearer the moment of our seemingly certain destruction.--

"The house was under two parallel roofs; and the one next the sea,
which sheltered the other, and us who were under the other, went off, I
suppose about ten o'clock. After my old plan, I will give you a sketch,
from which you may perceive how we were situated:--

      [In print, a figure representing a floor-plan appears here]

The _a_, _a_ are the windows that were first destroyed: _b_ went next;
my books were between the windows _b_, and on the wall opposite to them.
The lines _c_ and _d_ mark the directions of the two roofs; _e_ is the
room in which we were, and 2 is a plan of it on a larger scale. Look
now at 2: _a_ is the bed; _c_, _c_ the two wardrobes; _b_ the corner
in which we were. I was sitting in an arm-chair, holding my Wife; and
Tyrrell and the little Black child were close to us. We had given up all
notion of surviving; and only waited for the fall of the roof to perish
together.

"Before long the roof went. Most of the materials, however, were carried
clear away: one of the large couples was caught on the bedpost marked
_d_, and held fast by the iron spike; while the end of it hung over our
heads: had the beam fallen an inch on either side of the bedpost, it
must necessarily have crushed us. The walls did not go with the roof;
and we remained for half an hour, alternately praying to God, and
watching them as they bent, creaked, and shivered before the storm.

"Tyrrell and the child, when the roof was off, made their way through
the remains of the partition, to the outer door; and with the help of
the people who were looking for us, got into the kitchen. A good while
after they were gone, and before we knew anything of their fate, a Negro
suddenly came upon us; and the sight of him gave us a hope of safety.
When the people learned that we were in danger, and while their own huts
were flying about their ears, they crowded to help us; and the old
Cook urged them on to our rescue. He made five attempts, after saving
Tyrrell, to get to us; and four times he was blown down. The fifth time
he, and the Negro we first saw, reached the house. The space they had
to traverse was not above twenty yards of level ground, if so much. In
another minute or two, the Overseers and a crowd of Negroes, most of
whom had come on their hands and knees, were surrounding us; and with
their help Susan was carried round to the end of the house; where they
broke open the cellar window, and placed her in comparative safety. The
force of the hurricane was, by this time, a good deal diminished, or it
would have been impossible to stand before it.

"But the wind was still terrific; and the rain poured into the cellars
through the floor above. Susan, Tyrrell, and a crowd of Negroes remained
under it, for more than two hours: and I was long afraid that the wet
and cold would kill her, if she did not perish more violently. Happily
we had wine and spirits at hand, and she was much nerved by a tumbler
of claret. As soon as I saw her in comparative security, I went off with
one of the Overseers down to the Works, where the greater number of the
Negroes were collected, that we might see what could be done for them.
They were wretched enough, but no one was hurt; and I ordered them a
dram apiece, which seemed to give them a good deal of consolation.

"Before I could make my way back, the hurricane became as bad as at
first; and I was obliged to take shelter for half an hour in a ruined
Negro house. This, however, was the last of its extreme violence. By
one o'clock, even the rain had in a great degree ceased; and as only
one room of the house, the one marked _f_; was standing, and that
rickety,--I had Susan carried in a chair down the hill, to the Hospital;
where, in a small paved unlighted room, she spent the next twenty-four
hours. She was far less injured than might have been expected from such
a catastrophe.

"Next day, I had the passage at the entrance of the house repaired and
roofed; and we returned to the ruins of our habitation, still encumbered
as they were with the wreck of almost all we were possessed of. The
walls of the part of the house next the sea were carried away, in less I
think than half an hour after we reached the cellar: when I had leisure
to examine the remains of the house, I found the floor strewn with
fragments of the building, and with broken furniture; and our books all
soaked as completely as if they had been for several hours in the sea.

"In the course of a few days I had the other room, _g_, which is under
the same roof as the one saved, rebuilt; and Susan stayed in this
temporary abode for a week,--when we left Colonarie, and came to
Brighton. Mr. Munro's kindness exceeds all precedent. We shall certainly
remain here till my Wife is recovered from her confinement. In the
mean while we shall have a new house built, in which we hope to be well
settled before Christmas.

"The roof was half blown off the kitchen, but I have had it mended
already; the other offices were all swept away. The gig is much injured;
and my horse received a wound in the fall of the stable, from which he
will not be recovered for some weeks: in the mean time I have no choice
but to buy another, as I must go at least once or twice a week to
Colonarie, besides business in Town. As to our own comforts, we can
scarcely expect ever to recover from the blow that has now stricken
us. No money would repay me for the loss of my books, of which a large
proportion had been in my hands for so many years that they were
like old and faithful friends, and of which many had been given me at
different times by the persons in the world whom I most value.

"But against all this I have to set the preservation of our lives, in
a way the most awfully providential; and the safety of every one on the
Estate. And I have also the great satisfaction of reflecting that all
the Negroes from whom any assistance could reasonably be expected,
behaved like so many Heroes of Antiquity; risking their lives and limbs
for us and our property, while their own poor houses were flying like
chaff before the hurricane. There are few White people here who can
say as much for their Black dependents; and the force and value of the
relation between Master and Slave has been tried by the late calamity on
a large scale.

"Great part of both sides of this Island has been laid completely
waste. The beautiful wide and fertile Plain called the Charib Country,
extending for many miles to the north of Colonarie, and formerly
containing the finest sets of works and best dwelling-houses in the
Island, is, I am told, completely desolate: on several estates not a
roof even of a Negro hut standing. In the embarrassed circumstances of
many of the proprietors, the ruin is, I fear, irreparable.--At Colonarie
the damage is serious, but by no means desperate. The crop is perhaps
injured ten or fifteen per cent. The roofs of several large buildings
are destroyed, but these we are already supplying; and the injuries done
to the cottages of the Negroes are, by this time, nearly if not quite
remedied.

"Indeed, all that has been suffered in St. Vincent appears nothing
when compared with the appalling loss of property and of human lives at
Barbadoes. There the Town is little but a heap of ruins, and the corpses
are reckoned by thousands; while throughout the Island there are not, I
believe, ten estates on which the buildings are standing. The Elliotts,
from whom we have heard, are living with all their family in a tent; and
may think themselves wonderfully saved, when whole families round them
were crushed at once beneath their houses. Hugh Barton, the only officer
of the Garrison hurt, has broken his arm, and we know nothing of his
prospects of recovery. The more horrible misfortune of Barbadoes is
partly to be accounted for by the fact of the hurricane having begun
there during the night. The flatness of the surface in that Island
presented no obstacle to the wind, which must, however, I think have
been in itself more furious than with us. No other island has suffered
considerably.

"I have told both my Uncle and Anthony that I have given you the details
of our recent history;--which are not so pleasant that I should wish to
write them again. Perhaps you will be good enough to let them see this,
as soon as you and my Father can spare it.... I am ever, dearest Mother,

                    "Your grateful and affectionate
                                                      "JOHN STERLING."

This Letter, I observe, is dated 28th August, 1831; which is otherwise a
day of mark to the world and me,--the Poet Goethe's last birthday. While
Sterling sat in the Tropical solitudes, penning this history, little
European Weimar had its carriages and state-carriages busy on the
streets, and was astir with compliments and visiting-cards, doing its
best, as heretofore, on behalf of a remarkable day; and was not, for
centuries or tens of centuries, to see the like of it again!--


At Brighton, the hospitable home of those Munros, our friends continued
for above two months. Their first child, Edward, as above noticed, was
born here, "14th October, 1831;"--and now the poor lady, safe from all
her various perils, could return to Colonarie under good auspices.

It was in this year that I first heard definitely of Sterling as a
contemporary existence; and laid up some note and outline of him in my
memory, as of one whom I might yet hope to know. John Mill, Mrs. Austin
and perhaps other friends, spoke of him with great affection and much
pitying admiration; and hoped to see him home again, under better omens,
from over the seas. As a gifted amiable being, of a certain radiant
tenuity and velocity, too thin and rapid and diffusive, in danger of
dissipating himself into the vague, or alas into death itself: it was
so that, like a spot of bright colors, rather than a portrait with
features, he hung occasionally visible in my imagination.



CHAPTER XIII. A CATASTROPHE.

The ruin of his house had hardly been repaired, when there arrived out
of Europe tidings which smote as with a still more fatal hurricane on
the four corners of his inner world, and awoke all the old thunders that
lay asleep on his horizon there. Tidings, at last of a decisive nature,
from Gibraltar and the Spanish democrat adventure. This is what the
Newspapers had to report--the catastrophe at once, the details by
degrees--from Spain concerning that affair, in the beginning of the new
year 1832.

Torrijos, as we have seen, had hitherto accomplished as good as nothing,
except disappointment to his impatient followers, and sorrow and regret
to himself. Poor Torrijos, on arriving at Gibraltar with his wild band,
and coming into contact with the rough fact, had found painfully how
much his imagination had deceived him. The fact lay round him haggard
and iron-bound; flatly refusing to be handled according to his scheme
of it. No Spanish soldiery nor citizenry showed the least disposition to
join him; on the contrary the official Spaniards of that coast seemed
to have the watchfulest eye on all his movements, nay it was conjectured
they had spies in Gibraltar who gathered his very intentions and
betrayed them. This small project of attack, and then that other,
proved futile, or was abandoned before the attempt. Torrijos had to lie
painfully within the lines of Gibraltar,--his poor followers reduced to
extremity of impatience and distress; the British Governor too, though
not unfriendly to him, obliged to frown. As for the young Cantabs, they,
as was said, had wandered a little over the South border of romantic
Spain; had perhaps seen Seville, Cadiz, with picturesque views, since
not with belligerent ones; and their money being done, had now returned
home. So had it lasted for eighteen months.

The French Three Days breaking out had armed the Guerrillero Mina, armed
all manner of democratic guerrieros and guerrilleros; and considerable
clouds of Invasion, from Spanish exiles, hung minatory over the North
and North-East of Spain, supported by the new-born French Democracy,
so far as privately possible. These Torrijos had to look upon with
inexpressible feelings, and take no hand in supporting from the South;
these also he had to see brushed away, successively abolished by
official generalship; and to sit within his lines, in the painfulest
manner, unable to do anything. The fated, gallant-minded, but too
headlong man. At length the British Governor himself was obliged, in
official decency and as is thought on repeated remonstrance from his
Spanish official neighbors, to signify how indecorous, improper
and impossible it was to harbor within one's lines such explosive
preparations, once they were discovered, against allies in full peace
with us,--the necessity, in fact, there was for the matter ending. It
is said, he offered Torrijos and his people passports, and British
protection, to any country of the world except Spain: Torrijos did not
accept the passports; spoke of going peaceably to this place or to that;
promised at least, what he saw and felt to be clearly necessary, that he
would soon leave Gibraltar. And he did soon leave it; he and his, Boyd
alone of the Englishmen being now with him.

It was on the last night of November, 1831, that they all set forth;
Torrijos with Fifty-five companions; and in two small vessels committed
themselves to their nigh-desperate fortune. No sentry or official person
had noticed them; it was from the Spanish Consul, next morning, that the
British Governor first heard they were gone. The British Governor knew
nothing of them; but apparently the Spanish officials were much better
informed. Spanish guardships, instantly awake, gave chase to the two
small vessels, which were making all sail towards Malaga; and, on shore,
all manner of troops and detached parties were in motion, to render a
retreat to Gibraltar by land impossible.

Crowd all sail for Malaga, then; there perhaps a regiment will join us;
there,--or if not, we are but lost! Fancy need not paint a more tragic
situation than that of Torrijos, the unfortunate gallant man, in the
gray of this morning, first of December, 1831,--his last free morning.
Noble game is afoot, afoot at last; and all the hunters have him in
their toils.--The guardships gain upon Torrijos; he cannot even reach
Malaga; has to run ashore at a place called Fuengirola, not far from
that city;--the guardships seizing his vessels, so soon as he
is disembarked. The country is all up; troops scouring the coast
everywhere: no possibility of getting into Malaga with a party of
Fifty-five. He takes possession of a farmstead (Ingles, the place is
called); barricades himself there, but is speedily beleaguered with
forces hopelessly superior. He demands to treat; is refused all treaty;
is granted six hours to consider, shall then either surrender at
discretion, or be forced to do it. Of course he _does_ it, having no
alternative; and enters Malaga a prisoner, all his followers prisoners.
Here had the Torrijos Enterprise, and all that was embarked upon it,
finally arrived.

Express is sent to Madrid; express instantly returns; "Military
execution on the instant; give them shriving if they want it; that
done, fusillade them all." So poor Torrijos and his followers, the whole
Fifty-six of them, Robert Boyd included, meet swift death in Malaga.
In such manner rushes down the curtain on them and their affair; they
vanish thus on a sudden; rapt away as in black clouds of fate. Poor
Boyd, Sterling's cousin, pleaded his British citizenship; to no purpose:
it availed only to his dead body, this was delivered to the British
Consul for interment, and only this. Poor Madam Torrijos, hearing,
at Paris where she now was, of her husband's capture, hurries towards
Madrid to solicit mercy; whither also messengers from Lafayette and the
French Government were hurrying, on the like errand: at Bayonne, news
met the poor lady that it was already all over, that she was now a
widow, and her husband hidden from her forever.--Such was the handsel of
the new year 1832 for Sterling in his West-Indian solitudes.


Sterling's friends never heard of these affairs; indeed we were all
secretly warned not to mention the name of Torrijos in his hearing,
which accordingly remained strictly a forbidden subject. His misery over
this catastrophe was known, in his own family, to have been immense. He
wrote to his Brother Anthony: "I hear the sound of that musketry; it is
as if the bullets were tearing my own brain." To figure in one's sick
and excited imagination such a scene of fatal man-hunting, lost valor
hopelessly captured and massacred; and to add to it, that the victims
are not men merely, that they are noble and dear forms known lately
as individual friends: what a Dance of the Furies and wild-pealing
Dead-march is this, for the mind of a loving, generous and vivid man!
Torrijos getting ashore at Fuengirola; Robert Boyd and others ranked
to die on the esplanade at Malaga--Nay had not Sterling, too, been the
innocent yet heedless means of Boyd's embarking in this enterprise? By
his own kinsman poor Boyd had been witlessly guided into the pitfalls.
"I hear the sound of that musketry; it is as if the bullets were tearing
my own brain!"



CHAPTER XIV. PAUSE.

These thoughts dwelt long with Sterling; and for a good while, I fancy,
kept possession of the proscenium of his mind; madly parading there, to
the exclusion of all else,--coloring all else with their own black hues.
He was young, rich in the power to be miserable or otherwise; and this
was his first grand sorrow which had now fallen upon him.

An important spiritual crisis, coming at any rate in some form, had
hereby suddenly in a very sad form come. No doubt, as youth was passing
into manhood in these Tropical seclusions, and higher wants were
awakening in his mind, and years and reflection were adding new insight
and admonition, much in his young way of thought and action lay already
under ban with him, and repentances enough over many things were not
wanting. But here on a sudden had all repentances, as it were, dashed
themselves together into one grand whirlwind of repentance; and his
past life was fallen wholly as into a state of reprobation. A great
remorseful misery had come upon him. Suddenly, as with a sudden
lightning-stroke, it had kindled into conflagration all the ruined
structure of his past life; such ruin had to blaze and flame round
him, in the painfulest manner, till it went out in black ashes. His
democratic philosophies, and mutinous radicalisms, already falling
doomed in his thoughts, had reached their consummation and final
condemnation here. It was all so rash, imprudent, arrogant, all
that; false, or but half true; inapplicable wholly as a rule of noble
conduct;--and it has ended _thus_. Woe on it! Another guidance must be
found in life, or life is impossible!--

It is evident, Sterling's thoughts had already, since the old days of
the "black dragoon," much modified themselves. We perceive that, by mere
increase of experience and length of time, the opposite and much deeper
side of the question, which also has its adamantine basis of truth, was
in turn coming into play; and in fine that a Philosophy of Denial, and
world illuminated merely by the flames of Destruction, could never have
permanently been the resting-place of such a man. Those pilgrimings to
Coleridge, years ago, indicate deeper wants beginning to be felt, and
important ulterior resolutions becoming inevitable for him. If in your
own soul there is any tone of the "Eternal Melodies," you cannot live
forever in those poor outer, transitory grindings and discords; you will
have to struggle inwards and upwards, in search of some diviner home
for yourself!--Coleridge's prophetic moonshine, Torrijos's sad tragedy:
those were important occurrences in Sterling's life. But, on the whole,
there was a big Ocean for him, with impetuous Gulf-streams, and a doomed
voyage in quest of the Atlantis, _before_ either of those arose as
lights on the horizon. As important beacon-lights let us count them
nevertheless;--signal-dates they form to us, at lowest. We may
reckon this Torrijos tragedy the crisis of Sterling's history; the
turning-point, which modified, in the most important and by no means
wholly in the most favorable manner, all the subsequent stages of it.


Old Radicalism and mutinous audacious Ethnicism having thus fallen
to wreck, and a mere black world of misery and remorse now disclosing
itself, whatsoever of natural piety to God and man, whatsoever of pity
and reverence, of awe and devout hope was in Sterling's heart now awoke
into new activity; and strove for some due utterance and predominance.
His Letters, in these months, speak of earnest religious studies and
efforts;--of attempts by prayer and longing endeavor of all kinds, to
struggle his way into the temple, if temple there were, and there find
sanctuary. [10] The realities were grown so haggard; life a field of
black ashes, if there rose no temple anywhere on it! Why, like a fated
Orestes, is man so whipt by the Furies, and driven madly hither and
thither, if it is not even that he may seek some shrine, and there make
expiation and find deliverance?

In these circumstances, what a scope for Coleridge's philosophy, above
all! "If the bottled moonshine _be_ actually substance? Ah, could one
but believe in a Church while finding it incredible! What is faith; what
is conviction, credibility, insight? Can a thing be at once known for
true, and known for false? 'Reason,' 'Understanding:' is there, then,
such an internecine war between these two? It was so Coleridge
imagined it, the wisest of existing men!"--No, it is not an easy matter
(according to Sir Kenelm Digby), this of getting up your "astral spirit"
of a thing, and setting it in action, when the thing itself is well
burnt to ashes. Poor Sterling; poor sons of Adam in general, in this sad
age of cobwebs, worn-out symbolisms, reminiscences and simulacra! Who
can tell the struggles of poor Sterling, and his pathless wanderings
through these things! Long afterwards, in speech with his Brother,
he compared his case in this time to that of "a young lady who has
tragically lost her lover, and is willing to be half-hoodwinked into a
convent, or in any noble or quasi-noble way to escape from a world which
has become intolerable."


During the summer of 1832, I find traces of attempts towards
Anti-Slavery Philanthropy; shadows of extensive schemes in that
direction. Half-desperate outlooks, it is likely, towards the refuge of
Philanthropism, as a new chivalry of life. These took no serious hold
of so clear an intellect; but they hovered now and afterwards as
day-dreams, when life otherwise was shorn of aim;--mirages in the
desert, which are found not to be lakes when you put your bucket into
them. One thing was clear, the sojourn in St. Vincent was not to last
much longer.

Perhaps one might get some scheme raised into life, in Downing Street,
for universal Education to the Blacks, preparatory to emancipating
them? There were a noble work for a man! Then again poor Mrs. Sterling's
health, contrary to his own, did not agree with warm moist climates.
And again, &c. &c. These were the outer surfaces of the measure; the
unconscious pretexts under which it showed itself to Sterling and
was shown by him: but the inner heart and determining cause of it (as
frequently in Sterling's life, and in all our lives) was not these. In
brief, he had had enough of St. Vincent. The strangling oppressions of
his soul were too heavy for him there. Solution lay in Europe, or might
lie; not in these remote solitudes of the sea,--where no shrine or
saint's well is to be looked for, no communing of pious pilgrims
journeying together towards a shrine.



CHAPTER XV. BONN; HERSTMONCEUX.

After a residence of perhaps fifteen months Sterling quitted St.
Vincent, and never returned. He reappeared at his Father's house, to the
joy of English friends, in August, 1832; well improved in health, and
eager for English news; but, beyond vague schemes and possibilities,
considerably uncertain what was next to be done.

After no long stay in this scene,--finding Downing Street dead as stone
to the Slave-Education and to all other schemes,--he went across, with
his wife and child, to Germany; purposing to make not so much a tour
as some loose ramble, or desultory residence in that country, in the
Rhineland first of all. Here was to be hoped the picturesque in scenery,
which he much affected; here the new and true in speculation, which
he inwardly longed for and wanted greatly more; at all events, here as
readily as elsewhere might a temporary household be struck up, under
interesting circumstances.--I conclude he went across in the Spring
of 1833; perhaps directly after _Arthur Coningsby_ had got through the
press. This Novel, which, as we have said, was begun two or three years
ago, probably on his cessation from the _Athenaeum_, and was mainly
finished, I think, before the removal to St. Vincent, had by this time
fallen as good as obsolete to his own mind; and its destination now,
whether to the press or to the fire, was in some sort a matter at once
of difficulty and of insignificance to him. At length deciding for the
milder alternative, he had thrown in some completing touches here
and there,--especially, as I conjecture, a proportion of Coleridgean
moonshine at the end; and so sent it forth.

It was in the sunny days, perhaps in May or June of this year, that
_Arthur Coningsby_ reached my own hand, far off amid the heathy
wildernesses; sent by John Mill: and I can still recollect the pleasant
little episode it made in my solitude there. The general impression it
left on me, which has never since been renewed by a second reading in
whole or in part, was the certain prefigurement to myself, more or
less distinct, of an opulent, genial and sunny mind, but misdirected,
disappointed, experienced in misery;--nay crude and hasty; mistaking for
a solid outcome from its woes what was only to me a gilded vacuity. The
hero an ardent youth, representing Sterling himself, plunges into
life such as we now have it in these anarchic times, with the radical,
utilitarian, or mutinous heathen theory, which is the readiest for
inquiring souls; finds, by various courses of adventure, utter shipwreck
in this; lies broken, very wretched: that is the tragic nodus, or
apogee of his life-course. In this mood of mind, he clutches desperately
towards some new method (recognizable as Coleridge's) of laying hand
again on the old Church, which has hitherto been extraneous and as
if non-extant to his way of thought; makes out, by some Coleridgean
legedermain, that there actually is still a Church for him; that this
extant Church, which he long took for an extinct shadow, is not such,
but a substance; upon which he can anchor himself amid the storms of
fate;--and he does so, even taking orders in it, I think. Such could
by no means seem to me the true or tenable solution. Here clearly,
struggling amid the tumults, was a lovable young fellow-soul; who had
by no means yet got to land; but of whom much might be hoped, if he ever
did. Some of the delineations are highly pictorial, flooded with a
deep ruddy effulgence; betokening much wealth, in the crude or the ripe
state. The hope of perhaps, one day, knowing Sterling, was welcome
and interesting to me. _Arthur Coningsby_, struggling imperfectly in a
sphere high above circulating-library novels, gained no notice whatever
in that quarter; gained, I suppose in a few scattered heads, some such
recognition as the above; and there rested. Sterling never mentioned the
name of it in my hearing, or would hear it mentioned.


In those very days while _Arthur Coningsby_ was getting read amid the
Scottish moors, "in June, 1833," Sterling, at Bonn in the Rhine-country,
fell in with his old tutor and friend, the Reverend Julius Hare; one
with whom he always delighted to communicate, especially on such topics
as then altogether occupied him. A man of cheerful serious character, of
much approved accomplishment, of perfect courtesy; surely of much piety,
in all senses of that word. Mr. Hare had quitted his scholastic labors
and distinctions, some time ago; the call or opportunity for taking
orders having come; and as Rector of Herstmonceux in Sussex, a place
patrimonially and otherwise endeared to him, was about entering, under
the best omens, on a new course of life. He was now on his return from
Rome, and a visit of some length to Italy. Such a meeting could not
but be welcome and important to Sterling in such a mood. They had
much earnest conversation, freely communing on the highest matters;
especially of Sterling's purpose to undertake the clerical profession,
in which course his reverend friend could not but bid him good speed.

It appears, Sterling already intimated his intention to become a
clergyman: He would study theology, biblicalities, perfect himself in
the knowledge seemly or essential for his new course;--read diligently
"for a year or two in some good German University," then seek to obtain
orders: that was his plan. To which Mr. Hare gave his hearty _Euge_;
adding that if his own curacy happened then to be vacant, he should be
well pleased to have Sterling in that office. So they parted.

"A year or two" of serious reflection "in some good German University,"
or anywhere in the world, might have thrown much elucidation upon these
confused strugglings and purposings of Sterling's, and probably have
spared him some confusion in his subsequent life. But the talent of
waiting was, of all others, the one he wanted most. Impetuous velocity,
all-hoping headlong alacrity, what we must call rashness and impatience,
characterized him in most of his important and unimportant procedures;
from the purpose to the execution there was usually but one big leap
with him. A few months after Mr. Hare was gone, Sterling wrote that his
purposes were a little changed by the late meeting at Bonn; that he now
longed to enter the Church straightway: that if the Herstmonceux Curacy
was still vacant, and the Rector's kind thought towards him still held,
he would instantly endeavor to qualify himself for that office.

Answer being in the affirmative on both heads, Sterling returned to
England; took orders,--"ordained deacon at Chichester on Trinity Sunday
in 1834" (he never became technically priest):--and so, having fitted
himself and family with a reasonable house, in one of those leafy lanes
in quiet Herstmonceux, on the edge of Pevensey Level, he commenced the
duties of his Curacy.


The bereaved young lady has _taken_ the veil, then! Even so. "Life is
growing all so dark and brutal; must be redeemed into human, if it will
continue life. Some pious heroism, to give a human color to life again,
on any terms,"--even on impossible ones!

To such length can transcendental moonshine, cast by some morbidly
radiating Coleridge into the chaos of a fermenting life, act magically
there, and produce divulsions and convulsions and diseased developments.
So dark and abstruse, without lamp or authentic finger-post, is the
course of pious genius towards the Eternal Kingdoms grown. No fixed
highway more; the old spiritual highways and recognized paths to the
Eternal, now all torn up and flung in heaps, submerged in unutterable
boiling mud-oceans of Hypocrisy and Unbelievability, of brutal living
Atheism and damnable dead putrescent Cant: surely a tragic pilgrimage
for all mortals; Darkness, and the mere shadow of Death, enveloping all
things from pole to pole; and in the raging gulf-currents, offering us
will-o'-wisps for loadstars,--intimating that there are no stars, nor
ever were, except certain Old-Jew ones which have now gone out. Once
more, a tragic pilgrimage for all mortals; and for the young pious soul,
winged with genius, and passionately seeking land, and passionately
abhorrent of floating carrion withal, more tragical than for any!--A
pilgrimage we must all undertake nevertheless, and make the best of
with our respective means. Some arrive; a glorious few: many must be
lost,--go down upon the floating wreck which they took for land. Nay,
courage! These also, so far as there was any heroism in them, have
bequeathed their life as a contribution to us, have valiantly laid their
bodies in the chasm for us: of these also there is no ray of heroism
_lost_,--and, on the whole, what else of them could or should be "saved"
at any time? Courage, and ever Forward!

Concerning this attempt of Sterling's to find sanctuary in the old
Church, and desperately grasp the hem of her garment in such manner,
there will at present be many opinions: and mine must be recorded here
in flat reproval of it, in mere pitying condemnation of it, as a rash,
false, unwise and unpermitted step. Nay, among the evil lessons of his
Time to poor Sterling, I cannot but account this the worst; properly
indeed, as we may say, the apotheosis, the solemn apology and
consecration, of all the evil lessons that were in it to him. Alas, if
we did remember the divine and awful nature of God's Truth, and had not
so forgotten it as poor doomed creatures never did before,--should we,
durst we in our most audacious moments, think of wedding _it_ to the
World's Untruth, which is also, like all untruths, the Devil's? Only in
the world's last lethargy can such things be done, and accounted safe
and pious! Fools! "Do you think the Living God is a buzzard idol,"
sternly asks Milton, that you dare address Him in this manner?--Such
darkness, thick sluggish clouds of cowardice and oblivious baseness,
have accumulated on us: thickening as if towards the eternal sleep!
It is not now known, what never needed proof or statement before, that
Religion is not a doubt; that it is a certainty,--or else a mockery and
horror. That none or all of the many things we are in doubt about, and
need to have demonstrated and rendered probable, can by any alchemy be
made a "Religion" for us; but are and must continue a baleful, quiet or
unquiet, Hypocrisy for us; and bring--_salvation_, do we fancy? I think,
it is another thing they will bring, and are, on all hands, visibly
bringing this good while!--


The time, then, with its deliriums, has done its worst for poor
Sterling. Into deeper aberration it cannot lead him; this is the
crowning error. Happily, as beseems the superlative of errors, it was
a very brief, almost a momentary one. In June, 1834, Sterling dates as
installed at Herstmonceux; and is flinging, as usual, his whole soul
into the business; successfully so far as outward results could show:
but already in September, he begins to have misgivings; and in February
following, quits it altogether,--the rest of his life being, in great
part, a laborious effort of detail to pick the fragments of it off him,
and be free of it in soul as well as in title.

At this the extreme point of spiritual deflexion and depression, when
the world's madness, unusually impressive on such a man, has done its
very worst with him, and in all future errors whatsoever he will be a
little less mistaken, we may close the First Part of Sterling's Life.




PART II.




CHAPTER I. CURATE.

By Mr. Hare's account, no priest of any Church could more fervently
address himself to his functions than Sterling now did. He went about
among the poor, the ignorant, and those that had need of help; zealously
forwarded schools and beneficences; strove, with his whole might, to
instruct and aid whosoever suffered consciously in body, or still worse
unconsciously in mind. He had charged himself to make the Apostle Paul
his model; the perils and voyagings and ultimate martyrdom of Christian
Paul, in those old ages, on the great scale, were to be translated into
detail, and become the practical emblem of Christian Sterling on the
coast of Sussex in this new age. "It would be no longer from Jerusalem
to Damascus," writes Sterling, "to Arabia, to Derbe, Lystra, Ephesus,
that he would travel: but each house of his appointed Parish would be
to him what each of those great cities was,--a place where he would bend
his whole being, and spend his heart for the conversion, purification,
elevation of those under his influence. The whole man would be
forever at work for this purpose; head, heart, knowledge, time, body,
possessions, all would be directed to this end." A high enough model
set before one:--how to be realized!--Sterling hoped to realize it, to
struggle towards realizing it, in some small degree. This is Mr. Hare's
report of him:--

"He was continually devising some fresh scheme for improving the
condition of the Parish. His aim was to awaken the minds of the
people, to arouse their conscience, to call forth their sense of moral
responsibility, to make them feel their own sinfulness, their need of
redemption, and thus lead them to a recognition of the Divine Love by
which that redemption is offered to us. In visiting them he was diligent
in all weathers, to the risk of his own health, which was greatly
impaired thereby; and his gentleness and considerate care for the sick
won their affection; so that, though his stay was very short, his name
is still, after a dozen years, cherished by many."

How beautiful would Sterling be in all this; rushing forward like a host
towards victory; playing and pulsing like sunshine or soft lightning;
busy at all hours to perform his part in abundant and superabundant
measure! "Of that which it was to me personally," continues Mr. Hare,
"to have such a fellow-laborer, to live constantly in the freest
communion with such a friend, I cannot speak. He came to me at a time of
heavy affliction, just after I had heard that the Brother, who had
been the sharer of all my thoughts and feelings from childhood, had bid
farewell to his earthly life at Rome; and thus he seemed given to me to
make up in some sort for him whom I had lost. Almost daily did I look
out for his usual hour of coming to me, and watch his tall slender
form walking rapidly across the hill in front of my window; with the
assurance that he was coming to cheer and brighten, to rouse and stir
me, to call me up to some height of feeling, or down to some depth of
thought. His lively spirit, responding instantaneously to every impulse
of Nature and Art; his generous ardor in behalf of whatever is noble and
true; his scorn of all meanness, of all false pretences and conventional
beliefs, softened as it was by compassion for the victims of those
besetting sins of a cultivated age; his never-flagging impetuosity in
pushing onward to some unattained point of duty or of knowledge: all
this, along with his gentle, almost reverential affectionateness towards
his former tutor, rendered my intercourse with him an unspeakable
blessing; and time after time has it seemed to me that his visit had
been like a shower of rain, bringing down freshness and brightness on
a dusty roadside hedge. By him too the recollection of these our daily
meetings was cherished till the last." [11]

There are many poor people still at Herstmonceux who affectionately
remember him: Mr. Hare especially makes mention of one good man there,
in his young days "a poor cobbler," and now advanced to a much
better position, who gratefully ascribes this outward and the other
improvements in his life to Sterling's generous encouragement and
charitable care for him. Such was the curate life at Herstmonceux. So,
in those actual leafy lanes, on the edge of Pevensey Level, in this new
age, did our poor New Paul (on hest of certain oracles) diligently
study to comport himself,--and struggle with all his might _not_ to be a
moonshine shadow of the First Paul.


It was in this summer of 1834,--month of May, shortly after arriving in
London,--that I first saw Sterling's Father. A stout broad gentleman
of sixty, perpendicular in attitude, rather showily dressed, and of
gracious, ingenious and slightly elaborate manners. It was at Mrs.
Austin's in Bayswater; he was just taking leave as I entered, so our
interview lasted only a moment: but the figure of the man, as Sterling's
father, had already an interest for me, and I remember the time well.
Captain Edward Sterling, as we formerly called him, had now quite dropt
the military title, nobody even of his friends now remembering it; and
was known, according to his wish, in political and other circles, as Mr.
Sterling, a private gentleman of some figure. Over whom hung, moreover,
a kind of mysterious nimbus as the principal or one of the principal
writers in the _Times_, which gave an interesting chiaroscuro to his
character in society. A potent, profitable, but somewhat questionable
position; of which, though he affected, and sometimes with anger,
altogether to disown it, and rigorously insisted on the rights of
anonymity, he was not unwilling to take the honors too: the private
pecuniary advantages were very undeniable; and his reception in the
Clubs, and occasionally in higher quarters, was a good deal modelled on
the universal belief in it.


John Sterling at Herstmonceux that afternoon, and his Father here in
London, would have offered strange contrasts to an eye that had
seen them both. Contrasts, and yet concordances. They were two very
different-looking men, and were following two very different modes of
activity that afternoon. And yet with a strange family likeness, too,
both in the men and their activities; the central impulse in each, the
faculties applied to fulfil said impulse, not at all dissimilar,--as
grew visible to me on farther knowledge.



CHAPTER II. NOT CURATE.

Thus it went on for some months at Herstmonceux; but thus it could
not last. We said there were already misgivings as to health, &c. in
September: [12] that was but the fourth month, for it had begun only in
June. The like clouds of misgiving, flights of dark vapor, chequering
more and more the bright sky of this promised land, rose heavier and
rifer month after month; till in February following, that is in the
eighth month from starting, the sky had grown quite overshaded; and poor
Sterling had to think practically of departure from his promised land
again, finding that the goal of his pilgrimage was _not_ there. Not
there, wherever it may be! March again, therefore; the abiding city,
and post at which we can live and die, is still ahead of us, it would
appear!

"Ill-health" was the external cause; and, to all parties concerned,
to Sterling himself I have no doubt as completely as to any, the one
determining cause. Nor was the ill-health wanting; it was there in too
sad reality. And yet properly it was not there as the burden; it was
there as the last ounce which broke the camel's back. I take it, in this
as in other cases known to me, ill-health was not the primary cause
but rather the ultimate one, the summing-up of innumerable far deeper
conscious and unconscious causes,--the cause which could boldly show
itself on the surface, and give the casting vote. Such was often
Sterling's way, as one could observe in such cases: though the most
guileless, undeceptive and transparent of men, he had a noticeable,
almost childlike faculty of self-deception, and usually substituted
for the primary determining motive and set of motives, some ultimate
ostensible one, and gave that out to himself and others as the ruling
impulse for important changes in life. As is the way with much more
ponderous and deliberate men;--as is the way, in a degree, with all men!

Enough, in February, 1835, Sterling came up to London, to consult with
his physicians,--and in fact in all ways to consider with himself and
friends,--what was to be done in regard to this Herstmonceux business.
The oracle of the physicians, like that of Delphi, was not exceedingly
determinate: but it did bear, what was a sufficiently undeniable fact,
that Sterling's constitution, with a tendency to pulmonary ailments,
was ill-suited for the office of a preacher; that total abstinence from
preaching for a year or two would clearly be the safer course. To which
effect he writes to Mr. Hare with a tone of sorrowful agitation; gives
up his clerical duties at Herstmonceux;--and never resumed them there
or elsewhere. He had been in the Church eight months in all: a brief
section of his life, but an important one, which colored several of his
subsequent years, and now strangely colors all his years in the memory
of some.

This we may account the second grand crisis of his History. Radicalism,
not long since, had come to its consummation, and vanished from him in
a tragic manner. "Not by Radicalism is the path to Human Nobleness for
me!" And here now had English Priesthood risen like a sun, over the
waste ruins and extinct volcanoes of his dead Radical world, with
promise of new blessedness and healing under its Wings; and this too has
soon found itself an illusion: "Not by Priesthood either lies the way,
then. Once more, where does the way lie!"--To follow illusions till they
burst and vanish is the lot of all new souls who, luckily or lucklessly,
are left to their own choice in starting on this Earth. The roads are
many; the authentic finger-posts are few,--never fewer than in this era,
when in so many senses the waters are out. Sterling of all men had the
quickest sense for nobleness, heroism and the human _summum bonum_; the
liveliest headlong spirit of adventure and audacity; few gifted living
men less stubbornness of perseverance. Illusions, in his chase of the
_summum bonum_, were not likely to be wanting; aberrations, and wasteful
changes of course, were likely to be many! It is in the history of
such vehement, trenchant, far-shining and yet intrinsically light and
volatile souls, missioned into this epoch to seek their way there, that
we best see what a confused epoch it is.

This clerical aberration,--for such it undoubtedly was in Sterling,--we
have ascribed to Coleridge; and do clearly think that had there been
no Coleridge, neither had this been,--nor had English Puseyism or some
other strange enough universal portents been. Nevertheless, let us say
farther that it lay partly in the general bearing of the world for
such a man. This battle, universal in our sad epoch of "all old things
passing away" against "all things becoming new," has its summary and
animating heart in that of Radicalism against Church; there, as in its
flaming core, and point of focal splendor, does the heroic worth that
lies in each side of the quarrel most clearly disclose itself; and
Sterling was the man, above many, to recognize such worth on both sides.
Natural enough, in such a one, that the light of Radicalism having gone
out in darkness for him, the opposite splendor should next rise as the
chief, and invite his loyalty till it also failed. In one form or the
other, such an aberration was not unlikely for him. But an aberration,
especially in this form, we may certainly call it. No man of Sterling's
veracity, had he clearly consulted his own heart, or had his own heart
been capable of clearly responding, and not been dazzled and bewildered
by transient fantasies and theosophic moonshine, could have undertaken
this function. His heart would have answered: "No, thou canst not. What
is incredible to thee, thou shalt not, at thy soul's peril, attempt to
believe!--Elsewhither for a refuge, or die here. Go to Perdition if thou
must,--but not with a lie in thy mouth; by the Eternal Maker, no!"

Alas, once more! How are poor mortals whirled hither and thither in the
tumultuous chaos of our era; and, under the thick smoke-canopy which
has eclipsed all stars, how do they fly now after this poor meteor, now
after that!--Sterling abandoned his clerical office in February, 1835;
having held it, and ardently followed it, so long as we say,--eight
calendar months in all.


It was on this his February expedition to London that I first saw
Sterling,--at the India House incidentally, one afternoon, where I
found him in company with John Mill, whom I happened like himself to be
visiting for a few minutes. The sight of one whose fine qualities I had
often heard of lately, was interesting enough; and, on the whole, proved
not disappointing, though it was the translation of dream into fact,
that is of poetry into prose, and showed its unrhymed side withal. A
loose, careless-looking, thin figure, in careless dim costume, sat, in
a lounging posture, carelessly and copiously talking. I was struck with
the kindly but restless swift-glancing eyes, which looked as if the
spirits were all out coursing like a pack of merry eager beagles,
beating every bush. The brow, rather sloping in form, was not of
imposing character, though again the head was longish, which is always
the best sign of intellect; the physiognomy in general indicated
animation rather than strength.

We talked rapidly of various unmemorable things: I remember coming on
the Negroes, and noticing that Sterling's notion on the Slavery Question
had not advanced into the stage of mine. In reference to the question
whether an "engagement for life," on just terms, between parties who
are fixed in the character of master and servant, as the Whites and the
Negroes are, is not really better than one from day to day,--he said
with a kindly jeer, "I would have the Negroes themselves consulted as to
that!"--and would not in the least believe that the Negroes were by
no means final or perfect judges of it.--His address, I perceived, was
abrupt, unceremonious; probably not at all disinclined to logic, and
capable of dashing in upon you like a charge of Cossacks, on occasion:
but it was also eminently ingenious, social, guileless. We did all very
well together: and Sterling and I walked westward in company, choosing
whatever lanes or quietest streets there were, as far as Knightsbridge
where our roads parted; talking on moralities, theological philosophies;
arguing copiously, but _except_ in opinion not disagreeing

In his notions on such subjects, the expected Coleridge cast of thought
was very visible; and he seemed to express it even with exaggeration,
and in a fearless dogmatic manner. Identity of sentiment, difference of
opinion: these are the known elements of a pleasant dialogue. We parted
with the mutual wish to meet again;--which accordingly, at his Father's
house and at mine, we soon repeatedly did; and already, in the few days
before his return to Herstmonceux, had laid the foundations of a frank
intercourse, pointing towards pleasant intimacies both with himself
and with his circle, which in the future were abundantly fulfilled.
His Mother, essentially and even professedly "Scotch," took to my Wife
gradually with a most kind maternal relation; his Father, a gallant
showy stirring gentleman, the Magus of the _Times_, had talk and
argument ever ready, was an interesting figure, and more and more took
interest in us. We had unconsciously made an acquisition, which grew
richer and wholesomer with every new year; and ranks now, seen in
the pale moonlight of memory, and must ever rank, among the precious
possessions of life.

Sterling's bright ingenuity, and also his audacity, velocity and
alacrity, struck me more and more. It was, I think, on the occasion of a
party given one of these evenings at his Father's, where I remember John
Mill, John Crawford, Mrs. Crawford, and a number of young and elderly
figures of distinction,--that a group having formed on the younger side
of the room, and transcendentalisms and theologies forming the topic, a
number of deep things were said in abrupt conversational style, Sterling
in the thick of it. For example, one sceptical figure praised the
Church of England, in Hume's phrase, "as a Church tending to keep down
fanaticism," and recommendable for its very indifferency; whereupon a
transcendental figure urges him: "You are afraid of the horse's kicking:
but will you sacrifice all qualities to being safe from that? Then get
a dead horse. None comparable to that for not kicking in your stable!"
Upon which, a laugh; with new laughs on other the like occasions;--and
at last, in the fire of some discussion, Sterling, who was unusually
eloquent and animated, broke out with this wild phrase, "I could plunge
into the bottom of Hell, if I were sure of finding the Devil there and
getting him strangled!" Which produced the loudest laugh of all; and had
to be repeated, on Mrs. Crawford's inquiry, to the house at large; and,
creating among the elders a kind of silent shudder,--though we
urged that the feat would really be a good investment of human
industry,--checked or stopt these theologic thunders for the evening.
I still remember Sterling as in one of his most animated moods that
evening. He probably returned to Herstmonceux next day, where he
proposed yet to reside for some indefinite time.

Arrived at Herstmonceux, he had not forgotten us. One of his Letters
written there soon after was the following, which much entertained
me, in various ways. It turns on a poor Book of mine, called _Sartor
Resartus_; which was not then even a Book, but was still hanging
desolately under bibliopolic difficulties, now in its fourth or fifth
year, on the wrong side of the river, as a mere aggregate of Magazine
Articles; having at last been slit into that form, and lately completed
_so_, and put together into legibility. I suppose Sterling had borrowed
it of me. The adventurous hunter spirit which had started such a bemired
_Auerochs_, or Urus of the German woods, and decided on chasing that as
game, struck me not a little;--and the poor Wood-Ox, so bemired in the
forests, took it as a compliment rather:--

             "_To Thomas Carlyle, Esq., Chelsea, London_.
                            "HERSTMONCEUX near BATTLE, 29th May, 1835.

"MY DEAR CARLYLE,--I have now read twice, with care, the wondrous
account of Teufelsdrockh and his Opinions; and I need not say that it
has given me much to think of. It falls in with the feelings and tastes
which were, for years, the ruling ones of my life; but which you will
not be angry with me when I say that I am infinitely and hourly thankful
for having escaped from. Not that I think of this state of mind as one
with which I have no longer any concern. The sense of a oneness of life
and power in all existence; and of a boundless exuberance of beauty
around us, to which most men are well-nigh dead, is a possession which
no one that has ever enjoyed it would wish to lose. When to this we add
the deep feeling of the difference between the actual and the ideal
in Nature, and still more in Man; and bring in, to explain this, the
principle of duty, as that which connects us with a possible Higher
State, and sets us in progress towards it,--we have a cycle of thoughts
which was the whole spiritual empire of the wisest Pagans, and which
might well supply food for the wide speculations and richly creative
fancy of Teufelsdrockh, or his prototype Jean Paul.

"How then comes it, we cannot but ask, that these ideas, displayed
assuredly with no want of eloquence, vivacity or earnestness, have
found, unless I am much mistaken, so little acceptance among the best
and most energetic minds in this country? In a country where millions
read the Bible, and thousands Shakspeare; where Wordsworth circulates
through book-clubs and drawing-rooms; where there are innumerable
admirers of your favorite Burns; and where Coleridge, by sending from
his solitude the voice of earnest spiritual instruction, came to be
beloved, studied and mourned for, by no small or careless school of
disciples?--To answer this question would, of course, require more
thought and knowledge than I can pretend to bring to it. But there are
some points on which I will venture to say a few words.

"In the first place, as to the form of composition,--which may be
called, I think, the Rhapsodico-Reflective. In this the _Sartor
Resartus_ resembles some of the master-works of human invention, which
have been acknowledged as such by many generations; and especially the
works of Rabelais, Montaigne, Sterne and Swift. There is nothing I
know of in Antiquity like it. That which comes nearest is perhaps the
Platonic Dialogue. But of this, although there is something of the
playful and fanciful on the surface, there is in reality neither in the
language (which is austerely determined to its end), nor in the method
and progression of the work, any of that headlong self-asserting
capriciousness, which, if not discernible in the plan of Teufelsdrockh's
Memoirs, is yet plainly to be seen in the structure of the sentences,
the lawless oddity, and strange heterogeneous combination and allusion.
The principle of this difference, observable often elsewhere in modern
literature (for the same thing is to be found, more or less, in many of
our most genial works of imagination,--_Don Quixote_, for instance, and
the writings of Jeremy Taylor), seems to be that well-known one of the
predominant objectivity of the Pagan mind; while among us the subjective
has risen into superiority, and brought with it in each individual
a multitude of peculiar associations and relations. These, as not
explicable from any one _external_ principle assumed as a premise by
the ancient philosopher, were rejected from the sphere of his aesthetic
creation: but to us they all have a value and meaning; being connected
by the bond of our own personality and all alike existing in that
infinity which is its arena.

"But however this may be, and comparing the Teufelsdrockhean Epopee
only with those other modern works,--it is noticeable that Rabelais,
Montaigne and Sterne have trusted for the currency of their writings, in
a great degree, to the use of obscene and sensual stimulants. Rabelais,
besides, was full of contemporary and personal satire; and seems to
have been a champion in the great cause of his time,--as was Montaigne
also,--that of the right of thought in all competent minds, unrestrained
by any outward authority. Montaigne, moreover, contains more pleasant
and lively gossip, and more distinct good-humored painting of his own
character and daily habits, than any other writer I know. Sterne is
never obscure, and never moral; and the costume of his subjects is drawn
from the familiar experience of his own time and country: and Swift,
again, has the same merit of the clearest perspicuity, joined to that
of the most homely, unaffected, forcible English. These points of
difference seem to me the chief ones which bear against the success of
the _Sartor_. On the other hand, there is in Teufelsdrockh a depth and
fervor of feeling, and a power of serious eloquence, far beyond that of
any of these four writers; and to which indeed there is nothing at
all comparable in any of them, except perhaps now and then, and very
imperfectly, in Montaigne.

"Of the other points of comparison there are two which I would
chiefly dwell on: and first as to the language. A good deal of this
is positively barbarous. 'Environment,' 'vestural,' 'stertorous,'
'visualized,' 'complected,' and others to be found I think in the first
twenty pages,--are words, so far as I know, without any authority;
some of them contrary to analogy: and none repaying by their value
the disadvantage of novelty. To these must be added new and erroneous
locutions; 'whole other tissues' for _all the other_, and similar
uses of the word _whole_; 'orients' for _pearls_; 'lucid' and 'lucent'
employed as if they were different in meaning; 'hulls' perpetually for
_coverings_, it being a word hardly used, and then only for the husk
of a nut; 'to insure a man of misapprehension;' 'talented,' a mere
newspaper and hustings word, invented, I believe, by O'Connell.

"I must also mention the constant recurrence of some words in a quaint
and queer connection, which gives a grotesque and somewhat repulsive
mannerism to many sentences. Of these the commonest offender is 'quite;'
which appears in almost every page, and gives at first a droll kind of
emphasis; but soon becomes wearisome. 'Nay,' 'manifold,' 'cunning enough
significance,' 'faculty' (meaning a man's rational or moral _power_),
'special,' 'not without,' haunt the reader as if in some uneasy dream
which does not rise to the dignity of nightmare. Some of these strange
mannerisms fall under the general head of a singularity peculiar, so far
as I know, to Teufelsdrockh. For instance, that of the incessant use of
a sort of odd superfluous qualification of his assertions; which seems
to give the character of deliberateness and caution to the style, but
in time sounds like mere trick or involuntary habit. 'Almost' does more
than yeoman's, _almost_ slave's service in this way. Something similar
may be remarked of the use of the double negative by way of affirmation.

"Under this head, of language, may be mentioned, though not with strict
grammatical accuracy, two standing characteristics of the Professor's
style,--at least as rendered into English: _First_, the composition
of words, such as 'snow-and-rosebloom maiden:' an attractive damsel
doubtless in Germany, but, with all her charms, somewhat uncouth here.
'Life-vision' is another example; and many more might be found. To
say nothing of the innumerable cases in which the words are only
intelligible as a compound term, though not distinguished by hyphens. Of
course the composition of words is sometimes allowable even in English:
but the habit of dealing with German seems to have produced, in the
pages before us, a prodigious superabundance of this form of expression;
which gives harshness and strangeness, where the matter would at all
events have been surprising enough. _Secondly_, I object, with the
same qualification, to the frequent use of _inversion_; which generally
appears as a transposition of the two members of a clause, in a way
which would not have been practiced in conversation. It certainly gives
emphasis and force, and often serves to point the meaning. But a style
may be fatiguing and faulty precisely by being too emphatic, forcible
and pointed; and so straining the attention to find its meaning, or the
admiration to appreciate its beauty.

"Another class of considerations connects itself with the heightened
and plethoric fulness of the style: its accumulation and contrast of
imagery; its occasional jerking and almost spasmodic violence;--and
above all, the painful subjective excitement, which seems the element
and groundwork even of every description of Nature; often taking the
shape of sarcasm or broad jest, but never subsiding into calm. There is
also a point which I should think worth attending to, were I planning
any similar book: I mean the importance, in a work of imagination, of
not too much disturbing in the reader's mind the balance of the New
and Old. The former addresses itself to his active, the latter to his
passive faculty; and these are mutually dependent, and must coexist in
certain proportion, if you wish to combine his sympathy and progressive
exertion with willingness and ease of attention. This should be taken
into account in forming a style; for of course it cannot be consciously
thought of in composing each sentence.

"But chiefly it seems important in determining the plan of a work. If
the tone of feeling, the line of speculation are out of the common way,
and sure to present some difficulty to the average reader, then it would
probably be desirable to select, for the circumstances, drapery
and accessories of all kinds, those most familiar, or at least most
attractive. A fable of the homeliest purport, and commonest every-day
application, derives an interest and charm from its turning on the
characters and acts of gods and genii, lions and foxes, Arabs and
Affghauns. On the contrary, for philosophic inquiry and truths of awful
preciousness, I would select as my personages and interlocutors beings
with whose language and 'whereabouts' my readers would be familiar. Thus
did Plato in his Dialogues, Christ in his Parables. Therefore it seems
doubtful whether it was judicious to make a German Professor the hero
of _Sartor_. Berkeley began his _Siris_ with tar-water; but what can
English readers be expected to make of _Gukguk_ by way of prelibation to
your nectar and tokay? The circumstances and details do not flash with
living reality on the minds of your readers, but, on the contrary,
themselves require some of that attention and minute speculation, the
whole original stock of which, in the minds of most of them, would not
be too much to enable them to follow your views of Man and Nature. In
short, there is not a sufficient basis of the common to justify
the amount of peculiarity in the work. In a book of science, these
considerations would of course be inapplicable; but then the whole shape
and coloring of the book must be altered to make it such; and a man
who wishes merely to get at the philosophical result, or summary of the
whole, will regard the details and illustrations as so much unprofitable
surplusage.

"The sense of strangeness is also awakened by the marvellous
combinations, in which the work abounds to a degree that the common
reader must find perfectly bewildering. This can hardly, however, be
treated as a consequence of the _style_; for the style in this respect
coheres with, and springs from, the whole turn and tendency of thought.
The noblest images are objects of a humorous smile, in a mind which
sees itself above all Nature and throned in the arms of an Almighty
Necessity; while the meanest have a dignity, inasmuch as they are
trivial symbols of the same one life to which the great whole
belongs. And hence, as I divine, the startling whirl of incongruous
juxtaposition, which of a truth must to many readers seem as amazing as
if the Pythia on the tripod should have struck up a drinking-song, or
Thersites had caught the prophetic strain of Cassandra.

"All this, of course, appears to me true and relevant; but I cannot help
feeling that it is, after all, but a poor piece of quackery to comment
on a multitude of phenomena without adverting to the principle which
lies at the root, and gives the true meaning to them all. Now this
principle I seem to myself to find in the state of mind which is
attributed to Teufelsdrockh; in his state of mind, I say, not in his
opinions, though these are, in him as in all men, most important,--being
one of the best indices to his state of mind. Now what distinguishes
him, not merely from the greatest and best men who have been on earth
for eighteen hundred years, but from the whole body of those who have
been working forwards towards the good, and have been the salt and light
of the world, is this: That he does not believe in a God. Do not be
indignant, I am blaming no one;--but if I write my thoughts, I must
write them honestly.

"Teufelsdrockh does not belong to the herd of sensual and thoughtless
men; because he does perceive in all Existence a unity of power; because
he does believe that this is a real power external to him and dominant
to a certain extent over him, and does not think that he is himself a
shadow in a world of shadows. He had a deep feeling of the beautiful,
the good and the true; and a faith in their final victory.

"At the same time, how evident is the strong inward unrest, the Titanic
heaving of mountain on mountain; the storm-like rushing over land and
sea in search of peace. He writhes and roars under his consciousness
of the difference in himself between the possible and the actual, the
hoped-for and the existent. He feels that duty is the highest law of
his own being; and knowing how it bids the waves be stilled into an
icy fixedness and grandeur, he trusts (but with a boundless inward
misgiving) that there is a principle of order which will reduce all
confusion to shape and clearness. But wanting peace himself, his fierce
dissatisfaction fixes on all that is weak, corrupt and imperfect around
him; and instead of a calm and steady co-operation with all those who
are endeavoring to apply the highest ideas as remedies for the worst
evils, he holds himself aloof in savage isolation; and cherishes (though
he dare not own) a stern joy at the prospect of that Catastrophe which
is to turn loose again the elements of man's social life, and give for
a time the victory to evil;--in hopes that each new convulsion of the
world must bring us nearer to the ultimate restoration of all things;
fancying that each may be the last. Wanting the calm and cheerful
reliance, which would be the spring of active exertion, he flatters his
own distemper by persuading himself that his own age and generation
are peculiarly feeble and decayed; and would even perhaps be willing
to exchange the restless immaturity of our self-consciousness, and
the promise of its long throe-pangs, for the unawakened undoubting
simplicity of the world's childhood; of the times in which there was all
the evil and horror of our day, only with the difference that conscience
had not arisen to try and condemn it. In these longings, if they are
Teufelsdrockh's, he seems to forget that, could we go back five thousand
years, we should only have the prospect of travelling them again, and
arriving at last at the same point at which we stand now.

"Something of this state of mind I may say that I understand; for I have
myself experienced it. And the root of the matter appears to me: A want
of sympathy with the great body of those who are now endeavoring to
guide and help onward their fellow-men. And in what is this alienation
grounded? It is, as I believe, simply in the difference on that point:
viz. the clear, deep, habitual recognition of a one Living _Personal_
God, essentially good, wise, true and holy, the Author of all that
exists; and a reunion with whom is the only end of all rational beings.
This belief... [_There follow now several pages on "Personal God," and
other abstruse or indeed properly unspeakable matters; these, and a
general Postscript of qualifying purport, I will suppress; extracting
only the following fractions, as luminous or slightly significant to
us:_]

"Now see the difference of Teufelsdrockh's feelings. At the end of book
iii. chap. 8, I find these words: 'But whence? O Heaven, whither? Sense
knows not; Faith knows not; only that it is through mystery to mystery,
from God to God.

                    'We _are such stuff_
     As dreams are made of, and our little life
     Is rounded with a sleep.'

And this tallies with the whole strain of his character. What we find
everywhere, with an abundant use of the name of God, is the conception
of a formless Infinite whether in time or space; of a high inscrutable
Necessity, which it is the chief wisdom and virtue to submit to, which
is the mysterious impersonal base of all Existence,--shows itself in the
laws of every separate being's nature; and for man in the shape of duty.
On the other hand, I affirm, we do know whence we come and whither we
go!--

... "And in this state of mind, as there is no true sympathy with
others, just as little is there any true peace for ourselves. There is
indeed possible the unsympathizing factitious calm of Art, which we
find in Goethe. But at what expense is it bought? Simply, by abandoning
altogether the idea of duty, which is the great witness of our
personality. And he attains his inhuman ghastly calmness by reducing the
Universe to a heap of material for the idea of beauty to work on!--

... "The sum of all I have been writing as to the connection of our
faith in God with our feeling towards men and our mode of action, may of
course be quite erroneous: but granting its truth, it would supply the
one principle which I have been seeking for, in order to explain
the peculiarities of style in your account of Teufelsdrockh and his
writings.... The life and works of Luther are the best comment I know of
on this doctrine of mine.

"Reading over what I have written, I find I have not nearly done justice
to my own sense of the genius and moral energy of the book; but this
is what you will best excuse.--Believe me most sincerely and faithfully
yours,

                                                      "JOHN STERLING."

Here are sufficient points of "discrepancy with agreement," here is
material for talk and argument enough; and an expanse of free discussion
open, which requires rather to be speedily restricted for convenience'
sake, than allowed to widen itself into the boundless, as it tends to
do!--

In all Sterling's Letters to myself and others, a large collection of
which now lies before me, duly copied and indexed, there is, to one that
knew his speech as well, a perhaps unusual likeness between the speech
and the Letters; and yet, for most part, with a great inferiority on
the part of these. These, thrown off, one and all of them, without
premeditation, and with most rapid-flowing pen, are naturally as like
his speech as writing can well be; this is their grand merit to us:
but on the other hand, the want of the living tones, swift looks and
motions, and manifold dramatic accompaniments, tells heavily, more
heavily than common. What can be done with champagne itself, much more
with soda-water, when the gaseous spirit is fled! The reader, in any
specimens he may see, must bear this in mind.

Meanwhile these Letters do excel in honesty, in candor and transparency;
their very carelessness secures their excellence in this respect. And in
another much deeper and more essential respect I must likewise call them
excellent,--in their childlike goodness, in the purity of heart, the
noble affection and fidelity they everywhere manifest in the writer.
This often touchingly strikes a familiar friend in reading them; and
will awaken reminiscences (when you have the commentary in your own
memory) which are sad and beautiful, and not without reproach to you on
occasion. To all friends, and all good causes, this man is true; behind
their back as before their face, the same man!--Such traits of the
autobiographic sort, from these Letters, as can serve to paint him
or his life, and promise not to weary the reader, I must endeavor to
select, in the sequel.



CHAPTER III. BAYSWATER

Sterling continued to reside at Herstmonceux through the spring and
summer; holding by the peaceable retired house he still had there, till
the vague future might more definitely shape itself, and better point
out what place of abode would suit him in his new circumstances. He
made frequent brief visits to London; in which I, among other friends,
frequently saw him, our acquaintance at each visit improving in all
ways. Like a swift dashing meteor he came into our circle; coruscated
among us, for a day or two, with sudden pleasant illumination; then
again suddenly withdrew,--we hoped, not for long.

I suppose, he was full of uncertainties; but undoubtedly was gravitating
towards London. Yet, on the whole, on the surface of him, you saw no
uncertainties; far from that: it seemed always rather with peremptory
resolutions, and swift express businesses, that he was charged. Sickly
in body, the testimony said: but here always was a mind that gave you
the impression of peremptory alertness, cheery swift decision,--of a
_health_ which you might have called exuberant. I remember dialogues
with him, of that year; one pleasant dialogue under the trees of the
Park (where now, in 1851, is the thing called "Crystal Palace"), with
the June sunset flinging long shadows for us; the last of the Quality
just vanishing for dinner, and the great night beginning to prophesy of
itself. Our talk (like that of the foregoing Letter) was of the faults
of my style, of my way of thinking, of my &c. &c.; all which
admonitions and remonstrances, so friendly and innocent, from this young
junior-senior, I was willing to listen to, though unable, as usual, to
get almost any practical hold of them. As usual, the garments do not fit
you, you are lost in the garments, or you cannot get into them at all;
this is not your suit of clothes, it must be another's:--alas, these are
not your dimensions, these are only the optical angles you subtend; on
the whole, you will never get measured in that way!--

Another time, of date probably very contiguous, I remember hearing
Sterling preach. It was in some new college-chapel in Somerset-house (I
suppose, what is now called King's College); a very quiet small place,
the audience student-looking youths, with a few elder people, perhaps
mostly friends of the preacher's. The discourse, delivered with a
grave sonorous composure, and far surpassing in talent the usual run of
sermons, had withal an air of human veracity as I still recollect, and
bespoke dignity and piety of mind: but gave me the impression rather
of artistic excellence than of unction or inspiration in that kind.
Sterling returned with us to Chelsea that day;--and in the afternoon we
went on the Thames Putney-ward together, we two with my Wife; under
the sunny skies, on the quiet water, and with copious cheery talk, the
remembrance of which is still present enough to me.

This was properly my only specimen of Sterling's preaching. Another
time, late in the same autumn, I did indeed attend him one evening to
some Church in the City,--a big Church behind Cheapside, "built by Wren"
as he carefully informed me;--but there, in my wearied mood, the chief
subject of reflection was the almost total vacancy of the place, and how
an eloquent soul was preaching to mere lamps and prayer-books; and of
the sermon I retain no image. It came up in the way of banter, if he
ever urged the duty of "Church extension," which already he very seldom
did and at length never, what a specimen we once had of bright lamps,
gilt prayer-books, baize-lined pews, Wren-built architecture; and how,
in almost all directions, you might have fired a musket through the
church, and hit no Christian life. A terrible outlook indeed for the
Apostolic laborer in the brick-and-mortar line!--


In the Autumn of this same 1835, he removed permanently to London,
whither all summer he had been evidently tending; took a house in
Bayswater, an airy suburb, half town, half country, near his Father's,
and within fair distance of his other friends and objects; and decided
to await there what the ultimate developments of his course might be.
His house was in Orme Square, close by the corner of that little place
(which has only _three_ sides of houses); its windows looking to the
east: the Number was, and I believe still is, No. 5. A sufficiently
commodious, by no means sumptuous, small mansion; where, with the means
sure to him, he could calculate on finding adequate shelter for his
family, his books and himself, and live in a decent manner, in no terror
of debt, for one thing. His income, I suppose, was not large; but he
lived generally a safe distance within it; and showed himself always as
a man bountiful in money matters, and taking no thought that way.

His study-room in this house was perhaps mainly the drawing-room;
looking out safe, over the little dingy grassplot in front, and the
quiet little row of houses opposite, with the huge dust-whirl of
Oxford Street and London far enough ahead of you as background,--as
back-curtain, blotting out only _half_ your blue hemisphere with dust
and smoke. On the right, you had the continuous growl of the Uxbridge
Road and its wheels, coming as lullaby not interruption. Leftward and
rearward, after some thin belt of houses, lay mere country; bright
sweeping green expanses, crowned by pleasant Hampstead, pleasant Harrow,
with their rustic steeples rising against the sky. Here on winter
evenings, the bustle of removal being all well ended, and family and
books got planted in their new places, friends could find Sterling, as
they often did, who was delighted to be found by them, and would give
and take, vividly as few others, an hour's good talk at any time.

His outlooks, it must be admitted, were sufficiently vague and
overshadowed; neither the past nor the future of a too joyful kind.
Public life, in any professional form, is quite forbidden; to work
with his fellows anywhere appears to be forbidden: nor can the humblest
solitary endeavor to work worthily as yet find an arena. How unfold
one's little bit of talent; and live, and not lie sleeping, while it
is called To-day? As Radical, as Reforming Politician in any public or
private form,--not only has this, in Sterling's case, received tragical
sentence and execution; but the opposite extreme, the Church whither he
had fled, likewise proves abortive: the Church also is not the haven for
him at all. What is to be done? Something must be done, and soon,--under
penalties. Whoever has received, on him there is an inexorable behest to
give. "_Fais ton fait_, Do thy little stroke of work:" this is Nature's
voice, and the sum of all the commandments, to each man!

A shepherd of the people, some small Agamemnon after his sort, doing
what little sovereignty and guidance he can in his day and generation:
such every gifted soul longs, and should long, to be. But how, in any
measure, is the small kingdom necessary for Sterling to be attained? Not
through newspapers and parliaments, not by rubrics and reading-desks:
none of the sceptres offered in the world's market-place, nor none of
the crosiers there, it seems, can be the shepherd's-crook for this man.
A most cheerful, hoping man; and full of swift faculty, though much
lamed,--considerably bewildered too; and tending rather towards the
wastes and solitary places for a home; the paved world not being
friendly to him hitherto! The paved world, in fact, both on its
practical and spiritual side, slams to its doors against him; indicates
that he cannot enter, and even must not,--that it will prove a
choke-vault, deadly to soul and to body, if he enter. Sceptre, crosier,
sheep-crook is none there for him.

There remains one other implement, the resource of all Adam's posterity
that are otherwise foiled,--the Pen. It was evident from this point that
Sterling, however otherwise beaten about, and set fluctuating, would
gravitate steadily with all his real weight towards Literature. That he
would gradually try with consciousness to get into Literature; and, on
the whole, never quit Literature, which was now all the world for him.
Such is accordingly the sum of his history henceforth: such small sum,
so terribly obstructed and diminished by circumstances, is all we have
realized from him.


Sterling had by no means as yet consciously quitted the clerical
profession, far less the Church as a creed. We have seen, he
occasionally officiated still in these months, when a friend requested
or an opportunity invited. Nay it turned out afterwards, he had, unknown
even to his own family, during a good many weeks in the coldest period
of next spring, when it was really dangerous for his health and did
prove hurtful to it,--been constantly performing the morning service
in some Chapel in Bayswater for a young clerical neighbor, a slight
acquaintance of his, who was sickly at the time. So far as I know, this
of the Bayswater Chapel in the spring of 1836, a feat severely rebuked
by his Doctor withal, was his last actual service as a churchman. But
the conscious life ecclesiastical still hung visibly about his inner
unconscious and real life, for years to come; and not till by slow
degrees he had unwinded from him the wrappages of it, could he become
clear about himself, and so much as try heartily what his now sole
course was. Alas, and he had to live all the rest of his days, as in
continual flight for his very existence; "ducking under like a poor
unfledged partridge-bird," as one described it, "before the mower;
darting continually from nook to nook, and there crouching, to escape
the scythe of Death." For Literature Proper there was but little left
in such a life. Only the smallest broken fractions of his last and
heaviest-laden years can poor Sterling be said to have completely lived.
His purpose had risen before him slowly in noble clearness; clear at
last,--and even then the inevitable hour was at hand.

In those first London months, as always afterwards while it remained
physically possible, I saw much of him; loved him, as was natural,
more and more; found in him, many ways, a beautiful acquisition to my
existence here. He was full of bright speech and argument; radiant with
arrowy vitalities, vivacities and ingenuities. Less than any man he gave
you the idea of ill-health. Hopeful, sanguine; nay he did not even seem
to need definite hope, or much to form any; projecting himself in aerial
pulses like an aurora borealis, like a summer dawn, and filling all the
world with present brightness for himself and others. Ill-health? Nay
you found at last, it was the very excess of _life_ in him that brought
on disease. This restless play of being, fit to conquer the world, could
it have been held and guided, could not be held. It had worn _holes_ in
the outer case of it, and there found vent for itself,--there, since not
otherwise.

In our many promenades and colloquies, which were of the freest, most
copious and pleasant nature, religion often formed a topic, and perhaps
towards the beginning of our intercourse was the prevailing topic.
Sterling seemed much engrossed in matters theological, and led the
conversation towards such; talked often about Church, Christianity
Anglican and other, how essential the belief in it to man; then, on
the other side, about Pantheism and such like;--all in the Coleridge
dialect, and with eloquence and volubility to all lengths. I remember
his insisting often and with emphasis on what he called a "personal
God," and other high topics, of which it was not always pleasant to give
account in the argumentative form, in a loud hurried voice, walking and
arguing through the fields or streets. Though of warm quick feelings,
very positive in his opinions, and vehemently eager to convince and
conquer in such discussions, I seldom or never saw the least anger in
him against me or any friend. When the blows of contradiction came too
thick, he could with consummate dexterity whisk aside out of their way;
prick into his adversary on some new quarter; or gracefully flourishing
his weapon, end the duel in some handsome manner. One angry glance I
remember in him, and it was but a glance, and gone in a moment. "Flat
Pantheism!" urged he once (which he would often enough do about this
time), as if triumphantly, of something or other, in the fire of a
debate, in my hearing: "It is mere Pantheism, that!"--"And suppose it
were Pot-theism?" cried the other: "If the thing is true!"--Sterling did
look hurt at such flippant heterodoxy, for a moment. The soul of his own
creed, in those days, was far other than this indifference to Pot or Pan
in such departments of inquiry.

To me his sentiments for most part were lovable and admirable, though in
the logical outcome there was everywhere room for opposition. I admired
the temper, the longing towards antique heroism, in this young man of
the nineteenth century; but saw not how, except in some German-English
empire of the air, he was ever to realize it on those terms. In fact,
it became clear to me more and more that here was nobleness of heart
striving towards all nobleness; here was ardent recognition of the worth
of Christianity, for one thing; but no belief in it at all, in my sense
of the word belief,--no belief but one definable as mere theoretic
moonshine, which would never stand the wind and weather of fact. Nay it
struck me farther that Sterling's was not intrinsically, nor had ever
been in the highest or chief degree, a devotional mind. Of course all
excellence in man, and worship as the supreme excellence, was part
of the inheritance of this gifted man: but if called to define him,
I should say, Artist not Saint was the real bent of his being. He had
endless admiration, but intrinsically rather a deficiency of reverence
in comparison. Fear, with its corollaries, on the religious side, he
appeared to have none, nor ever to have had any.

In short, it was a strange enough symptom to me of the bewildered
condition of the world, to behold a man of this temper, and of this
veracity and nobleness, self-consecrated here, by free volition and
deliberate selection, to be a Christian Priest; and zealously struggling
to fancy himself such in very truth. Undoubtedly a singular present
fact;--from which, as from their point of intersection, great
perplexities and aberrations in the past, and considerable confusions in
the future might be seen ominously radiating. Happily our friend, as I
said, needed little hope. To-day with its activities was always bright
and rich to him. His unmanageable, dislocated, devastated world,
spiritual or economical, lay all illuminated in living sunshine, making
it almost beautiful to his eyes, and gave him no hypochondria. A richer
soul, in the way of natural outfit for felicity, for joyful activity in
this world, so far as his strength would go, was nowhere to be met with.


The Letters which Mr. Hare has printed, Letters addressed, I imagine,
mostly to himself, in this and the following year or two, give record
of abundant changeful plannings and laborings, on the part of Sterling;
still chiefly in the theological department. Translation from Tholuck,
from Schleiermacher; treatise on this thing, then on that, are on the
anvil: it is a life of abstruse vague speculations, singularly cheerful
and hopeful withal, about Will, Morals, Jonathan Edwards, Jewhood,
Manhood, and of Books to be written on these topics. Part of which
adventurous vague plans, as the Translation from Tholuck, he actually
performed; other greater part, merging always into wider undertakings,
remained plan merely. I remember he talked often about Tholuck,
Schleiermacher, and others of that stamp; and looked disappointed,
though full of good nature, at my obstinate indifference to them and
their affairs.

His knowledge of German Literature, very slight at this time,
limited itself altogether to writers on Church matters,--Evidences,
Counter-Evidences, Theologies and Rumors of Theologies; by the Tholucks,
Schleiermachers, Neanders, and I know not whom. Of the true sovereign
souls of that Literature, the Goethes, Richters, Schillers, Lessings,
he had as good as no knowledge; and of Goethe in particular an obstinate
misconception, with proper abhorrence appended,--which did not abate for
several years, nor quite abolish itself till a very late period. Till,
in a word, he got Goethe's works fairly read and studied for himself!
This was often enough the course with Sterling in such cases. He had a
most swift glance of recognition for the worthy and for the unworthy;
and was prone, in his ardent decisive way, to put much faith in it.
"Such a one is a worthless idol; not excellent, only sham-excellent:"
here, on this negative side especially, you often had to admire how
right he was;--often, but not quite always. And he would maintain, with
endless ingenuity, confidence and persistence, his fallacious spectrum
to be a real image. However, it was sure to come all right in the end.
Whatever real excellence he might misknow, you had but to let it stand
before him, soliciting new examination from him: none surer than he to
recognize it at last, and to pay it all his dues, with the arrears
and interest on them. Goethe, who figures as some absurd high-stalking
hollow play-actor, or empty ornamental clock-case of an "Artist"
so-called, in the Tale of the _Onyx Ring_, was in the throne of
Sterling's intellectual world before all was done; and the theory
of "Goethe's want of feeling," want of &c. &c. appeared to him also
abundantly contemptible and forgettable.

Sterling's days, during this time as always, were full of occupation,
cheerfully interesting to himself and others; though, the wrecks of
theology so encumbering him, little fruit on the positive side could
come of these labors. On the negative side they were productive; and
there also, so much of encumbrance requiring removal, before fruit could
grow, there was plenty of labor needed. He looked happy as well as
busy; roamed extensively among his friends, and loved to have them about
him,--chiefly old Cambridge comrades now settling into occupations in
the world;--and was felt by all friends, by myself as by few, to be a
welcome illumination in the dim whirl of things. A man of altogether
social and human ways; his address everywhere pleasant and enlivening.
A certain smile of thin but genuine laughter, we might say, hung
gracefully over all he said and did;--expressing gracefully, according
to the model of this epoch, the stoical pococurantism which is required
of the cultivated Englishman. Such laughter in him was not deep, but
neither was it false (as lamentably happens often); and the cheerfulness
it went to symbolize was hearty and beautiful,--visible in the silent
unsymbolized state in a still gracefuler fashion.

Of wit, so far as rapid lively intellect produces wit, he had plenty,
and did not abuse his endowment that way, being always fundamentally
serious in the purport of his speech: of what we call humor, he had
some, though little; nay of real sense for the ludicrous, in any form,
he had not much for a man of his vivacity; and you remarked that his
laugh was limited in compass, and of a clear but not rich quality. To
the like effect shone something, a kind of childlike half-embarrassed
shimmer of expression, on his fine vivid countenance; curiously mingling
with its ardors and audacities. A beautiful childlike soul! He was
naturally a favorite in conversation, especially with all who had
any funds for conversing: frank and direct, yet polite and delicate
withal,--though at times too he could crackle with his dexterous
petulancies, making the air all like needles round you; and there was
no end to his logic when you excited it; no end, unless in some form of
silence on your part. Elderly men of reputation I have sometimes known
offended by him: for he took a frank way in the matter of talk; spoke
freely out of him, freely listening to what others spoke, with a kind of
"hail fellow well met" feeling; and carelessly measured a men much less
by his reputed account in the bank of wit, or in any other bank, than by
what the man had to show for himself in the shape of real spiritual cash
on the occasion. But withal there was ever a fine element of natural
courtesy in Sterling; his deliberate demeanor to acknowledged superiors
was fine and graceful; his apologies and the like, when in a fit of
repentance he felt commanded to apologize, were full of naivete, and
very pretty and ingenuous.

His circle of friends was wide enough; chiefly men of his own standing,
old College friends many of them; some of whom have now become
universally known. Among whom the most important to him was Frederic
Maurice, who had not long before removed to the Chaplaincy of Guy's
Hospital here, and was still, as he had long been, his intimate and
counsellor. Their views and articulate opinions, I suppose, were now
fast beginning to diverge; and these went on diverging far enough: but
in their kindly union, in their perfect trustful familiarity, precious
to both parties, there never was the least break, but a steady, equable
and duly increasing current to the end. One of Sterling's commonest
expeditions, in this time, was a sally to the other side of London
Bridge: "Going to Guy's to-day." Maurice, in a year or two, became
Sterling's brother-in-law; wedded Mrs. Sterling's younger sister,--a
gentle excellent female soul; by whom the relation was, in many ways,
strengthened and beautified for Sterling and all friends of the parties.
With the Literary notabilities I think he had no acquaintance; his
thoughts indeed still tended rather towards a certain class of the
Clerical; but neither had he much to do with these; for he was at
no time the least of a tuft-hunter, but rather had a marked natural
indifference to _tufts_.

The Rev. Mr. Dunn, a venerable and amiable Irish gentleman,
"distinguished," we were told, "by having refused a bishopric:" and
who was now living, in an opulent enough retirement, amid his books
and philosophies and friends, in London,--is memorable to me among this
clerical class: one of the mildest, beautifulest old men I have ever
seen,--"like Fenelon," Sterling said: his very face, with its kind true
smile, with its look of suffering cheerfulness and pious wisdom, was a
sort of benediction. It is of him that Sterling writes, in the Extract
which Mr. Hare, modestly reducing the name to an initial "Mr. D.," has
given us: [13] "Mr. Dunn, for instance; the defect of whose Theology,
compounded as it is of the doctrine of the Greek Fathers, of the Mystics
and of Ethical Philosophers, consists,--if I may hint a fault in one
whose holiness, meekness and fervor would have made him the beloved
disciple of him whom Jesus loved,--in an insufficient apprehension of
the reality and depth of Sin." A characteristic "defect" of this fine
gentle soul. On Mr. Dunn's death, which occurred two or three
years later, Stirling gave, in some veiled yet transparent form, in
_Blackwood's Magazine_, an affectionate and eloquent notice of him;
which, stript of the veil, was excerpted into the Newspapers also. [14]

Of Coleridge there was little said. Coleridge was now dead, not long
since; nor was his name henceforth much heard in Sterling's circle;
though on occasion, for a year or two to come, he would still assert his
transcendent admiration, especially if Maurice were by to help. But he
was getting into German, into various inquiries and sources of knowledge
new to him, and his admirations and notions on many things were silently
and rapidly modifying themselves.

So, amid interesting human realities, and wide cloud-canopies of
uncertain speculation, which also had their interests and their
rainbow-colors to him, and could not fail in his life just now, did
Sterling pass his year and half at Bayswater. Such vaporous speculations
were inevitable for him at present; but it was to be hoped they would
subside by and by, and leave the sky clear. All this was but the
preliminary to whatever work might lie in him:--and, alas, much other
interruption lay between him and that.


CHAPTER V. TO MADEIRA.

Sterling's dubieties as to continuing at Bordeaux were quickly decided.
The cholera in France, the cholera in Nice, the-- In fact his moorings
were now loose; and having been fairly at sea, he never could anchor
himself here again. Very shortly after this Letter, he left Belsito
again (for good, as it proved); and returned to England with his
household, there to consider what should next be done.

On my return from Scotland, that year, perhaps late in September, I
remember finding him lodged straitly but cheerfully, and in happy humor,
in a little cottage on Blackheath; whither his Father one day persuaded
me to drive out with him for dinner. Our welcome, I can still recollect,
was conspicuously cordial; the place of dinner a kind of upper room,
half garret and full of books, which seemed to be John's place of study.
From a shelf, I remember also, the good soul took down a book modestly
enough bound in three volumes, lettered on the back Carlyle's _French
Revolution_, which had been published lately; this he with friendly
banter bade me look at as a first symptom, small but significant, that
the book was not to die all at once. "One copy of it at least might hope
to last the date of sheep-leather," I admitted,--and in my then mood
the little fact was welcome. Our dinner, frank and happy on the part
of Sterling, was peppered with abundant jolly satire from his Father:
before tea, I took myself away; towards Woolwich, I remember, where
probably there was another call to make, and passage homeward by
steamer: Sterling strode along with me a good bit of road in the bright
sunny evening, full of lively friendly talk, and altogether kind and
amiable; and beautifully sympathetic with the loads he thought he saw on
_me_, forgetful of his own. We shook hands on the road near the foot of
Shooter's Hill:--at which point dim oblivious clouds rush down; and of
small or great I remember nothing more in my history or his for some
time.

Besides running much about among friends, and holding counsels for the
management of the coming winter, Sterling was now considerably occupied
with Literature again; and indeed may be said to have already
definitely taken it up as the one practical pursuit left for him. Some
correspondence with _Blackwood's Magazine_ was opening itself, under
promising omens: now, and more and more henceforth, he began to look
on Literature as his real employment, after all; and was prosecuting it
with his accustomed loyalty and ardor. And he continued ever afterwards,
in spite of such fitful circumstances and uncertain outward fluctuations
as his were sure of being, to prosecute it steadily with all the
strength he had.

One evening about this time, he came down to us, to Chelsea, most likely
by appointment and with stipulation for privacy; and read, for our
opinion, his Poem of the _Sexton's Daughter_, which we now first
heard of. The judgment in this house was friendly, but not the most
encouraging. We found the piece monotonous, cast in the mould of
Wordsworth, deficient in real human fervor or depth of melody, dallying
on the borders of the infantile and "goody-good;"--in fact, involved
still in the shadows of the surplice, and inculcating (on hearsay
mainly) a weak morality, which he would one day find not to be moral at
all, but in good part maudlin-hypocritical and immoral. As indeed was
to be said still of most of his performances, especially the poetical;
a sickly _shadow_ of the parish-church still hanging over them, which
he could by no means recognize for sickly. _Imprimatur_ nevertheless
was the concluding word,--with these grave abatements, and rhadamanthine
admonitions. To all which Sterling listened seriously and in the mildest
humor. His reading, it might have been added, had much hurt the effect
of the piece: a dreary pulpit or even conventicle manner; that flattest
moaning hoo-hoo of predetermined pathos, with a kind of rocking canter
introduced by way of intonation, each stanza the exact fellow Of the
other, and the dull swing of the rocking-horse duly in each;--no reading
could be more unfavorable to Sterling's poetry than his own. Such a mode
of reading, and indeed generally in a man of such vivacity the total
absence of all gifts for play-acting or artistic mimicry in any kind,
was a noticeable point.


After much consultation, it was settled at last that Sterling should go
to Madeira for the winter. One gray dull autumn afternoon, towards
the middle of October, I remember walking with him to the eastern Dock
region, to see his ship, and how the final preparations in his own
little cabin were proceeding there. A dingy little ship, the deck
crowded with packages, and bustling sailors within eight-and-forty hours
of lifting anchor; a dingy chill smoky day, as I have said withal, and
a chaotic element and outlook, enough to make a friend's heart sad. I
admired the cheerful careless humor and brisk activity of Sterling, who
took the matter all on the sunny side, as he was wont in such cases. We
came home together in manifold talk: he accepted with the due smile
my last contribution to his sea-equipment, a sixpenny box of German
lucifers purchased on the sudden in St. James's Street, fit to be
offered with laughter or with tears or with both; he was to leave for
Portsmouth almost immediately, and there go on board. Our next news
was of his safe arrival in the temperate Isle. Mrs. Sterling and the
children were left at Knightsbridge; to pass this winter with his Father
and Mother.


At Madeira Sterling did well: improved in health; was busy with much
Literature; and fell in with society which he could reckon pleasant.
He was much delighted with the scenery of the place; found the climate
wholesome to him in a marked degree; and, with good news from home,
and kindly interests here abroad, passed no disagreeable winter in that
exile. There was talking, there was writing, there was hope of better
health; he rode almost daily, in cheerful busy humor, along those
fringed shore-roads:--beautiful leafy roads and horse-paths; with here
and there a wild cataract and bridge to look at; and always with the
soft sky overhead, the dead volcanic mountain on one hand, and broad
illimitable sea spread out on the other. Here are two Letters which give
reasonably good account of him:--

             "_To Thomas Carlyle, Esq., Chelsea, London_.
                               "FUNCHAL, MADEIRA, 16th November, 1837.

"MY DEAR CARLYLE,--I have been writing a good many letters all in a
batch, to go by the same opportunity; and I am thoroughly weary of
writing the same things over and over again to different people. My
letter to you therefore, I fear, must have much of the character of
remainder-biscuit. But you will receive it as a proof that I do not wish
you to forget me, though it may be useless for any other purpose.

"I reached this on the 2d, after a tolerably prosperous voyage, deformed
by some days of sea-sickness, but otherwise not to be complained of. I
liked my twenty fellow-passengers far better than I expected;--three or
four of them I like much, and continue to see frequently. The Island
too is better than I expected: so that my Barataria at least does not
disappoint me. The bold rough mountains, with mist about their summits,
verdure below, and a bright sun over all, please me much; and I
ride daily on the steep and narrow paved roads, which no wheels ever
journeyed on. The Town is clean, and there its merits end: but I am
comfortably lodged; with a large and pleasant sitting-room to myself. I
have met with much kindness; and see all the society I want,--though it
is not quite equal to that of London, even excluding Chelsea.

"I have got about me what Books I brought out; and have read a little,
and done some writing for _Blackwood_,--all, I have the pleasure to
inform you, prose, nay extremely prose. I shall now be more at leisure;
and hope to get more steadily to work; though I do not know what I shall
begin upon. As to reading, I have been looking at _Goethe_, especially
the _Life_,--much as a shying horse looks at a post. In truth, I am
afraid of him. I enjoy and admire him so much, and feel I could so
easily be tempted to go along with him. And yet I have a deeply rooted
and old persuasion that he was the most splendid of anachronisms. A
thoroughly, nay intensely Pagan Life, in an age when it is men's duty
to be Christian. I therefore never take him up without a kind of inward
check, as if I were trying some forbidden spell; while, on the other
hand, there is so infinitely much to be learnt from him, and it is
so needful to understand the world we live in, and our own age, and
especially its greatest minds, that I cannot bring myself to burn my
books as the converted Magicians did, or sink them as did Prospero.
There must, as I think, have been some prodigious defect in his mind, to
let him hold such views as his about women and some other things; and
in another respect, I find so much coldness and hollowness as to the
highest truths, and feel so strongly that the Heaven he looks up to is
but a vault of ice,--that these two indications, leading to the same
conclusion, go far to convince me he was a profoundly immoral and
irreligious spirit, with as rare faculties of intelligence as ever
belonged to any one. All this may be mere _goody_ weakness and twaddle,
on my part: but it is a persuasion that I cannot escape from; though I
should feel the doing so to be a deliverance from a most painful load.
If you could help me, I heartily wish you would. I never take him up
without high admiration, or lay him down without real sorrow for what he
chose to be.

"I have been reading nothing else that you would much care for.
Southey's _Amadis_ has amused me; and Lyell's _Geology_ interested me.
The latter gives one the same sort of bewildering view of the abysmal
extent of Time that Astronomy does of Space. I do not think I shall take
your advice as to learning Portuguese. It is said to be very ill spoken
here; and assuredly it is the most direful series of nasal twangs I ever
heard. One gets on quite well with English.

"The people here are, I believe, in a very low condition; but they do
not appear miserable. I am told that the influence of the priests makes
the peasantry all Miguelites; but it is said that nobody wants any more
revolutions. There is no appearance of riot or crime; and they are all
extremely civil. I was much interested by learning that Columbus once
lived here, before he found America and fame. I have been to see a
deserted _quinta_ (country-house), where there is a great deal of
curious old sculpture, in relief, upon the masonry; many of the figures,
which are nearly as large as life, representing soldiers clad and armed
much as I should suppose those of Cortez were. There are no buildings
about the Town, of the smallest pretensions to beauty or charm of any
kind. On the whole, if Madeira were one's world, life would certainly
rather tend to stagnate; but as a temporary refuge, a niche in an old
ruin where one is sheltered from the shower, it has great merit. I am
more comfortable and contented than I expected to be, so far from home
and from everybody I am closely connected with: but, of course, it is at
best a tolerable exile.

"Tell Mrs. Carlyle that I have written, since I have been here, and
am going to send to _Blackwood_, a humble imitation of her _Watch and
Canary-Bird_, entitled _The Suit of Armor and the Skeleton_. [15] I am
conscious that I am far from having reached the depth and fulness of
despair and mockery which distinguish the original! But in truth there
is a lightness of tone about her style, which I hold to be invaluable:
where she makes hairstrokes, I make blotches. I have a vehement
suspicion that my Dialogue is an entire failure; but I cannot be plagued
with it any longer. Tell her I will not send her messages, but will
write to her soon.--Meanwhile I am affectionately hers and yours,

                                                      "JOHN STERLING."

The next is to his Brother-in-law; and in a still hopefuler tone:--

                    "_To Charles Barton, Esq._ [16]
                                     FUNCHAL, MADEIRA, 3d March, 1838.

"MY DEAR CHARLES,--I have often been thinking of you and your
whereabouts in Germany, and wishing I knew more about you; and at last
it occurred to me that you might perhaps have the same wish about me,
and that therefore I should do well to write to you.

"I have been here exactly four months, having arrived on the 2d of
November,--my wedding-day; and though you perhaps may not think it a
compliment to Susan, I have seldom passed four months more cheerfully
and agreeably. I have of course felt my absence from my family, and
missed the society of my friends; for there is not a person here whom
I knew before I left England. But, on the whole, I have been in good
health, and actively employed. I have a good many agreeable and valuable
acquaintances, one or two of whom I hope I may hereafter reckon as
friends. The weather has generally been fine, and never cold; and the
scenery of the Island is of a beauty which you unhappy Northern people
can have little conception of.

"It consists of a great mass of volcanic mountains, covered in their
lower parts with cottages, vines and patches of vegetables. When you
pass through, or over the central ridge, and get towards the North,
there are woods of trees, of the laurel kind, covering the wild steep
slopes, and forming some of the strangest and most beautiful prospects I
have ever seen. Towards the interior, the forms of the hills become
more abrupt, and loftier; and give the notion of very recent volcanic
disturbances, though in fact there has been nothing of the kind since
the discovery of the Island by Europeans. Among these mountains, the
dark deep precipices, and narrow ravines with small streams at the
bottom; the basaltic knobs and ridges on the summits; and the perpetual
play of mist and cloud around them, under this bright sun and clear
sky,--form landscapes which you would thoroughly enjoy, and which I
much wish I could give you a notion of. The Town is on the south, and
of course the sheltered side of the Island; perfectly protected from the
North and East; although we have seen sometimes patches of bright snow
on the dark peaks in the distance. It is a neat cheerful place; all
built of gray stone, but having many of the houses colored white or red.
There is not a really handsome building in it, but there is a general
aspect of comfort and solidity. The shops are very poor. The English do
not mix at all with the Portuguese. The Bay is a very bad anchorage; but
is wide, bright and cheerful; and there are some picturesque points--one
a small black island--scattered about it.

"I lived till a fortnight ago in lodgings, having two rooms, one a
very good one; and paying for everything fifty-six dollars a month, the
dollar being four shillings and twopence. This you will see is dear; but
I could make no better arrangement, for there is an unusual affluence
of strangers this year. I have now come to live with a friend, a Dr.
Calvert, in a small house of our own, where I am much more comfortable,
and live greatly cheaper. He is a friend of Mrs. Percival's; about my
age, an Oriel man, and a very superior person. I think the chances are,
we shall go home together.... I cannot tell you of all the other people
I have become familiar with; and shall only mention in addition Bingham
Baring, eldest son of Lord Ashburton, who was here for some weeks on
account of a dying brother, and whom I saw a great deal of. He is a
pleasant, very good-natured and rather clever man; Conservative Member
for North Staffordshire.

"During the first two months I was here, I rode a great deal about the
Island, having a horse regularly; and was much in agreeable company,
seeing a great deal of beautiful scenery. Since then, the weather has
been much more unsettled, though not cold; and I have gone about less,
as I cannot risk the being wet. But I have spent my time pleasantly,
reading and writing. I have written a good many things for _Blackwood_;
one of which, the _Armor and the Skeleton_, I see is printed in the
February Number. I have just sent them a long Tale, called the _Onyx
Ring_, which cost me a good deal of trouble; and the extravagance
of which, I think, would amuse you; but its length may prevent its
appearance in _Blackwood_. If so, I think I should make a volume of it.
I have also written some poems, and shall probably publish the _Sexton's
Daughter_ when I return.

"My health goes on most favorably. I have had no attack of the chest
this spring; which has not happened to me since the spring before we
went to Bonn; and I am told, if I take care, I may roll along for years.
But I have little hope of being allowed to spend the four first months
of any year in England; and the question will be, Whether to go at
once to Italy, by way of Germany and Switzerland, with my family, or to
settle with them in England, perhaps at Hastings, and go abroad myself
when it may be necessary. I cannot decide till I return; but I think the
latter the most probable.

"To my dear Charles I do not like to use the ordinary forms of ending
a letter, for they are very inadequate to express my sense of your long
and most unvarying kindness; but be assured no one living could say with
more sincerity that he is ever affectionately yours,

                                                      "JOHN STERLING."

Other Letters give occasionally views of the shadier side of things:
dark broken weather, in the sky and in the mind; ugly clouds covering
one's poor fitful transitory prospect, for a time, as they might well do
in Sterling's case. Meanwhile we perceive his literary business is fast
developing itself; amid all his confusions, he is never idle long.
Some of his best Pieces--the Onyx _Ring_, for one, as we perceive--were
written here this winter. Out of the turbid whirlpool of the days he
strives assiduously to snatch what he can.

Sterling's communications with _Blackwood's Magazine_ had now issued
in some open sanction of him by Professor Wilson, the distinguished
presiding spirit of that Periodical; a fact naturally of high importance
to him under the literary point of view. For Wilson, with his clear
flashing eye and great genial heart, had at once recognized Sterling;
and lavished stormily, in his wild generous way, torrents of praise
on him in the editorial comments: which undoubtedly was one of the
gratefulest literary baptisms, by fire or by water, that could befall a
soul like Sterling's. He bore it very gently, being indeed past the
age to have his head turned by anybody's praises: nor do I think the
exaggeration that was in these eulogies did him any ill whatever; while
surely their generous encouragement did him much good, in his solitary
struggle towards new activity under such impediments as his. _Laudari a
laudato_; to be called noble by one whom you and the world recognize as
noble: this great satisfaction, never perhaps in such a degree before
or after had now been vouchsafed to Sterling; and was, as I compute, an
important fact for him. He proceeded on his pilgrimage with new energy,
and felt more and more as if authentically consecrated to the same.

The _Onyx Ring_, a curious Tale, with wild improbable basis, but with
a noble glow of coloring and with other high merits in it, a Tale still
worth reading, in which, among the imaginary characters, various friends
of Sterling's are shadowed forth, not always in the truest manner, came
out in _Blackwood_ in the winter of this year. Surely a very high talent
for painting, both of scenery and persons, is visible in this Fiction;
the promise of a Novel such as we have few. But there wants maturing,
wants purifying of clear from unclear;--properly there want patience
and steady depth. The basis, as we said, is wild and loose; and in the
details, lucent often with fine color, and dipt in beautiful sunshine,
there are several things mis_seen_, untrue, which is the worst species
of mispainting. Witness, as Sterling himself would have by and by
admitted, the "empty clockcase" (so we called it) which he has labelled
Goethe,--which puts all other untruths in the Piece to silence.


One of the great alleviations of his exile at Madeira he has already
celebrated to us: the pleasant circle of society he fell into there.
Great luck, thinks Sterling in this voyage; as indeed there was: but
he himself, moreover, was readier than most men to fall into pleasant
circles everywhere, being singularly prompt to make the most of any
circle. Some of his Madeira acquaintanceships were really good; and one
of them, if not more, ripened into comradeship and friendship for him.
He says, as we saw, "The chances are, Calvert and I will come home
together."

Among the English in pursuit of health, or in flight from fatal disease,
that winter, was this Dr. Calvert; an excellent ingenious cheery
Cumberland gentleman, about Sterling's age, and in a deeper stage of
ailment, this not being his first visit to Madeira: he, warmly joining
himself to Sterling, as we have seen, was warmly received by him; so
that there soon grew a close and free intimacy between them; which for
the next three years, till poor Calvert ended his course, was a leading
element in the history of both. Companionship in incurable malady,
a touching bond of union, was by no means purely or chiefly a
companionship in misery in their case. The sunniest inextinguishable
cheerfulness shone, through all manner of clouds, in both. Calvert had
been travelling physician in some family of rank, who had rewarded him
with a pension, shielding his own ill-health from one sad evil. Being
hopelessly gone in pulmonary disorder, he now moved about among friendly
climates and places, seeking what alleviation there might be; often
spending his summers in the house of a sister in the environs of London;
an insatiable rider on his little brown pony; always, wherever you might
meet him, one of the cheeriest of men. He had plenty of speculation too,
clear glances of all kinds into religious, social, moral concerns; and
pleasantly incited Sterling's outpourings on such subjects. He could
report of fashionable persons and manners, in a fine human Cumberland
manner; loved art, a great collector of drawings; he had endless help
and ingenuity; and was in short every way a very human, lovable, good
and nimble man,--the laughing blue eyes of him, the clear cheery soul
of him, still redolent of the fresh Northern breezes and transparent
Mountain streams. With this Calvert, Sterling formed a natural intimacy;
and they were to each other a great possession, mutually enlivening many
a dark day during the next three years. They did come home together
this spring; and subsequently made several of these health-journeys in
partnership.



CHAPTER VI. LITERATURE: THE STERLING CLUB.

In spite of these wanderings, Sterling's course in life, so far as his
poor life could have any course or aim beyond that of screening itself
from swift death, was getting more and more clear to him; and he pursued
it diligently, in the only way permitted him, by hasty snatches, in
the intervals of continual fluctuation, change of place and other
interruption.

Such, once for all, were the conditions appointed him. And it must be
owned he had, with a most kindly temper, adjusted himself to these; nay
you would have said, he loved them; it was almost as if he would have
chosen them as the suitablest. Such an adaptation was there in him
of volition to necessity:--for indeed they both, if well seen into,
proceeded from one source. Sterling's bodily disease was the expression,
under physical conditions, of the too vehement life which, under the
moral, the intellectual and other aspects, incessantly struggled within
him. Too vehement;--which would have required a frame of oak and iron
to contain it: in a thin though most wiry body of flesh and bone, it
incessantly "wore holes," and so found outlet for itself. He could take
no rest, he had never learned that art; he was, as we often reproached
him, fatally incapable of sitting still. Rapidity, as of pulsing
auroras, as of dancing lightnings: rapidity in all forms characterized
him. This, which was his bane, in many senses, being the real origin of
his disorder, and of such continual necessity to move and change,--was
also his antidote, so far as antidote there might be; enabling him to
love change, and to snatch, as few others could have done, from the
waste chaotic years, all tumbled into ruin by incessant change, what
hours and minutes of available turned up. He had an incredible facility
of labor. He flashed with most piercing glance into a subject; gathered
it up into organic utterability, with truly wonderful despatch,
considering the success and truth attained; and threw it on paper with a
swift felicity, ingenuity, brilliancy and general excellence, of which,
under such conditions of swiftness, I have never seen a parallel.
Essentially an _improviser_ genius; as his Father too was, and of
admirable completeness he too, though under a very different form.

If Sterling has done little in Literature, we may ask, What other man
than he, in such circumstances, could have done anything? In virtue of
these rapid faculties, which otherwise cost him so dear, he has built
together, out of those wavering boiling quicksands of his few later
years, a result which may justly surprise us. There is actually some
result in those poor Two Volumes gathered from him, such as they are; he
that reads there will not wholly lose his time, nor rise with a
malison instead of a blessing on the writer. Here actually is a real
seer-glance, of some compass, into the world of our day; blessed glance,
once more, of an eye that is human; truer than one of a thousand,
and beautifully capable of making others see with it. I have known
considerable temporary reputations gained, considerable piles of
temporary guineas, with loud reviewing and the like to match, on a far
less basis than lies in those two volumes. Those also, I expect, will
be held in memory by the world, one way or other, till the world
has extracted all its benefit from them. Graceful, ingenious and
illuminative reading, of their sort, for all manner of inquiring souls.
A little verdant flowery island of poetic intellect, of melodious
human verity; sunlit island founded on the rocks;--which the enormous
circumambient continents of mown reed-grass and floating lumber, with
_their_ mountain-ranges of ejected stable-litter however alpine, cannot
by any means or chance submerge: nay, I expect, they will not even quite
hide it, this modest little island, from the well-discerning; but will
float past it towards the place appointed for them, and leave said
island standing. _Allah kereem_, say the Arabs! And of the English
also some still know that there is a, difference in the material of
mountains!--

As it is this last little result, the amount of his poor and
ever-interrupted literary labor, that henceforth forms the essential
history of Sterling, we need not dwell at too much length on the foreign
journeys, disanchorings, and nomadic vicissitudes of household, which
occupy his few remaining years, and which are only the disastrous and
accidental arena of this. He had now, excluding his early and more
deliberate residence in the West Indies, made two flights abroad, once
with his family, once without, in search of health. He had two more, in
rapid succession, to make, and many more to meditate; and in the whole
from Bayswater to the end, his family made no fewer than five complete
changes of abode, for his sake. But these cannot be accepted as in any
sense epochs in his life: the one last epoch of his life was that of his
internal change towards Literature as his work in the world; and we need
not linger much on these, which are the mere outer accidents of that,
and had no distinguished influence in modifying that.

Friends still hoped the unrest of that brilliant too rapid soul would
abate with years. Nay the doctors sometimes promised, on the physical
side, a like result; prophesying that, at forty-five or some mature age,
the stress of disease might quit the lungs, and direct itself to other
quarters of the system. But no such result was appointed for us; neither
forty-five itself, nor the ameliorations promised then, were ever to
be reached. Four voyages abroad, three of them without his family,
in flight from death; and at home, for a like reason, five complete
shiftings of abode: in such wandering manner, and not otherwise, had
Sterling to continue his pilgrimage till it ended.

Once more I must say, his cheerfulness throughout was wonderful. A
certain grimmer shade, coming gradually over him, might perhaps be
noticed in the concluding years; not impatience properly, yet the
consciousness how much he needed patience; something more caustic in his
tone of wit, more trenchant and indignant occasionally in his tone of
speech: but at no moment was his activity bewildered or abated, nor did
his composure ever give way. No; both his activity and his composure
he bore with him, through all weathers, to the final close; and on the
whole, right manfully he walked his wild stern way towards the goal, and
like a Roman wrapt his mantle round him when he fell.--Let us glance,
with brevity, at what he saw and suffered in his remaining pilgrimings
and chargings; and count up what fractions of spiritual fruit he
realized to us from them.


Calvert and he returned from Madeira in the spring of 1838. Mrs.
Sterling and the family had lived in Knightsbridge with his Father's
people through the winter: they now changed to Blackheath, or ultimately
Hastings, and he with them, coming up to London pretty often; uncertain
what was to be done for next winter. Literature went on briskly here:
_Blackwood_ had from him, besides the _Onyx Ring_ which soon came out
with due honor, assiduous almost monthly contributions in prose and
verse. The series called _Hymns of a Hermit_ was now going on; eloquent
melodies, tainted to me with something of the same disease as the
_Sexton's Daughter_, though perhaps in a less degree, considering
that the strain was in a so much higher pitch. Still better, in clear
eloquent prose, the series of detached thoughts, entitled _Crystals from
a Cavern_; of which the set of fragments, generally a little larger in
compass, called _Thoughts and Images_, and again those called _Sayings
and Essayings_, [17] are properly continuations. Add to which, his friend
John Mill had now charge of a Review, _The London and Westminster_
its name; wherein Sterling's assistance, ardently desired, was freely
afforded, with satisfaction to both parties, in this and the following
years. An Essay on _Montaigne_, with the notes and reminiscences
already spoken of, was Sterling's first contribution here; then one on
_Simonides_: [18] both of the present season.

On these and other businesses, slight or important, he was often running
up to London; and gave us almost the feeling of his being resident among
us. In order to meet the most or a good many of his friends at once
on such occasions, he now furthermore contrived the scheme of a little
Club, where monthly over a frugal dinner some reunion might take place;
that is, where friends of his, and withal such friends of theirs as
suited,--and in fine, where a small select company definable as
persons to whom it was pleasant to talk together,--might have a
little opportunity of talking. The scheme was approved by the persons
concerned: I have a copy of the Original Regulations, probably drawn up
by Sterling, a very solid lucid piece of economics; and the List of the
proposed Members, signed "James Spedding, Secretary," and dated "8th
August, 1838." [19] The Club grew; was at first called the _Anonymous
Club_; then, after some months of success, in compliment to the founder
who had now left us again, the _Sterling Club_;--under which latter
name, it once lately, for a time, owing to the Religious Newspapers,
became rather famous in the world! In which strange circumstances
the name was again altered, to suit weak brethren; and the Club still
subsists, in a sufficiently flourishing though happily once more a
private condition. That is the origin and genesis of poor Sterling's
Club; which, having honestly paid the shot for itself at Will's
Coffee-house or elsewhere, rashly fancied its bits of affairs were quite
settled; and once little thought of getting into Books of History with
them!--


But now, Autumn approaching, Sterling had to quit Clubs, for matters
of sadder consideration. A new removal, what we call "his third
peregrinity," had to be decided on; and it was resolved that Rome should
be the goal of it, the journey to be done in company with Calvert, whom
also the Italian climate might be made to serve instead of Madeira. One
of the liveliest recollections I have, connected with the _Anonymous
Club_, is that of once escorting Sterling, after a certain meeting
there, which I had seen only towards the end, and now remember nothing
of,--except that, on breaking up, he proved to be encumbered with a
carpet-bag, and could not at once find a cab for Knightsbridge. Some
small bantering hereupon, during the instants of embargo. But we carried
his carpet-bag, slinging it on my stick, two or three of us alternately,
through dusty vacant streets, under the gaslights and the stars, towards
the surest cab-stand; still jesting, or pretending to jest, he and we,
not in the mirthfulest manner; and had (I suppose) our own feelings
about the poor Pilgrim, who was to go on the morrow, and had hurried to
meet us in this way, as the last thing before leaving England.



CHAPTER VII. ITALY.

The journey to Italy was undertaken by advice of Sir James Clark,
reckoned the chief authority in pulmonary therapeutics; who prophesied
important improvements from it, and perhaps even the possibility
henceforth of living all the year in some English home. Mrs. Sterling
and the children continued in a house avowedly temporary, a furnished
house at Hastings, through the winter. The two friends had set off
for Belgium, while the due warmth was still in the air. They traversed
Belgium, looking well at pictures and such objects; ascended the Rhine;
rapidly traversed Switzerland and the Alps; issuing upon Italy and
Milan, with immense appetite for pictures, and time still to gratify
themselves in that pursuit, and be deliberate in their approach to Rome.
We will take this free-flowing sketch of their passage over the Alps;
written amid "the rocks of Arona,"--Santo Borromeo's country, and poor
little Mignon's! The "elder Perdonnets" are opulent Lausanne people, to
whose late son Sterling had been very kind in Madeira the year before:--

              "_To Mrs. Sterling, Knightsbridge, London_.
                          "ARONA on the LAGO MAGGIORE, 8th Oct., 1838.

"MY DEAR MOTHER,--I bring down the story of my proceedings to the
present time since the 29th of September. I think it must have been
after that day that I was at a great breakfast at the elder Perdonnets',
with whom I had declined to dine, not choosing to go out at night....
I was taken by my hostess to see several pretty pleasure-grounds and
points of view in the neighborhood; and latterly Calvert was better, and
able to go with us. He was in force again, and our passports were all
settled so as to enable us to start on the morning of the 2d, after
taking leave of our kind entertainer with thanks for her infinite
kindness.

"We reached St. Maurice early that evening; having had the Dent du
Midi close to us for several hours; glittering like the top of a silver
teapot, far up in the sky. Our course lay along the Valley of the Rhone;
which is considered one of the least beautiful parts of Switzerland,
and perhaps for this reason pleased us, as we had not been prepared
to expect much. We saw, before reaching the foot of the Alpine pass at
Brieg, two rather celebrated Waterfalls; the one the Pissevache, which
has no more beauty than any waterfall one hundred or two hundred feet
high must necessarily have: the other, near Tourtemagne, is much more
pleasing, having foliage round it, and being in a secluded dell. If you
buy a Swiss Waterfall, choose this one.

"Our second day took us through Martigny to Sion, celebrated for its
picturesque towers upon detached hills, for its strong Romanism and its
population of _cretins_,--that is, maimed idiots having the _goitre_. It
looked to us a more thriving place than we expected. They are building
a great deal; among other things, a new Bishop's Palace and a new
Nunnery,--to inhabit either of which _ex officio_ I feel myself very
unsuitable. From Sion we came to Brieg; a little village in a nook,
close under an enormous mountain and glacier, where it lies like a
molehill, or something smaller, at the foot of a haystack. Here also we
slept; and the next day our voiturier, who had brought us from Lausanne,
started with us up the Simplon Pass; helped on by two extra horses.

"The beginning of the road was rather cheerful; having a good deal of
green pasturage, and some mountain villages; but it soon becomes dreary
and savage in aspect, and but for our bright sky and warm air, would
have been truly dismal. However, we gained gradually a distinct and
near view of several large glaciers; and reached at last the high
and melancholy valleys of the Upper Alps; where even the pines become
scanty, and no sound is heard but the wheels of one's carriage, except
when there happens to be a storm or an avalanche, neither of which
entertained us. There is, here and there, a small stream of water
pouring from the snow; but this is rather a monotonous accompaniment to
the general desolation than an interruption of it. The road itself is
certainly very good, and impresses one with a strong notion of human
power. But the common descriptions are much exaggerated; and many of
what the Guide-Books call 'galleries' are merely parts of the road
supported by a wall built against the rock, and have nothing like a
roof above them. The 'stupendous bridges,' as they are called, might be
packed, a dozen together, into one arch of London Bridge; and they
are seldom even very striking from the depth below. The roadway is
excellent, and kept in the best order. On the whole, I am very glad
to have travelled the most famous road in Europe, and to have had
delightful weather for doing so, as indeed we have had ever since we
left Lausanne. The Italian descent is greatly more remarkable than the
other side.

"We slept near the top, at the Village of Simplon, in a very fair and
well-warmed inn, close to a mountain stream, which is one of the great
ornaments of this side of the road. We have here passed into a region of
granite, from that of limestone, and what is called gneiss. The valleys
are sharper and closer,--like cracks in a hard and solid mass;--and
there is much more of the startling contrast of light and shade, as
well as more angular boldness of outline; to all which the more abundant
waters add a fresh and vivacious interest. Looking back through one
of these abysmal gorges, one sees two torrents dashing together, the
precipice and ridge on one side, pitch-black with shade; and that on the
other all flaming gold; while behind rises, in a huge cone, one of the
glacier summits of the chain. The stream at one's feet rushes at a leap
some two hundred feet down, and is bordered with pines and beeches,
struggling through a ruined world of clefts and boulders. I never saw
anything so much resembling some of the _Circles_ described by Dante.
From Simplon we made for Duomo d'Ossola; having broken out, as through
the mouth of a mine, into green and fertile valleys full of vines and
chestnuts, and white villages,--in short, into sunshine and Italy.

"At this place we dismissed our Swiss voiturier, and took an Italian
one; who conveyed us to Omegna on the Lake of Orta; a place little
visited by English travellers, but which fully repaid us the trouble of
going there. We were lodged in a simple and even rude Italian inn; where
they cannot speak a word of French; where we occupied a barn-like room,
with a huge chimney fit to lodge a hundred ghosts, whom we expelled by
dint of a hot woodfire. There were two beds, and as it happened good
ones, in this strange old apartment; which was adorned by pictures of
Architecture, and by Heads of Saints, better than many at the Royal
Academy Exhibition, and which one paid nothing for looking at. The
thorough Italian character of the whole scene amused us, much more than
Meurice's at Paris would have done; for we had voluble, commonplace
good-humor, with the aspect and accessories of a den of banditti.

"To-day we have seen the Lake of Orta, have walked for some miles among
its vineyards and chestnuts; and thence have come, by Baveno, to this
place;--having seen by the way, I believe, the most beautiful part
of the Lago Maggiore, and certainly the most cheerful, complete and
extended example of fine scenery I have ever fallen in with. Here we
are, much to my wonder,--for it seems too good to be true,--fairly in
Italy; and as yet my journey has been a pleasanter and more instructive,
and in point of health a more successful one, than I at all imagined
possible. Calvert and I go on as well as can be. I let him have his way
about natural science, and he only laughs benignly when he thinks
me absurd in my moral speculations. My only regrets are caused by my
separation from my family and friends, and by the hurry I have been
living in, which has prevented me doing any work,--and compelled me to
write to you at a good deal faster rate than the _vapore_ moves on the
Lago Maggiore. It will take me to-morrow to Sesto Calende, whence we go
to Varese. We shall not be at Milan for some days. Write thither, if you
are kind enough to write at all, till I give you another address. Love
to my Father.

                        "Your affectionate son,
                                                      "JOHN STERLING."

Omitting Milan, Florence nearly all, and much about "Art," Michael
Angelo, and other aerial matters, here are some select terrestrial
glimpses, the fittest I can find, of his progress towards Rome:--

                           _To his Mother_.

"_Lucca, Nov. 27th_, 1838.--I had dreams, like other people, before I
came here, of what the Lombard Lakes must be; and the week I spent among
them has left me an image, not only more distinct, but far more warm,
shining and various, and more deeply attractive in innumerable respects,
than all I had before conceived of them. And so also it has been with
Florence; where I spent three weeks: enough for the first hazy radiant
dawn of sympathy to pass away; yet constantly adding an increase of
knowledge and of love, while I examined, and tried to understand, the
wonderful minds that have left behind them there such abundant traces of
their presence.... On Sunday, the day before I left Florence, I went to
the highest part of the Grand Duke's Garden of Boboli, which commands a
view of most of the City, and of the vale of the Arno to the westward;
where, as we had been visited by several rainy days, and now at last had
a very fine one, the whole prospect was in its highest beauty. The mass
of buildings, chiefly on the other side of the River, is sufficient
to fill the eye, without perplexing the mind by vastness like that of
London; and its name and history, its outline and large and picturesque
buildings, give it grandeur of a higher order than that of mere
multitudinous extent. The Hills that border the Valley of the Arno are
also very pleasing and striking to look upon; and the view of the rich
Plain, glimmering away into blue distance, covered with an endless web
of villages and country-houses, is one of the most delightful images of
human well-being I have ever seen....

"Very shortly before leaving Florence, I went through the house of
Michael Angelo; which is still possessed by persons of the same family,
descendants, I believe, of his Nephew. There is in it his 'first work in
marble,' as it is called; and a few drawings,--all with the stamp of
his enginery upon them, which was more powerful than all the steam in
London.... On the whole, though I have done no work in Florence that can
be of any use or pleasure to others, except my Letters to my Wife,--I
leave it with the certainty of much valuable knowledge gained there, and
with a most pleasant remembrance of the busy and thoughtful days I owe
to it.


"We left Florence before seven yesterday morning [26th November] for
this place; travelling on the northern side of the Arno, by Prato,
Pistoia, Pescia. We tried to see some old frescos in a Church at Prato;
but found the Priests all about, saying mass; and of course did not
venture to put our hands into a hive where the bees were buzzing and on
the wing. Pistoia we only coasted. A little on one side of it, there is
a Hill, the first on the road from Florence; which we walked up, and
had a very lively and brilliant prospect over the road we had just
travelled, and the town of Pistoia. Thence to this place the whole land
is beautiful, and in the highest degree prosperous,--in short, to speak
metaphorically, all dotted with Leghorn bonnets, and streaming with
olive-oil. The girls here are said to employ themselves chiefly in
platting straw, which is a profitable employment; and the slightness and
quiet of the work are said to be much more favorable to beauty than the
coarser kinds of labor performed by the country-women elsewhere. Certain
it is that I saw more pretty women in Pescia, in the hour I spent there,
than I ever before met with among the same numbers of the 'phare sect.'
Wherefore, as a memorial of them, I bought there several Legends of
Female Saints and Martyrs, and of other Ladies quite the reverse, and
held up as warnings; all of which are written in _ottava rima_, and sold
for three halfpence apiece. But unhappily I have not yet had time to
read them. This Town has 30,000 inhabitants, and is surrounded by
Walls, laid out as walks, and evidently not at present intended to be
besieged,--for which reason, this morning, I merely walked on them round
the Town, and did not besiege them....

"The Cathedral [of Lucca] contains some Relics; which have undoubtedly
worked miracles on the imagination of the people hereabouts. The
Grandfather of all Relics (as the Arabs would say) in the place is the
_Volto Santo_, which is a Face of the Saviour appertaining to a wooden
Crucifix. Now you must know that, after the ascension of Christ,
Nicodemus was ordered by an Angel to carve an image of him; and went
accordingly with a hatchet, and cut down a cedar for that purpose. He
then proceeded to carve the figure; and being tired, fell asleep before
he had done the face; which however, on awaking, he found completed by
celestial aid. This image was brought to Lucca, from Leghorn, I think,
where it had arrived in a ship, 'more than a thousand years ago,'
and has ever since been kept, in purple and fine linen and gold and
diamonds, quietly working miracles. I saw the gilt Shrine of it; and
also a Hatchet which refused to cut off the head of an innocent man,
who had been condemned to death, and who prayed to the _Volto Santo_.
I suppose it is by way of economy (they being a frugal people) that
the Italians have their Book of Common Prayer and their Arabian Nights'
Entertainments condensed into one."

                            _To the Same_.

"_Pisa, December 2d_, 1838.--Pisa is very unfairly treated in all the
Books I have read. It seems to me a quiet, but very agreeable place;
with wide clean streets, and a look of stability and comfort; and I
admire the Cathedral and its appendages more, the more I see them. The
leaning of the Tower is to my eye decidedly unpleasant; but it is a
beautiful building nevertheless, and the view from the top is, under a
bright sky, remarkably lively and satisfactory. The Lucchese Hills form
a fine mass, and the sea must in clear weather be very distinct. There
was some haze over it when I was up, though the land was all clear. I
could just see the Leghorn Light-house. Leghorn itself I shall not be
able to visit....

"The quiet gracefulness of Italian life, and the mental maturity and
vigor of Germany, have a great charm when compared with the restless
whirl of England, and the chorus of mingled yells and groans sent up by
our parties and sects, and by the suffering and bewildered crowds of the
laboring people. Our politics make my heart ache, whenever I think
of them. The base selfish frenzies of factions seem to me, at this
distance, half diabolic; and I am out of the way of knowing anything
that may be quietly a-doing to elevate the standard of wise and
temperate manhood in the country, and to diffuse the means of physical
and moral well-being among all the people.... I will write to my
Father as soon as I can after reaching the capital of his friend the
Pope,--who, if he had happened to be born an English gentleman, would no
doubt by this time be a respectable old-gentlemanly gouty member of the
Carlton. I have often amused myself by thinking what a mere accident
it is that Phillpotts is not Archbishop of Tuam, and M'Hale Bishop of
Exeter; and how slight a change of dress, and of a few catchwords,
would even now enable them to fill those respective posts with all the
propriety and discretion they display in their present positions."


At Rome he found the Crawfords, known to him long since; and at
different dates other English friends old and new; and was altogether in
the liveliest humor, no end to his activities and speculations. Of
all which, during the next four months, the Letters now before me give
abundant record,--far too abundant for our objects here. His grand
pursuit, as natural at Rome, was Art; into which metaphysical domain we
shall not follow him; preferring to pick out, here and there, something
of concrete and human. Of his interests, researches, speculations
and descriptions on this subject of Art, there is always rather a
superabundance, especially in the Italian Tour. Unfortunately, in
the hard weather, poor Calvert fell ill; and Sterling, along with his
Art-studies, distinguished himself as a sick-nurse till his poor comrade
got afoot again. His general impressions of the scene and what it held
for him may be read in the following excerpts. The Letters are all dated
_Rome_, and addressed to his Father or Mother:--

"_December 21st_, 1838.--Of Rome itself, as a whole, there are infinite
things to be said, well worth saying; but I shall confine myself to
two remarks: first, that while the Monuments and works of Art gain in
wondrousness and significance by familiarity with them, the actual life
of Rome, the Papacy and its pride, lose; and though one gets accustomed
to Cardinals and Friars and Swiss Guards, and ragged beggars and the
finery of London and Paris, all rolling on together, and sees how it is
that they subsist in a sort of spurious unity, one loses all tendency to
idealize the Metropolis and System of the Hierarchy into anything
higher than a piece of showy stage-declamation, at bottom, in our day,
thoroughly mean and prosaic. My other remark is, that Rome, seen from
the tower of the Capitol, from the Pincian or the Janiculum, is at this
day one of the most beautiful spectacles which eyes ever beheld. The
company of great domes rising from a mass of large and solid buildings,
with a few stone-pines and scattered edifices on the outskirts; the
broken bare Campagna all around; the Alban Hills not far, and the purple
range of Sabine Mountains in the distance with a cope of snow;--this
seen in the clear air, and the whole spiritualized by endless
recollections, and a sense of the grave and lofty reality of human
existence which has had this place for a main theatre, fills at once the
eyes and heart more forcibly, and to me delightfully, than I can find
words to say."

"_January 22d_, 1839.--The Modern Rome, Pope and all inclusive, are
a shabby attempt at something adequate to fill the place of the old
Commonwealth. It is easy enough to live among them, and there is much
to amuse and even interest a spectator; but the native existence of the
place is now thin and hollow, and there is a stamp of littleness, and
childish poverty of taste, upon all the great Christian buildings I have
seen here,--not excepting St. Peter's; which is crammed with bits of
colored marble and gilding, and Gog-and-Magog colossal statues of saints
(looking prodigiously small), and mosaics from the worst pictures in
Rome; and has altogether, with most imposing size and lavish splendor,
a tang of Guildhall finery about it that contrasts oddly with the
melancholy vastness and simplicity of the Ancient Monuments, though
these have not the Athenian elegance. I recur perpetually to the
galleries of Sculpture in the Vatican, and to the Frescos of Raffael
and Michael Angelo, of inexhaustible beauty and greatness, and to
the general aspect of the City and the Country round it, as the most
impressive scene on earth. But the Modern City, with its churches,
palaces, priests and beggars, is far from sublime."

Of about the same date, here is another paragraph worth inserting:
"Gladstone has three little agate crosses which he will give you for my
little girls. Calvert bought them, as a present, for 'the bodies,'
at Martigny in Switzerland, and I have had no earlier opportunity
of sending them. Will you despatch them to Hastings when you have an
opportunity? I have not yet seen Gladstone's _Church and State_; but as
there is a copy in Rome, I hope soon to lay hands on it. I saw yesterday
in the _Times_ a furious, and I am sorry to say, most absurd attack on
him and it, and the new Oxonian school."

"_February 28th, 1839_.--There is among the people plenty of squalid
misery; though not nearly so much as, they say, exists in Ireland; and
here there is a certain freedom and freshness of manners, a dash of
Southern enjoyment in the condition of the meanest and most miserable.
There is, I suppose, as little as well can be of conscience or
artificial cultivation of any kind; but there is not the affectation of
a virtue which they do not possess, nor any feeling of being despised
for the want of it; and where life generally is so inert, except as to
its passions and material wants, there is not the bitter consciousness
of having been beaten by the more prosperous, in a race which the
greater number have never thought of running. Among the laboring poor of
Rome, a bribe will buy a crime; but if common work procures enough for
a day's food or idleness, ten times the sum will not induce them to toil
on, as an English workman would, for the sake of rising in the world.
Sixpence any day will put any of them at the top of the only tree they
care for,--that on which grows the fruit of idleness. It is striking to
see the way in which, in magnificent churches, the most ragged beggars
kneel on the pavement before some favorite altar in the midst of
well-dressed women and of gazing foreigners. Or sometimes you will see
one with a child come in from the street where she has been begging,
put herself in a corner, say a prayer (probably for the success of her
petitions), and then return to beg again. There is wonderfully little of
any moral strength connected with this devotion; but still it is better
than nothing, and more than is often found among the men of the upper
classes in Rome. I believe the Clergy to be generally profligate, and
the state of domestic morals as bad as it has ever been represented."--

Or, in sudden contrast, take this other glance homeward; a Letter to his
eldest child; in which kind of Letters, more than in any other, Sterling
seems to me to excel. Readers recollect the hurricane in St. Vincent;
the hasty removal to a neighbor's house, and the birth of a son there,
soon after. The boy has grown to some articulation, during these
seven years; and his Father, from the new foreign scene of Priests and
Dilettanti, thus addresses him:--

              "_To Master Edward C. Sterling, Hastings_.
                                            "ROME, 21st January, 1839.

"MY DEAR EDWARD,--I was very glad to receive your Letter, which showed
me that you have learned something since I left home. If you knew how
much pleasure it gave me to see your handwriting, I am sure you would
take pains to be able to write well, that you might often send me
letters, and tell me a great many things which I should like to know
about Mamma and your Sisters as well as yourself.

"If I go to Vesuvius, I will try to carry away a bit of the lava, which
you wish for. There has lately been a great eruption, as it is called,
of that Mountain; which means a great breaking-out of hot ashes and
fire, and of melted stones which is called lava.

"Miss Clark is very kind to take so much pains with you; and I trust you
will show that you are obliged to her, by paying attention to all she
tells you. When you see how much more grown people know than you, you
ought to be anxious to learn all you can from those who teach you; and
as there are so many wise and good things written in Books, you ought
to try to read early and carefully; that you may learn something of what
God has made you able to know. There are Libraries containing very many
thousands of Volumes; and all that is written in these is,--accounts of
some part or other of the World which God has made, or of the Thoughts
which he has enabled men to have in their minds. Some Books are
descriptions of the earth itself, with its rocks and ground and water,
and of the air and clouds, and the stars and moon and sun, which shine
so beautifully in the sky. Some tell you about the things that grow upon
the ground; the many millions of plants, from little mosses and threads
of grass up to great trees and forests. Some also contain accounts of
living things: flies, worms, fishes, birds and four-legged beasts. And
some, which are the most, are about men and their thoughts and doings.
These are the most important of all; for men are the best and most
wonderful creatures of God in the world; being the only ones able to
know him and love him, and to try of their own accord to do his will.

"These Books about men are also the most important to us, because we
ourselves are human beings, and may learn from such Books what we ought
to think and to do and to try to be. Some of them describe what sort of
people have lived in old times and in other countries. By reading them,
we know what is the difference between ourselves in England now, and the
famous nations which lived in former days. Such were the Egyptians who
built the Pyramids, which are the greatest heaps of stone upon the face
of the earth: and the Babylonians, who had a city with huge walls, built
of bricks, having writing on them that no one in our time has been able
to make out. There were also the Jews, who were the only ancient people
that knew how wonderful and how good God is: and the Greeks, who were
the wisest of all in thinking about men's lives and hearts, and who knew
best how to make fine statues and buildings, and to write wise books. By
Books also we may learn what sort of people the old Romans were, whose
chief city was Rome, where I am now; and how brave and skilful they were
in war; and how well they could govern and teach many nations which they
had conquered. It is from Books, too, that you must learn what kind of
men were our Ancestors in the Northern part of Europe, who belonged
to the tribes that did the most towards pulling down the power of the
Romans: and you will see in the same way how Christianity was sent among
them by God, to make them wiser and more peaceful, and more noble
in their minds; and how all the nations that now are in Europe, and
especially the Italians and the Germans, and the French and the English,
came to be what they now are.--It is well worth knowing (and it can be
known only by reading) how the Germans found out the Printing of Books,
and what great changes this has made in the world. And everybody in
England ought to try to understand how the English came to have their
Parliaments and Laws; and to have fleets that sail over all seas of the
world.

"Besides learning all these things, and a great many more about
different times and countries, you may learn from Books, what is the
truth of God's will, and what are the best and wisest thoughts, and the
most beautiful words; and how men are able to lead very right lives, and
to do a great deal to better the world. I have spent a great part of my
life in reading; and I hope you will come to like it as much as I do,
and to learn in this way all that I know.

"But it is a still more serious matter that you should try to be
obedient and gentle; and to command your temper; and to think of other
people's pleasure rather than your own, and of what you _ought_ to do
rather than what you _like_. If you try to be better for all you read,
as well as wiser, you will find Books a great help towards goodness as
well as knowledge, and above all other Books, the Bible; which tells us
of the will of God, and of the love of Jesus Christ towards God and men.

"I had a Letter from Mamma to-day, which left Hastings on the 10th of
this month. I was very glad to find in it that you were all well
and happy; but I know Mamma is not well, and is likely to be more
uncomfortable every day for some time. So I hope you will all take care
to give her as little trouble as possible. After sending you so much
advice, I shall write a little Story to divert you.--I am, my dear Boy,

                      "Your affectionate Father,
                                                      "JOHN STERLING."

The "Story" is lost, destroyed, as are many such which Sterling wrote,
with great felicity, I am told, and much to the satisfaction of the
young folk, when the humor took him.

Besides these plentiful communications still left, I remember long
Letters, not now extant, principally addressed to his Wife, of which we
and the circle at Knightsbridge had due perusal, treating with animated
copiousness about all manner of picture-galleries, pictures, statues and
objects of Art at Rome, and on the road to Rome and from it, wheresoever
his course led him into neighborhood of such objects. That was
Sterling's habit. It is expected in this Nineteenth Century that a man
of culture shall understand and worship Art: among the windy gospels
addressed to our poor Century there are few louder than this of
Art;--and if the Century expects that every man shall do his duty,
surely Sterling was not the man to balk it! Various extracts from these
picture-surveys are given in Hare; the others, I suppose, Sterling
himself subsequently destroyed, not valuing them much.

Certainly no stranger could address himself more eagerly to reap what
artistic harvest Rome offers, which is reckoned the peculiar produce
of Rome among cities under the sun; to all galleries, churches, sistine
chapels, ruins, coliseums, and artistic or dilettante shrines he
zealously pilgrimed; and had much to say then and afterwards, and with
real technical and historical knowledge I believe, about the objects of
devotion there. But it often struck me as a question, Whether all this
even to himself was not, more or less, a nebulous kind of element;
prescribed not by Nature and her verities, but by the Century expecting
every man to do his duty? Whether not perhaps, in good part, temporary
dilettante cloudland of our poor Century;--or can it be the real diviner
Pisgah height, and everlasting mount of vision, for man's soul in
any Century? And I think Sterling himself bent towards a negative
conclusion, in the course of years. Certainly, of all subjects this
was the one I cared least to hear even Sterling talk of: indeed it is a
subject on which earnest men, abhorrent of hypocrisy and speech that has
no meaning, are admonished to silence in this sad time, and had better,
in such a Babel as we have got into for the present, "perambulate their
picture-gallery with little or no speech."

Here is another and to me much more earnest kind of "Art," which
renders Rome unique among the cities of the world; of this we will, in
preference; take a glance through Sterling's eyes:--

"January 22d, 1839.--On Friday last there was a great Festival at St.
Peter's; the only one I have seen. The Church was decorated with crimson
hangings, and the choir fitted up with seats and galleries, and a throne
for the Pope. There were perhaps a couple of hundred guards of different
kinds; and three or four hundred English ladies, and not so many foreign
male spectators; so that the place looked empty. The Cardinals in
scarlet, and Monsignori in purple, were there; and a body of officiating
Clergy. The Pope was carried in in his chair on men's shoulders, wearing
the Triple Crown; which I have thus actually seen: it is something
like a gigantic Egg, and of the same color, with three little bands of
gold,--very large Egg-shell with three streaks of the yolk smeared round
it. He was dressed in white silk robes, with gold trimmings.

"It was a fine piece of state-show; though, as there are three or four
such Festivals yearly, of course there is none of the eager interest
which breaks out at coronations and similar rare events; no explosion
of unwonted velvets, jewels, carriages and footmen, such as London and
Milan have lately enjoyed. I guessed all the people in St. Peter's,
including performers and spectators, at 2,000; where 20,000 would hardly
have been a crushing crowd. Mass was performed, and a stupid but short
Latin sermon delivered by a lad, in honor of St. Peter, who would have
been much astonished if he could have heard it. The genuflections, and
train-bearings, and folding up the tails of silk petticoats while the
Pontiff knelt, and the train of Cardinals going up to kiss his Ring, and
so forth,--made on me the impression of something immeasurably old and
sepulchral, such as might suit the Grand Lama's court, or the inside of
an Egyptian Pyramid; or as if the Hieroglyphics on one of the Obelisks
here should begin to pace and gesticulate, and nod their bestial heads
upon the granite tablets. The careless bystanders, the London ladies
with their eye-glasses and look of an Opera-box, the yawning young
gentlemen of the _Guarda Nobile_, and the laugh of one of the file of
vermilion Priests round the steps of the altar at the whispered good
thing of his neighbor, brought one back to nothing indeed of a very
lofty kind, but still to the Nineteenth Century."--

"At the great Benediction of the City and the World on Easter Sunday by
the Pope," he writes afterwards, "there was a large crowd both native
and foreign, hundreds of carriages, and thousands of the lower orders of
people from the country; but even of the poor hardly one in twenty took
off his hat, and a still smaller number knelt down. A few years ago,
not a head was covered, nor was there a knee which did not bow."--A very
decadent "Holiness of our Lord the Pope," it would appear!--

Sterling's view of the Pope, as seen in these his gala days, doing his
big play-actorism under God's earnest sky, was much more substantial
to me than his studies in the picture-galleries. To Mr. Hare also he
writes: "I have seen the Pope in all his pomp at St. Peter's; and he
looked to me a mere lie in livery. The Romish Controversy is doubtless a
much more difficult one than the managers of the Religious-Tract Society
fancy, because it is a theoretical dispute; and in dealing with notions
and authorities, I can quite understand how a mere student in a library,
with no eye for facts, should take either one side or other. But how any
man with clear head and honest heart, and capable of seeing realities,
and distinguishing them from scenic falsehoods, should, after living in
a Romanist country, and especially at Rome, be inclined to side with Leo
against Luther, I cannot understand." [20]

It is fit surely to recognize with admiring joy any glimpse of the
Beautiful and the Eternal that is hung out for us, in color, in form or
tone, in canvas, stone, or atmospheric air, and made accessible by any
sense, in this world: but it is greatly fitter still (little as we are
used that way) to shudder in pity and abhorrence over the scandalous
tragedy, transcendent nadir of human ugliness and contemptibility, which
under the daring title of religious worship, and practical recognition
of the Highest God, daily and hourly everywhere transacts itself there.
And, alas, not there only, but elsewhere, everywhere more or less;
whereby our sense is so blunted to it;--whence, in all provinces of
human life, these tears!--

But let us take a glance at the Carnival, since we are here. The
Letters, as before, are addressed to Knightsbridge; the date _Rome_:--

"_February 5th_, 1839.--The Carnival began yesterday. It is a curious
example of the trifling things which will heartily amuse tens of
thousands of grown people, precisely because they are trifling, and
therefore a relief from serious business, cares and labors. The Corso
is a street about a mile long, and about as broad as Jermyn Street; but
bordered by much loftier houses, with many palaces and churches, and
has two or three small squares opening into it. Carriages, mostly open,
drove up and down it for two or three hours; and the contents were shot
at with handfuls of comfits from the windows,--in the hope of making
them as non-content as possible,--while they returned the fire to the
best of their inferior ability. The populace, among whom was I, walked
about; perhaps one in fifty were masked in character; but there was
little in the masquerade either of splendor of costume or liveliness of
mimicry. However, the whole scene was very gay; there were a good many
troops about, and some of them heavy dragoons, who flourished
their swords with the magnanimity of our Life-Guards, to repel the
encroachments of too ambitious little boys. Most of the windows
and balconies were hung with colored drapery; and there were flags,
trumpets, nosegays and flirtations of all shapes and sizes. The best of
all was, that there was laughter enough to have frightened Cassius out
of his thin carcass, could the lean old homicide have been present,
otherwise than as a fleshless ghost;--in which capacity I thought I had
a glimpse of him looking over the shoulder of a particolored clown, in
a carriage full of London Cockneys driving towards the Capitol. This
good-humored foolery will go on for several days to come, ending always
with the celebrated Horse-race, of horses without riders. The long
street is cleared in the centre by troops, and half a dozen quadrupeds,
ornamented like Grimaldi in a London pantomime, scamper away, with the
mob closing and roaring at their heels."

"_February_ 9th, 1839.--The usual state of Rome is quiet and sober. One
could almost fancy the actual generation held their breath, and stole by
on tiptoe, in presence of so memorable a past. But during the Carnival
all mankind, womankind and childkind think it unbecoming not to play
the fool. The modern donkey pokes its head out of the lion's skin of old
Rome, and brays out the absurdest of asinine roundelays. Conceive twenty
thousand grown people in a long street, at the windows, on the footways,
and in carriages, amused day after day for several hours in pelting and
being pelted with handfuls of mock or real sugar-plums; and this no name
or presence, but real downright showers of plaster comfits, from which
people guard their eyes with meshes of wire. As sure as a carriage
passes under a window or balcony where are acquaintances of theirs, down
comes a shower of hail, ineffectually returned from below. The parties
in two crossing carriages similarly assault each other; and there are
long balconies hung the whole way with a deep canvas pocket full of this
mortal shot. One Russian Grand Duke goes with a troop of youngsters in a
wagon, all dressed in brown linen frocks and masked, and pelts among the
most furious, also being pelted. The children are of course preeminently
vigorous, and there is a considerable circulation of real sugar-plums,
which supply consolation for all disappointments."

The whole to conclude, as is proper, with a display, with two displays,
of fireworks; in which art, as in some others, Rome is unrivalled:--

"_February 9th_, 1839.--It seems to be the ambition of all the lower
classes to wear a mask and showy grotesque disguise of some kind; and I
believe many of the upper ranks do the same. They even put St. Peter's
into masquerade; and make it a Cathedral of Lamplight instead of a stone
one. Two evenings ago this feat was performed; and I was able to see it
from the rooms of a friend near this, which command an excellent view of
it. I never saw so beautiful an effect of artificial light. The evening
was perfectly serene and clear; the principal lines of the building, the
columns, architrave and pediment of the front, the two inferior cupolas,
the curves of the dome from which the dome rises, the ribs of the dome
itself, the small oriel windows between them, and the lantern and ball
and cross,--all were delineated in the clear vault of air by lines of
pale yellow fire. The dome of another great Church, much nearer to
the eye, stood up as a great black mass,--a funereal contrast to the
luminous tabernacle.

"While I was looking at this latter, a red blaze burst from the summit,
and at the same moment seemed to flash over the whole building, filling
up the pale outline with a simultaneous burst of fire. This is a
celebrated display; and is done, I believe, by the employment of a very
great number of men to light, at the same instant, the torches which are
fixed for the purpose all over the building. After the first glare of
fire, I did not think the second aspect of the building so beautiful
as the first; it wanted both softness and distinctness. The two most
animated days of the Carnival are still to come."

"_April 4th_, 1839.--We have just come to the termination of all the
Easter spectacles here. On Sunday evening St. Peter's was a second time
illuminated; I was in the Piazza, and admired the sight from a nearer
point than when I had seen it before at the time of the Carnival.

"On Monday evening the celebrated fire-works were let off from the
Castle of St. Angelo; they were said to be, in some respects more
brilliant than usual. I certainly never saw any fireworks comparable
to them for beauty. The Girandola is a discharge of many thousands of
rockets at once, which of course fall back, like the leaves of a lily,
and form for a minute a very beautiful picture. There was also in
silvery light a very long Facade of a Palace, which looked a residence
for Oberon and Titania, and beat Aladdin's into darkness. Afterwards a
series of cascades of red fire poured down the faces of the Castle and
of the scaffoldings round it, and seemed a burning Niagara. Of course
there were abundance of serpents, wheels and cannon-shot; there was also
a display of dazzling white light, which made a strange appearance on
the houses, the river, the bridge, and the faces of the multitude. The
whole ended with a second and a more splendid Girandola."

Take finally, to people the scene a little for us, if our imagination
be at all lively, these three small entries, of different dates, and so
wind up:--

"_December 30th_, 1838.--I received on Christmas-day a packet from
Dr. Carlyle, containing Letters from the Maurices; which were a very
pleasant arrival. The Dr. wrote a few lines with them, mentioning that
he was only at Civita Vecchia while the steamer baited on its way to
Naples. I have written to thank him for his despatches."

"_March 16th_, 1839.--I have seen a good deal of John Mill, whose
society I like much. He enters heartily into the interest of the things
which I most care for here, and I have seldom had more pleasure than
in taking him to see Raffael's Loggie, where are the Frescos called his
Bible, and to the Sixtine Chapel, which I admire and love more and
more. He is in very weak health, but as fresh and clear in mind as
possible.... English politics seem in a queer state, the Conservatives
creeping on, the Whigs losing ground; like combatants on the top of a
breach, while there is a social mine below which will probably blow both
parties into the air."

"_April 4th_, 1839.--I walked out on Tuesday on the Ancona Road, and
about noon met a travelling carriage, which from a distance looked very
suspicious, and on nearer approach was found really to contain Captain
Sterling and an Albanian manservant on the front, and behind under the
hood Mrs. A. Sterling and the she portion of the tail. They seemed very
well; and, having turned the Albanian back to the rear of the whole
machine, I sat by Anthony, and entered Rome in triumph."--Here is indeed
a conquest! Captain A. Sterling, now on his return from service in
Corfu, meets his Brother in this manner; and the remaining Roman days
are of a brighter complexion. As these suddenly ended, I believe he
turned southward, and found at Naples the Dr. Carlyle above mentioned
(an extremely intimate acquaintance of mine), who was still there. For
we are a most travelling people, we of this Island in this time; and,
as the Prophet threatened, see ourselves, in so many senses, made "like
unto a wheel!"--

Sterling returned from Italy filled with much cheerful imagery and
reminiscence, and great store of artistic, serious, dilettante and other
speculation for the time; improved in health, too; but probably
little enriched in real culture or spiritual strength; and indeed not
permanently altered by his tour in any respect to a sensible extent,
that one could notice. He returned rather in haste, and before the
expected time; summoned, about the middle of April, by his Wife's
domestic situation at Hastings; who, poor lady, had been brought to bed
before her calculation, and had in few days lost her infant; and now saw
a household round her much needing the master's presence. He hurried off
to Malta, dreading the Alps at that season; and came home, by steamer,
with all speed, early in May, 1839.




PART III.




CHAPTER I. CLIFTON.

Matters once readjusted at Hastings, it was thought Sterling's health
had so improved, and his activities towards Literature so developed
themselves into congruity, that a permanent English place of abode
might now again be selected,--on the Southwest coast somewhere,--and the
family once more have the blessing of a home, and see its _lares_
and _penates_ and household furniture unlocked from the Pantechnicon
repositories, where they had so long been lying.

Clifton, by Bristol, with its soft Southern winds and high cheerful
situation, recommended too by the presence of one or more valuable
acquaintances there, was found to be the eligible place; and thither in
this summer of 1839, having found a tolerable lodging, with the prospect
by and by of an agreeable house, he and his removed. This was the end of
what I call his "third peregrinity;"--or reckoning the West Indies one,
his fourth. This also is, since Bayswater, the fourth time his family
has had to shift on his account. Bayswater; then to Bordeaux, to
Blackheath and Knightsbridge (during the Madeira time), to Hastings
(Roman time); and now to Clifton, not to stay there either: a sadly
nomadic life to be prescribed to a civilized man!


At Clifton his habitation was speedily enough set up; household
conveniences, methods of work, daily promenades on foot or horseback,
and before long even a circle of friends, or of kindly neighborhoods
ripening into intimacy, were established round him. In all this no man
could be more expert or expeditious, in such cases. It was with singular
facility, in a loving, hoping manner, that he threw himself open to
the new interests and capabilities of the new place; snatched out of
it whatsoever of human or material would suit him; and in brief, in
all senses had pitched his tent-habitation, and grew to look on it as a
house. It was beautiful too, as well as pathetic. This man saw himself
reduced to be a dweller in tents, his house is but a stone tent; and he
can so kindly accommodate himself to that arrangement;--healthy faculty
and diseased necessity, nature and habit, and all manner of things
primary and secondary, original and incidental, conspiring now to make
it easy for him. With the evils of nomadism, he participated to the full
in whatever benefits lie in it for a man.

He had friends enough, old and new, at Clifton, whose intercourse made
the place human for him. Perhaps among the most valued of the former
sort may be mentioned Mrs. Edward Strachey, Widow of the late Indian
Judge, who now resided here; a cultivated, graceful, most devout and
high-minded lady; whom he had known in old years, first probably as
Charles Buller's Aunt, and whose esteem was constant for him, and always
precious to him. She was some ten or twelve years older than he; she
survived him some years, but is now also gone from us. Of new friends
acquired here, besides a skilful and ingenious Dr. Symonds, physician
as well as friend, the principal was Francis Newman, then and still an
ardently inquiring soul, of fine University and other attainments, of
sharp-cutting, restlessly advancing intellect, and the mildest pious
enthusiasm; whose worth, since better known to all the world, Sterling
highly estimated;--and indeed practically testified the same; having by
will appointed him, some years hence, guardian to his eldest Son; which
pious function Mr. Newman now successfully discharges.


Sterling was not long in certainty as to his abode at Clifton: alas,
where could he long be so? Hardly six months were gone when his old
enemy again overtook him; again admonished him how frail his hopes of
permanency were. Each winter, it turned out, he had to fly; and after
the second of these, he quitted the place altogether. Here, meanwhile,
in a Letter to myself, and in Excerpts from others, are some glimpses of
his advent and first summer there:--

                           _To his Mother_.

"_Clifton, June 11th_, 1839.--As yet I am personally very uncomfortable
from the general confusion of this house, which deprives me of my room
to sit and read and write in; all being more or less lumbered by boxes,
and invaded by servile domesticities aproned, handled, bristled, and of
nondescript varieties. We have very fine warm weather, with occasional
showers; and the verdure of the woods and fields is very beautiful.
Bristol seems as busy as need be; and the shops and all kinds of
practical conveniences are excellent; but those of Clifton have the
usual sentimental, not to say meretricious fraudulence of commercial
establishments in Watering-places.

"The bag which Hannah forgot reached us safely at Bath on Friday
morning; but I cannot quite unriddle the mystery of the change of
padlocks, for I left the right one in care of the Head Steam-engine at
Paddington, which seemed a very decent person with a good black coat on,
and a pen behind its ear. I have been meditating much on the story of
Palarea's 'box of papers;' which does not appear to be in my possession,
and I have a strong impression that I gave it to young Florez Calderon.
I will write to say so to Madam Torrijos speedily." Palarea, Dr.
Palarea, I understand, was "an old guerilla leader whom they called
_El Medico_." Of him and of the vanished shadows, now gone to Paris, to
Madrid, or out of the world, let us say nothing!

                           _To Mr. Carlyle_.

"_June 15th_, 1839.--We have a room now occupied by Robert Barton [a
brother-in-law]; to which Anthony may perhaps succeed; but which after
him, or in lieu of him, would expand itself to receive you. Is there no
hope of your coming? I would undertake to ride with you at all possible
paces, and in all existing directions.

"As yet my books are lying as ghost books, in a limbo on the banks of
a certain Bristolian Styx, humanly speaking, a _Canal_; but the other
apparatus of life is gathered about me, and performs its diurnal
functions. The place pleases me better than I expected: a far lookout on
all sides, over green country; a sufficient old City lying in the hollow
near; and civilization, in no tumultuous state, rather indeed stagnant,
visible in the Rows of Houses and Gardens which call themselves Clifton.
I hope soon to take a lease of a house, where I may arrange myself more
methodically; keep myself equably boiling in my own kitchen; and spread
myself over a series of book-shelves.... I have just been interrupted
by a visit from Mrs. Strachey; with whom I dined yesterday. She seems a
very good and thoroughly kind-hearted woman; and it is pleasant to have
her for a neighbor.... I have read Emerson's Pamphlets. I should find it
more difficult than ever to write to him."

                           _To his Father_.

"_June 30th_, 1839.--Of Books I shall have no lack, though no plethora;
and the Reading-room supplies all one can want in the way of Papers
and Reviews. I go there three or four times a week, and inquire how the
human race goes on. I suppose this Turco-Egyptian War will throw several
diplomatists into a state of great excitement, and massacre a good many
thousands of Africans and Asiatics?--For the present, it appears, the
English Education Question is settled. I wish the Government had said
that, in their inspection and superintendence, they would look only to
secular matters, and leave religious ones to the persons who set up the
schools, whoever these might be. It seems to me monstrous that the State
should be prevented taking any efficient measures for teaching Roman
Catholic children to read, write and cipher, merely because they believe
in the Pope, and the Pope is an impostor,--which I candidly confess he
is! There is no question which I can so ill endure to see made a party
one as that of Education."--The following is of the same day:--

             "_To Thomas Carlyle, Esq., Chelsea, London_.
                                 "MANOR HOUSE, CLIFTON PLACE, CLIFTON,
                                                     "30th June, 1839.

"MY DEAR CARLYLE,--I have heard, this morning, from my Father, that you
are to set out on Tuesday for Scotland: so I have determined to fillip
away some spurt of ink in your direction, which may reach you before you
move towards Thule.

"Writing to you, in fact, is considerably easier than writing about
you; which has been my employment of late, at leisure moments,--that
is, moments of leisure from idleness, not work. As you partly guessed,
I took in hand a Review of _Teufelsdrockh_--for want of a better
Heuschrecke to do the work; and when I have been well enough, and alert
enough, during the last fortnight, have tried to set down some notions
about Tobacco, Radicalism, Christianity, Assafoetida and so forth. But a
few abortive pages are all the result as yet. If my speculations should
ever see daylight, they may chance to get you into scrapes, but
will certainly get me into worse.... But one must work; _sic itur ad
astra_,--and the _astra_ are always there to befriend one, at least as
asterisks, filling up the gaps which yawn in vain for words.

"Except my unsuccessful efforts to discuss you and your offences, I have
done nothing that leaves a trace behind;--unless the endeavor to teach
my little boy the Latin declensions shall be found, at some time short
of the Last Day, to have done so. I have--rather I think from dyspepsia
than dyspneumony--been often and for days disabled from doing anything
but read. In this way I have gone through a good deal of Strauss's Book;
which is exceedingly clever and clearheaded; with more of insight, and
less of destructive rage than I expected. It will work deep and far,
in such a time as ours. When so many minds are distracted about the
history, or rather genesis of the Gospel, it is a great thing for
partisans on the one side to have, what the other never have wanted,
a Book of which they can say, This is our Creed and Code,--or rather
Anti-creed and Anti-code. And Strauss seems perfectly secure against the
sort of answer to which Voltaire's critical and historical shallowness
perpetually exposed him. I mean to read the Book through. It seems
admitted that the orthodox theologians have failed to give any
sufficient answer.--I have also looked through Michelet's _Luther_, with
great delight; and have read the fourth volume of Coleridge's _Literary
Remains_, in which there are things that would interest you. He has a
great hankering after Cromwell, and explicitly defends the execution of
Charles.

"Of Mrs. Strachey we have seen a great deal; and might have seen more,
had I had time and spirits for it. She is a warm-hearted, enthusiastic
creature, whom one cannot but like. She seems always excited by the wish
for more excitement than her life affords. And such a person is always
in danger of doing something less wise than his best knowledge and
aspirations; because he must do something, and circumstances do not
allow him to do what he desires. Thence, after the first glow of
novelty, endless self-tormenting comes from the contrast between aims
and acts. She sets out, with her daughter and two boys, for a Tour in
Wales to-morrow morning. Her talk of you is always most affectionate;
and few, I guess, will read _Sartor_ with more interest than she.

"I am still in a very extempore condition as to house, books, &c. One
which I have hired for three years will be given up to me in the middle
of August; and then I may hope to have something like a house,--so far
as that is possible for any one to whom Time itself is often but a worse
or a better kind of cave in the desert. We have had rainy and cheerless
weather almost since the day of our arrival. But the sun now shines
more lovingly, and the skies seem less disdainful of man and his
perplexities. The earth is green, abundant and beautiful. But human
life, so far as I can learn, is mean and meagre enough in its purposes,
however striking to the speculative or sentimental bystander. Pray be
assured that whatever you may say of the 'landlord at Clifton,' [21] the
more I know of him, the less I shall like him. Well with me if I can
put up with him for the present, and make use of him, till at last I can
joyfully turn him off forever!

"Love to you Wife and self. My little Charlotte desires me to tell you
that she has new shoes for her Doll, which she will show you when you
come.

                                "Yours,
                                                      "JOHN STERLING."

The visit to Clifton never took effect; nor to any of Sterling's
subsequent homes; which now is matter of regret to me. Concerning
the "Review of _Teufelsdrockh_" there will be more to say anon. As to
"little Charlotte and her Doll," I remember well enough and was more
than once reminded, this bright little creature, on one of my first
visits to Bayswater, had earnestly applied to me to put her Doll's shoes
on for her; which feat was performed.--The next fragment indicates a
household settled, fallen into wholesome routine again; and may close
the series here:--

                           _To his Mother_.

"_July 22d_, 1839.--A few evenings ago we went to Mr. Griffin's, and
met there Dr. Prichard, the author of a well-known Book on the _Races of
Mankind_, to which it stands in the same relation among English books
as the Racing Calendar does to those of Horsekind. He is a very
intelligent, accomplished person. We had also there the Dean; a certain
Dr. ---- of Corpus College, Cambridge (a booby); and a clever fellow,
a Mr. Fisher, one of the Tutors of Trinity in my days. We had a very
pleasant evening."--

At London we were in the habit of expecting Sterling pretty often; his
presence, in this house as in others, was looked for, once in the month
or two, and came always as sunshine in the gray weather to me and mine.
My daily walks with him had long since been cut short without renewal;
that walk to Eltham and Edgeworth's perhaps the last of the kind he and
I had: but our intimacy, deepening and widening year after year, knew no
interruption or abatement of increase; an honest, frank and truly human
mutual relation, valuable or even invaluable to both parties, and a
lasting loss, hardly to be replaced in this world, to the survivor of
the two.

His visits, which were usually of two or three days, were always full of
business, rapid in movement as all his life was. To me, if possible, he
would come in the evening; a whole cornucopia of talk and speculation
was to be discharged. If the evening would not do, and my affairs
otherwise permitted, I had to mount into cabs with him; fly far and
wide, shuttling athwart the big Babel, wherever his calls and pauses had
to be. This was his way to husband time! Our talk, in such straitened
circumstances, was loud or low as the circumambient groaning rage
of wheels and sound prescribed,--very loud it had to be in such
thoroughfares as London Bridge and Cheapside; but except while he
was absent, off for minutes into some banker's office, lawyer's,
stationer's, haberdasher's or what office there might be, it never
paused. In this way extensive strange dialogues were carried on: to me
also very strange,--private friendly colloquies, on all manner of rich
subjects, held thus amid the chaotic roar of things. Sterling was full
of speculations, observations and bright sallies; vividly awake to what
was passing in the world; glanced pertinently with victorious clearness,
without spleen, though often enough with a dash of mockery, into its
Puseyisms, Liberalisms, literary Lionisms, or what else the mad hour
might be producing,--always prompt to recognize what grain of sanity
might be in the same. He was opulent in talk, and the rapid movement and
vicissitude on such occasions seemed to give him new excitement.

Once, I still remember,--it was some years before, probably in May, on
his return from Madeira,--he undertook a day's riding with me; once and
never again. We coursed extensively, over the Hampstead and Highgate
regions, and the country beyond, sauntering or galloping through many
leafy lanes and pleasant places, in ever-flowing, ever-changing talk;
and returned down Regent Street at nightfall: one of the cheerfulest
days I ever had;--not to be repeated, said the Fates. Sterling was
charming on such occasions: at once a child and a gifted man. A serious
fund of thought he always had, a serious drift you never missed in him:
nor indeed had he much depth of real laughter or sense of the ludicrous,
as I have elsewhere said; but what he had was genuine, free and
continual: his sparkling sallies bubbled up as from aerated natural
fountains; a mild dash of gayety was native to the man, and had moulded
his physiognomy in a very graceful way. We got once into a cab, about
Charing Cross; I know not now whence or well whitherward, nor that our
haste was at all special; however, the cabman, sensible that his pace
was slowish, took to whipping, with a steady, passionless, businesslike
assiduity which, though the horse seemed lazy rather than weak, became
afflictive; and I urged remonstrance with the savage fellow: "Let him
alone," answered Sterling; "he is kindling the enthusiasm of his horse,
you perceive; that is the first thing, then we shall do very well!"--as
accordingly we did.


At Clifton, though his thoughts began to turn more on poetic forms
of composition, he was diligent in prose elaborations too,--doing
Criticism, for one thing, as we incidentally observed. He wrote there,
and sent forth in this autumn of 1839, his most important contribution
to John Mill's Review, the article on _Carlyle_, which stands also in
Mr. Hare's collection. [22] What its effect on the public was I knew
not, and know not; but remember well, and may here be permitted to
acknowledge, the deep silent joy, not of a weak or ignoble nature, which
it gave to myself in my then mood and situation; as it well might. The
first generous human recognition, expressed with heroic emphasis, and
clear conviction visible amid its fiery exaggeration, that one's poor
battle in this world is not quite a mad and futile, that it is perhaps a
worthy and manful one, which will come to something yet: this fact is
a memorable one in every history; and for me Sterling, often enough the
stiff gainsayer in our private communings, was the doer of this. The
thought burnt in me like a lamp, for several days; lighting up into
a kind of heroic splendor the sad volcanic wrecks, abysses, and
convulsions of said poor battle, and secretly I was very grateful to my
daring friend, and am still, and ought to be. What the public might be
thinking about him and his audacities, and me in consequence, or whether
it thought at all, I never learned, or much heeded to learn.

Sterling's gainsaying had given way on many points; but on others it
continued stiff as ever, as may be seen in that article; indeed he
fought Parthian-like in such cases, holding out his last position as
doggedly as the first: and to some of my notions he seemed to grow in
stubbornness of opposition, with the growing inevitability, and
never would surrender. Especially that doctrine of the "greatness and
fruitfulness of Silence," remained afflictive and incomprehensible:
"Silence?" he would say: "Yes, truly; if they give you leave to proclaim
silence by cannon-salvos! My Harpocrates-Stentor!" In like manner,
"Intellect and Virtue," how they are proportional, or are indeed one
gift in us, the same great summary of gifts; and again, "Might and
Right," the identity of these two, if a man will understand this
God's-Universe, and that only he who conforms to the law of it can
in the long-run have any "might:" all this, at the first blush, often
awakened Sterling's musketry upon me, and many volleys I have had
to stand,--the thing not being decidable by that kind of weapon or
strategy.

In such cases your one method was to leave our friend in peace. By
small-arms practice no mortal could dislodge him: but if you were in the
right, the silent hours would work continually for you; and Sterling,
more certainly than any man, would and must at length swear fealty to
the right, and passionately adopt it, burying all hostilities under
foot. A more candid soul, once let the stormful velocities of it expend
themselves, was nowhere to be met with. A son of light, if I have ever
seen one; recognizing the truth, if truth there were; hurling overboard
his vanities, petulances, big and small interests, in ready loyalty to
truth: very beautiful; at once a loyal child, as I said, and a gifted
man!--Here is a very pertinent passage from one of his Letters, which,
though the name continues blank, I will insert:--

                           _To his Father_.

"_October 15th_, 1839.--As to my 'over-estimate of ----,' your
expressions rather puzzle me. I suppose there may be, at the outside, a
hundred persons in England whose opinions on such a matter are worth
as much as mine. If by 'the public' you and my Mother mean the other
ninety-nine, I submit. I have no doubt that, on any matter not relating
peculiarly to myself, the judgment of the ninety-nine most philosophical
heads in the country, if unanimous, would be right, and mine, if opposed
to them, wrong. But then I am at a loss to make out, How the decision of
the very few really competent persons has been ascertained to be thus in
contradiction to me? And on the other hand, I conceive myself, from my
opportunities, knowledge and attention to the subject, to be alone quite
entitled to outvote tens of thousands of gentlemen, however much my
superiors as men of business, men of the world, or men of merely dry or
merely frivolous literature.

"I do not remember ever before to have heard the saying, whether of
Talleyrand or of any one else, That _all_ the world is a wiser man
than any man in the world. Had it been said even by the Devil, it would
nevertheless be false. I have often indeed heard the saying, _On peut
etre plus FIN qu'un autre, mais pas plus FIN que tous les autres_. But
observe that '_fin_' means _cunning_, not _wise_. The difference between
this assertion and the one you refer to is curious and worth examining.
It is quite certain, there is always some one man in the world wiser
than all the rest; as Socrates was declared by the oracle to be; and as,
I suppose, Bacon was in his day, and perhaps Burke in his. There is also
some one, whose opinion would be probably true, if opposed to that of
all around him; and it is always indubitable that the wise men are the
scores, and the unwise the millions. The millions indeed come round, in
the course of a generation or two, to the opinions of the wise; but
by that time a new race of wise men have again shot ahead of their
contemporaries: so it has always been, and so, in the nature of things,
it always must be. But with cunning, the matter is quite different.
Cunning is not _dishonest wisdom_, which would be a contradiction
in terms; it is _dishonest prudence_, acuteness in practice, not in
thought: and though there must always be some one the most cunning in
the world, as well as some one the most wise, these two superlatives
will fare very differently in the world. In the case of cunning, the
shrewdness of a whole people, of a whole generation, may doubtless be
combined against that of the one, and so triumph over it; which was
pretty much the case with Napoleon. But although a man of the greatest
cunning can hardly conceal his designs and true character from millions
of unfriendly eyes, it is quite impossible thus to club the eyes of
the mind, and to constitute by the union of ten thousand follies an
equivalent for a single wisdom. A hundred school-boys can easily unite
and thrash their one master; but a hundred thousand school-boys would
not be nearer than a score to knowing as much Greek among them as
Bentley or Scaliger. To all which, I believe, you will assent as readily
as I;--and I have written it down only because I have nothing more
important to say."--


Besides his prose labors, Sterling had by this time written, publishing
chiefly in _Blackwood_, a large assortment of verses, _Sexton's
Daughter_, _Hymns of a Hermit_, and I know not what other extensive
stock of pieces; concerning which he was now somewhat at a loss as to
his true course. He could write verses with astonishing facility, in any
given form of metre; and to various readers they seemed excellent,
and high judges had freely called them so, but he himself had grave
misgivings on that latter essential point. In fact here once more was
a parting of the ways, "Write in Poetry; write in Prose?" upon which,
before all else, it much concerned him to come to a settlement.

My own advice was, as it had always been, steady against Poetry; and we
had colloquies upon it, which must have tried his patience, for in him
there was a strong leaning the other way. But, as I remarked and urged:
Had he not already gained superior excellence in delivering, by way of
_speech_ or prose, what thoughts were in him, which is the grand and
only intrinsic function of a writing man, call him by what title you
will? Cultivate that superior excellence till it become a perfect and
superlative one. Why _sing_ your bits of thoughts, if you _can_ contrive
to speak them? By your thought, not by your mode of delivering it,
you must live or die.--Besides I had to observe there was in Sterling
intrinsically no depth of _tune_; which surely is the real test of a
Poet or Singer, as distinguished from a Speaker? In music proper he
had not the slightest ear; all music was mere impertinent noise to him,
nothing in it perceptible but the mere march or time. Nor in his way
of conception and utterance, in the verses he wrote, was there any
contradiction, but a constant confirmation to me, of that fatal
prognostic;--as indeed the whole man, in ear and heart and tongue, is
one; and he whose soul does not sing, need not try to do it with his
throat. Sterling's verses had a monotonous rub-a-dub, instead of tune;
no trace of music deeper than that of a well-beaten drum; to which
limited range of excellence the substance also corresponded; being
intrinsically always a rhymed and slightly rhythmical _speech_, not a
_song_.

In short, all seemed to me to say, in his case: "You can speak with
supreme excellence; sing with considerable excellence you never can. And
the Age itself, does it not, beyond most ages, demand and require clear
speech; an Age incapable of being sung to, in any but a trivial manner,
till these convulsive agonies and wild revolutionary overturnings
readjust themselves? Intelligible word of command, not musical psalmody
and fiddling, is possible in this fell storm of battle. Beyond all ages,
our Age admonishes whatsoever thinking or writing man it has: Oh, speak
to me some wise intelligible speech; your wise meaning in the shortest
and clearest way; behold I am dying for want of wise meaning, and
insight into the devouring fact: speak, if you have any wisdom! As to
song so called, and your fiddling talent,--even if you have one, much
more if you have none,--we will talk of that a couple of centuries
hence, when things are calmer again. Homer shall be thrice welcome; but
only when Troy is _taken_: alas, while the siege lasts, and battle's
fury rages everywhere, what can I do with the Homer? I want Achilleus
and Odysseus, and am enraged to see them trying to be Homers!"--

Sterling, who respected my sincerity, and always was amenable enough to
counsel, was doubtless much confused by such contradictory diagnosis of
his case. The question, Poetry or Prose? became more and more pressing,
more and more insoluble. He decided, at last, to appeal to the public
upon it;--got ready, in the late autumn, a small select Volume of his
verses; and was now busy pushing it through the press. Unfortunately,
in the mean while, a grave illness, of the old pulmonary sort, overtook
him, which at one time threatened to be dangerous. This is a glance
again into his interior household in these circumstances:--

                           _To his Mother_.

"_December 21st_, 1839.--The Tin box came quite safe, with all its
miscellaneous contents. I suppose we are to thank you for the _Comic
Almanac_, which, as usual, is very amusing; and for the Book on _Watt_,
which disappointed me. The scientific part is no doubt very good, and
particularly clear and simple; but there is nothing remarkable in
the account of Watt's character; and it is an absurd piece of French
impertinence in Arago to say, that England has not yet learnt to
appreciate men like Watt, because he was not made a peer; which, were
our peerage an institution like that of France, would have been very
proper.

"I have now finished correcting the proofs of my little Volume of
Poems. It has been a great plague to me, and one that I would not have
incurred, had I expected to be laid up as I have been; but the
matter was begun before I had any notion of being disabled by such an
illness,--the severest I have suffered since I went to the West Indies.
The Book will, after all, be a botched business in many respects; and I
much doubt whether it will pay its expenses: but I try to consider it
as out of my hands, and not to fret myself about it. I shall be very
curious to see Carlyle's Tractate on _Chartism_; which"--But we need not
enter upon that.

Sterling's little Book was printed at his own expense; [23] published by
Moxon in the very end of this year. It carries an appropriate and pretty
Epigraph:--

     "Feeling, Thought, and Fancy be
     Gentle sister Graces three:
     If these prove averse to me,
     They will punish,--pardon Ye!"

He had dedicated the little Volume to Mr. Hare;--and he submitted very
patiently to the discouraging neglect with which it was received by the
world; for indeed the "Ye" said nothing audible, in the way of pardon
or other doom; so that whether the "sister Graces" were averse or not,
remained as doubtful as ever.



CHAPTER II. TWO WINTERS.

As we said above, it had been hoped by Sterling's friends, not very
confidently by himself, that in the gentler air of Clifton his health
might so far recover as to enable him to dispense with autumnal voyages,
and to spend the year all round in a house of his own. These hopes,
favorable while the warm season lasted, broke down when winter came. In
November of this same year, while his little Volume was passing through
the press, bad and worse symptoms, spitting of blood to crown the sad
list, reappeared; and Sterling had to equip himself again, at this late
season, for a new flight to Madeira; wherein the good Calvert, himself
suffering, and ready on all grounds for such an adventure, offered to
accompany him. Sterling went by land to Falmouth, meaning there to wait
for Calvert, who was to come by the Madeira Packet, and there take him
on board.

Calvert and the Packet did arrive, in stormy January weather; which
continued wildly blowing for weeks; forbidding all egress Westward,
especially for invalids. These elemental tumults, and blustering wars
of sea and sky, with nothing but the misty solitude of Madeira in the
distance, formed a very discouraging outlook. In the mean while Falmouth
itself had offered so many resources, and seemed so tolerable in climate
and otherwise, while this wintry ocean looked so inhospitable for
invalids, it was resolved our voyagers should stay where they were till
spring returned. Which accordingly was done; with good effect for that
season, and also with results for the coming seasons. Here again, from
Letters to Knightsbridge, are some glimpses of his winter-life:--

"_Falmouth, February 5th_, 1840.--I have been to-day to see a new
tin-mine, two or three miles off, which is expected to turn into a
copper-mine by and by, so they will have the two constituents of bronze
close together. This, by the way, was the 'brass' of Homer and the
Ancients generally, who do not seem to have known our brass made of
copper and zinc. Achilles in his armor must have looked like a bronze
statue.--I took Sheridan's advice, and did not go down the mine."

"_February 15th_.--To some iron-works the other day; where I saw half
the beam of a great steam-engine, a piece of iron forty feet long
and seven broad, cast in about five minutes. It was a very striking
spectacle. I hope to go to Penzance before I leave this country, and
will not fail to tell you about it." He did make trial of Penzance,
among other places, next year; but only of Falmouth this.

"_February 20th_.--I am going on _asy_ here, in spite of a great change
of weather. The East-winds are come at last, bringing with them snow,
which has been driving about for the last twenty-four hours; not falling
heavily, nor lying long when fallen. Neither is it as yet very cold, but
I suppose there will be some six weeks of unpleasant temperature.
The marine climate of this part of England will, no doubt, modify and
mollify the air into a happier sort of substance than that you breathe
in London.

"The large vessels that had been lying here for weeks, waiting for a
wind, have now sailed; two of them for the East Indies, and having three
hundred soldiers on board. It is a curious thing that the long-continued
westerly winds had so prevented the coasters arriving, that the Town was
almost on the point of a famine as to bread. The change has brought in
abundance of flour.--The people in general seem extremely comfortable;
their houses are excellent, almost all of stone. Their habits are very
little agricultural, but mining and fishing seem to prosper with
them. There are hardly any gentry here; I have not seen more than two
gentlemen's carriages in the Town; indeed I think the nearest one comes
from five miles off....

"I have been obliged to try to occupy myself with Natural Science, in
order to give some interest to my walks; and have begun to feel my way
in Geology. I have now learnt to recognize three or four of the common
kinds of stone about here, when I see them; but I find it stupid work
compared with Poetry and Philosophy. In the mornings, however, for an
hour or so before I get up, I generally light my candle, and try to
write some verses; and since I have been here, I have put together short
poems, almost enough for another small volume. In the evenings I have
gone on translating some of Goethe. But six or seven hours spent on my
legs, in the open air, do not leave my brain much energy for thinking.
Thus my life is a dull and unprofitable one, but still better than it
would have been in Madeira or on board ship. I hear from Susan every
day, and write to her by return of post."

At Falmouth Sterling had been warmly welcomed by the well-known
Quaker family of the Foxes, principal people in that place, persons of
cultivated opulent habits, and joining to the fine purities and pieties
of their sect a reverence for human intelligence in all kinds; to whom
such a visitor as Sterling was naturally a welcome windfall. The family
had grave elders, bright cheery younger branches, men and women; truly
amiable all, after their sort: they made a pleasant image of home for
Sterling in his winter exile. "Most worthy, respectable and highly
cultivated people, with a great deal of money among them," writes
Sterling in the end of February; "who make the place pleasant to me.
They are connected with all the large Quaker circle, the Gurneys, Frys,
&c., and also with Buxton the Abolitionist. It is droll to hear them
talking of all the common topics of science, literature, and life, and
in the midst of it: 'Does thou know Wordsworth?' or, 'Did thou see the
Coronation?' or 'Will thou take some refreshment?' They are very kind
and pleasant people to know."

"Calvert," continues our Diarist, "is better than he lately was, though
he has not been at all laid up. He shoots little birds, and dissects
and stuffs them; while I carry a hammer, and break flints and slates,
to look for diamonds and rubies inside; and admire my success in the
evening, when I empty my great-coat pocket of its specimens. On the
whole, I doubt whether my physical proceedings will set the Thames
on fire. Give my love to Anthony's Charlotte; also remember me
affectionately to the Carlyles."--

At this time, too, John Mill, probably encouraged by Sterling, arrived
in Falmouth, seeking refuge of climate for a sickly younger Brother, to
whom also, while he continued there, and to his poor patient, the doors
and hearts of this kind family were thrown wide open. Falmouth, during
these winter weeks, especially while Mill continued, was an unexpectedly
engaging place to Sterling; and he left it in spring, for Clifton, with
a very kindly image of it in his thoughts. So ended, better than it
might have done, his first year's flight from the Clifton winter.

In April, 1840, he was at his own hearth again; cheerily pursuing his
old labors,--struggling to redeem, as he did with a gallant constancy,
the available months and days, out of the wreck of so many that were
unavailable, for the business allotted him in this world. His swift,
decisive energy of character; the valiant rally he made again and ever
again, starting up fresh from amid the wounded, and cheerily storming in
anew, was admirable, and showed a noble fund of natural health amid such
an element of disease. Somehow one could never rightly fancy that he
was diseased; that those fatal ever-recurring downbreaks were not almost
rather the penalties paid for exuberance of health, and of faculty
for living and working; criminal forfeitures, incurred by excess of
self-exertion and such irrepressible over-rapidity of movement: and the
vague hope was habitual with us, that increase of years, as it deadened
this over-energy, would first make the man secure of life, and a sober
prosperous worker among his fellows. It was always as if with a kind
of blame that one heard of his being ill again! Poor Sterling;--no man
knows another's burden: these things were not, and were not to be, in
the way we had fancied them!

Summer went along in its usual quiet tenor at Clifton; health good, as
usual while the warm weather lasted, and activity abundant; the scene
as still as the busiest could wish. "You metropolitan signors," writes
Sterling to his Father, "cannot conceive the dulness and scantiness of
our provincial chronicle." Here is a little excursion to the seaside;
the lady of the family being again,--for good reasons,--in a weakly
state:--

          "_To Edward Sterling, Esq., Knightsbridge, London_.
                                 "PORTSHEAD, BRISTOL, 1st Sept., 1840.

"MY DEAR FATHER,--This place is a southern headland at the mouth of the
Avon. Susan, and the Children too, were all suffering from languor; and
as she is quite unfit to travel in a carriage, we were obliged to move,
if at all, to some place accessible by water; and this is the nearest
where we could get the fresher air of the Bristol Channel. We sent to
take a house, for a week; and came down here in a steamer yesterday
morning. It seems likely to do every one good. We have a comfortable
house, with eight rather small bedrooms, for which we pay four guineas
and a half for the week. We have brought three of our own maids, and
leave one to take care of the house at Clifton.

"A week ago my horse fell with me, but did not hurt seriously either
himself or me: it was, however, rather hard that, as there were six legs
to be damaged, the one that did scratch itself should belong to the part
of the machine possessing only two, instead of the quadrupedal portion.
I grazed about the size of a halfpenny on my left knee; and for a couple
of days walked about as if nothing had happened. I found, however,
that the skin was not returning correctly; and so sent for a doctor: he
treated the thing as quite insignificant, but said I must keep my leg
quiet for a few days. It is still not quite healed; and I lie all day
on a sofa, much to my discomposure; but the thing is now rapidly
disappearing; and I hope, in a day or two more, I shall be free again. I
find I can do no work, while thus crippled in my leg. The man in Horace
who made verses _stans pede in uno_ had the advantage of me.

"The Great Western came in last night about eleven, and has just been
making a flourish past our windows; looking very grand, with four
streamers of bunting, and one of smoke. Of course I do not yet know
whether I have Letters by her, as if so they will have gone to Clifton
first. This place is quiet, green and pleasant; and will suit us very
well, if we have good weather, of which there seems every appearance.

"Milnes spent last Sunday with me at Clifton; and was very amusing
and cordial. It is impossible for those who know him well not to like
him.--I send this to Knightsbridge, not knowing where else to hit you.
Love to my Mother.

                          "Your affectionate,
                                                      "JOHN STERLING."

The expected "Letters by the Great Western" are from Anthony, now in
Canada, doing military duties there. The "Milnes" is our excellent
Richard, whom all men know, and truly whom none can know well without
even doing as Sterling says.--In a week the family had returned to
Clifton; and Sterling was at his poetizings and equitations again. His
grand business was now Poetry; all effort, outlook and aim exclusively
directed thither, this good while.

Of the published Volume Moxon gave the worst tidings; no man had
hailed it with welcome; unsold it lay, under the leaden seal of general
neglect; the public when asked what it thought, had answered hitherto by
a lazy stare. It shall answer otherwise, thought Sterling; by no means
taking that as the final response. It was in this same September that he
announced to me and other friends, under seal of secrecy as usual, the
completion, or complete first-draught, of "a new Poem reaching to two
thousand verses." By working "three hours every morning" he had brought
it so far. This Piece, entitled _The Election_, of which in due time we
obtained perusal, and had to give some judgment, proved to be in a new
vein,--what might be called the mock-heroic, or sentimental Hudibrastic,
reminding one a little, too, of Wieland's _Oberon_;--it had touches of
true drollery combined not ill with grave clear insight; showed spirit
everywhere, and a plainly improved power of execution. Our stingy
verdict was to the effect, "Better, but still not good enough:--why
follow that sad 'metrical' course, climbing the loose sandhills, when
you have a firm path along the plain?" To Sterling himself it remained
dubious whether so slight a strain, new though it were, would suffice to
awaken the sleeping public; and the Piece was thrown away and taken up
again, at intervals; and the question, Publish or not publish? lay many
months undecided.

Meanwhile his own feeling was now set more and more towards Poetry;
and in spite of symptoms and dissuasions, and perverse prognostics of
outward wind and weather, he was rallying all his force for a downright
struggle with it; resolute to see which _was_ the stronger. It must be
owned, he takes his failures in the kindliest manner; and goes along,
bating no jot of heart or hope. Perhaps I should have more admired this
than I did! My dissuasions, in that case, might have been fainter. But
then my sincerity, which was all the use of my poor counsel in assent
or dissent, would have been less. He was now furthermore busy with a
_Tragedy of Strafford_, the theme of many failures in Tragedy; planning
it industriously in his head; eagerly reading in _Whitlocke, Rushworth_
and the Puritan Books, to attain a vesture and local habitation for it.
Faithful assiduous studies I do believe;--of which, knowing my stubborn
realism, and savage humor towards singing by the Thespian or other
methods, he told me little, during his visits that summer.


The advance of the dark weather sent him adrift again; to Torquay,
for this winter: there, in his old Falmouth climate, he hoped to do
well;--and did, so far as well-doing was readily possible, in that sad
wandering way of life. However, be where he may, he tries to work "two
or three hours in the morning," were it even "with a lamp," in bed,
before the fires are lit; and so makes something of it. From abundant
Letters of his now before me, I glean these two or three small glimpses;
sufficient for our purpose at present. The general date is "Tor, near
Torquay:"--

                   _To Mrs. Charles Fox, Falmouth_.

_Tor, November 30th_, 1840.--I reached this place on Thursday; having,
after much hesitation, resolved to come here, at least for the next
three weeks,--with some obscure purpose of embarking, at the New Year,
from Falmouth for Malta, and so reaching Naples, which I have not seen.
There was also a doubt whether I should not, after Christmas, bring my
family here for the first four months of the year. All this, however,
is still doubtful. But for certain inhabitants of Falmouth and its
neighborhood, this place would be far more attractive than it. But I
have here also friends, whose kindness, like much that I met with last
winter, perpetually makes me wonder at the stock of benignity in human
nature. A brother of my friend Julius Hare, Marcus by name, a Naval man,
and though not a man of letters, full of sense and knowledge, lives
here in a beautiful place, with a most agreeable and excellent wife, a
daughter of Lord Stanley of Alderley. I had hardly seen them before;
but they are fraternizing with me, in a much better than the Jacobin
fashion; and one only feels ashamed at the enormity of some people's
good-nature. I am in a little rural sort of lodging; and as comfortable
as a solitary oyster can expect to be."--

                            _To C. Barton_.

"_December 5th_.--This place is extremely small, much more so than
Falmouth even; but pretty, cheerful, and very mild in climate. There are
a great many villas in and about the little Town, having three or
four reception-rooms, eight or ten bedrooms; and costing about fifteen
hundred or two thousand pounds each, and occupied by persons spending
a thousand or more pounds a year. If the Country would acknowledge my
merits by the gift of one of these, I could prevail on myself to come
and live here; which would be the best move for my health I could
make in England; but, in the absence of any such expression of public
feeling, it would come rather dear."--

                         _To Mrs. Fox again_.

"_December 22d_.--By the way, did you ever read a Novel? If you ever
mean to do so hereafter, let it be Miss Martineau's _Deerbrook_. It is
really very striking; and parts of it are very true and very beautiful.
It is not so true, or so thoroughly clear and harmonious, among
delineations of English middle-class gentility, as Miss Austen's books,
especially as _Pride and Prejudice_, which I think exquisite; but it
is worth reading. _The hour and the Man_ is eloquent, but an absurd
exaggeration.--I hold out so valorously against this Scandinavian
weather, that I deserve to be ranked with Odin and Thor; and fancy I may
go to live at Clifton or Drontheim. Have you had the same icy desolation
as prevails here?"

                        _To W. Coningham, Esq_.

"_December 28th_.--Looking back to him [a deceased Uncle, father of his
correspondent], as I now very often do, I feel strongly, what the loss
of other friends has also impressed on me, how much Death deepens our
affection; and sharpens our regret for whatever has been even slightly
amiss in our conduct towards those who are gone. What trifles then
swell into painful importance; how we believe that, could the past be
recalled, life would present no worthier, happier task, than that of so
bearing ourselves towards those we love, that we might ever after find
nothing but melodious tranquillity breathing about their graves! Yet,
too often, I feel the difficulty of always practicing such mild wisdom
towards those who are still left me.--You will wonder less at my
rambling off in this way, when I tell you that my little lodging is
close to a picturesque old Church and Churchyard, where, every day, I
brush past a tombstone, recording that an Italian, of Manferrato, has
buried there a girl of sixteen, his only daughter: _'L' unica speranza
di mia vita_.'--No doubt, as you say, our Mechanical Age is necessary as
a passage to something better; but, at least, do not let us go back."--

At the New-year time, feeling unusually well, he returns to Clifton. His
plans, of course, were ever fluctuating; his movements were swift and
uncertain. Alas, his whole life, especially his winter-life, had to be
built as if on wavering drift-sand; nothing certain in it, except if
possible the "two or three hours of work" snatched from the general
whirlpool of the dubious four-and-twenty!

                           _To Dr. Carlyle_.

"_Clifton, January 10th_, 1841.--I stood the sharp frost at Torquay
with such entire impunity, that at last I took courage, and resolved to
return home. I have been here a week, in extreme cold; and have suffered
not at all; so that I hope, with care I may prosper in spite of medical
prognostics,--if you permit such profane language. I am even able to
work a good deal; and write for some hours every morning, by dint
of getting up early, which an Arnott stove in my study enables me to
do."--But at Clifton he cannot continue. Again, before long, the rude
weather has driven him Southward; the spring finds him in his former
haunts; doubtful as ever what to decide upon for the future; but tending
evidently towards a new change of residence for household and self:--

                        _To W. Coningham, Esq_.

"_Penzance, April 19th_, 1841.--My little Boy and I have been wandering
about between Torquay and this place; and latterly have had my Father
for a few days with us,--he left us yesterday. In all probability I
shall endeavor to settle either at Torquay, at Falmouth, or here; as it
is pretty clear that I cannot stand the sharp air of Clifton, and
still less the London east-winds. Penzance is, on the whole, a
pleasant-looking, cheerful place; with a delightful mildness of air, and
a great appearance of comfort among the people: the view of Mount's Bay
is certainly a very noble one. Torquay would suit the health of my
Wife and Children better; or else I should be glad to live here always,
London and its neighborhood being impracticable."--Such was his second
wandering winter; enough to render the prospect of a third at Clifton
very uninviting.


With the Falmouth friends, young and old, his intercourse had meanwhile
continued cordial and frequent. The omens were pointing towards that
region at his next place of abode. Accordingly, in few weeks hence, in
the June of this Summer, 1841, his dubitations and inquirings are again
ended for a time; he has fixed upon a house in Falmouth, and removed
thither; bidding Clifton, and the regretful Clifton friends, a kind
farewell. This was the _fifth_ change of place for his family since
Bayswater; the fifth, and to one chief member of it the last. Mrs.
Sterling had brought him a new child in October last; and went hopefully
to Falmouth, dreading _other_ than what befell there.



CHAPTER III. FALMOUTH: POEMS.

At Falmouth, as usual, he was soon at home in his new environment;
resumed his labors; had his new small circle of acquaintance, the ready
and constant centre of which was the Fox family, with whom he lived on
an altogether intimate, honored and beloved footing; realizing his best
anticipations in that respect, which doubtless were among his first
inducements to settle in this new place. Open cheery heights, rather
bare of wood: fresh southwestern breezes; a brisk laughing sea, swept by
industrious sails, and the nets of a most stalwart, wholesome, frank
and interesting population: the clean little fishing, trading and packet
Town; hanging on its slope towards the Eastern sun, close on the waters
of its basin and intricate bay,--with the miniature Pendennis Castle
seaward on the right, the miniature St. Mawes landward to left, and the
mining world and the farming world open boundlessly to the rear:--all
this made a pleasant outlook and environment. And in all this, as in the
other new elements of his position, Sterling, open beyond most men to
the worth of things about him, took his frank share. From the first,
he had liked the general aspect of the population, and their healthy,
lively ways; not to speak of the special friendships he had formed
there, which shed a charm over them all. "Men of strong character, clear
heads and genuine goodness," writes he, "are by no means wanting." And
long after: "The common people here dress better than in most parts of
England; and on Sundays, if the weather be at all fine, their appearance
is very pleasant. One sees them all round the Town, especially towards
Pendennis Castle, streaming in a succession of little groups, and
seeming for the most part really and quietly happy." On the whole he
reckoned himself lucky; and, so far as locality went, found this a
handsome shelter for the next two years of his life. Two years, and not
without an interruption; that was all. Here we have no continuing city;
he less than any of us! One other flight for shelter; and then it is
ended, and he has found an inexpugnable refuge. Let us trace his remote
footsteps, as we have opportunity:--

                      _To Dr. Symonds, Clifton_.

"_Falmouth, June 28th_, 1841.--Newman writes to me that he is gone to
the Rhine. I wish I were! And yet the only 'wish' at the bottom of my
heart, is to be able to work vigorously in my own way anywhere, were it
in some Circle of Dante's Inferno. This, however, is the secret of my
soul, which I disclose only to a few."

                           _To his Mother_.

"_Falmouth, July 6th_, 1841.--I have at last my own study made
comfortable; the carpet being now laid down, and most of my
appurtenances in tolerable order. By and by I shall, unless stopped by
illness, get myself together, and begin living an orderly life and
doing my daily task. I have swung a cot in my dressing-room; partly as
a convenience for myself, partly as a sort of memorial of my poor Uncle,
in whose cot in his dressing-room at Lisworney I remember to have slept
when a child. I have put a good large bookcase in my drawing-room, and
all the rest of my books fit very well into the study."

                           _To Mr. Carlyle_.

"_July 6th_.--No books have come in my way but Emerson's, which I value
full as much as you, though as yet I have read only some corners of
it. We have had an Election here, of the usual stamp; to me a droll
'realized Ideal,' after my late metrical adventures in that line. But
the oddest sign of the Times I know, is a cheap Translation of Strauss's
_Leben Jesu_, now publishing in numbers, and said to be circulating far
and wide. What does--or rather, what does not--this portend?"--


With the Poem called _The Election_, here alluded to, which had been
more than once revised and reconsidered, he was still under some
hesitations; but at last had well-nigh resolved, as from the first it
was clear he would do, on publishing it. This occupied some occasional
portion of his thoughts. But his grand private affair, I believe, was
now _Strafford_; to which, or to its adjuncts, all working hours were
devoted. Sterling's notions of Tragedy are high enough. This is what he
writes once, in reference to his own task in these weeks: "Few, I fancy,
know how much harder it is to write a Tragedy than to realize or be one.
Every man has in his heart and lot, if he pleases, and too many whether
they please or no, all the woes of OEdipus and Antigone. But it takes
the One, the Sophocles of a thousand years, to utter these in the
full depth and harmony of creative song. Curious, by the way, how that
Dramatic Form of the old Greek, with only some superficial changes,
remains a law not only for the stage, but for the thoughts of all Poets;
and what a charm it has even for the reader who never saw a theatre. The
Greek Plays and Shakspeare have interested a hundred as books, for one
who has seen their writings acted. How lightly does the mere clown, the
idle school-girl, build a private theatre in the fancy, and laugh or
weep with Falstaff and Macbeth: with how entire an oblivion of the
artificial nature of the whole contrivance, which thus compels them
to be their own architects, machinists, scene-painters, and actors! In
fact, the artifice succeeds,--becomes grounded in the substance of the
soul: and every one loves to feel how he is thus brought face to face
with the brave, the fair, the woful and the great of all past ages;
looks into their eyes, and feels the beatings of their hearts; and
reads, over the shoulder, the secret written tablets of the busiest
and the largest brains; while the Juggler, by whose cunning the whole
strange beautiful absurdity is set in motion, keeps himself hidden;
sings loud with a mouth unmoving as that of a statue, and makes the
human race cheat itself unanimously and delightfully by the illusion
that he preordains; while as an obscure Fate, he sits invisible, and
hardly lets his being be divined by those who cannot flee him. The Lyric
Art is childish, and the Epic barbarous, compared to this. But of the
true and perfect Drama it may be said, as of even higher mysteries,
Who is sufficient for these things?"--On this _Tragedy of Strafford_,
writing it and again writing it, studying for it, and bending himself
with his whole strength to do his best on it, he expended many strenuous
months,--"above a year of his life," he computes, in all.

For the rest, what Falmouth has to give him he is willing to take, and
mingles freely in it. In Hare's Collection there is given a _Lecture_
which he read in Autumn, 1841 (Mr. Hare says "1842," by mistake), to a
certain Public Institution in the place,--of which more anon;--a piece
interesting in this, if not much in any other respect. Doubtless his
friends the Foxes were at the heart of that lecturing enterprise, and
had urged and solicited him. Something like proficiency in certain
branches of science, as I have understood, characterized one or more of
this estimable family; love of knowledge, taste for art, wish to consort
with wisdom and wise men, were the tendencies of all; to opulent means
superadd the Quaker beneficence, Quaker purity and reverence, there is a
circle in which wise men also may love to be. Sterling made acquaintance
here with whatever of notable in worthy persons or things might be
afoot in those parts; and was led thereby, now and then, into pleasant
reunions, in new circles of activity, which might otherwise have
continued foreign to him. The good Calvert, too, was now here; and
intended to remain;--which he mostly did henceforth, lodging in
Sterling's neighborhood, so long as lodging in this world was permitted
him. Still good and clear and cheerful; still a lively comrade, within
doors or without,--a diligent rider always,--though now wearing visibly
weaker, and less able to exert himself.

Among those accidental Falmouth reunions, perhaps the notablest for
Sterling occurred in this his first season. There is in Falmouth an
Association called the _Cornwall Polytechnic Society_, established about
twenty years ago, and supported by the wealthy people of the Town and
neighborhood, for the encouragement of the arts in that region; it has
its Library, its Museum, some kind of Annual Exhibition withal; gives
prizes, publishes reports: the main patrons, I believe, are Sir Charles
Lemon, a well-known country gentleman of those parts, and the Messrs.
Fox. To this, so far as he liked to go in it, Sterling was sure to be
introduced and solicited. The Polytechnic meeting of 1841 was unusually
distinguished; and Sterling's part in it formed one of the pleasant
occurrences for him in Falmouth. It was here that, among other
profitable as well as pleasant things, he made acquaintance with
Professor Owen (an event of which I too had my benefit in due time, and
still have): the bigger assemblage called _British Association_, which
met at Plymouth this year, having now just finished its affairs there,
Owen and other distinguished persons had taken Falmouth in their route
from it. Sterling's account of this Polytechnic gala still remains,--in
three Letters to his Father, which, omitting the extraneous portions,
I will give in one,--as a piece worth reading among those still-life
pictures:--

          "To Edward Sterling, Esq., Knightsbridge, London.
                                         "FALMOUTH, 10th August, 1841.

"MY DEAR FATHER,--I was not well for a day or two after you went; and
since, I have been busy about an annual show of the Polytechnic Society
here, in which my friends take much interest, and for which I have been
acting as one of the judges in the department of the Fine Arts, and have
written a little Report for them. As I have not said that Falmouth is as
eminent as Athens or Florence, perhaps the Committee will not adopt my
statement. But if they do, it will be of some use; for I have hinted, as
delicately as possible, that people should not paint historical pictures
before they have the power of drawing a decent outline of a pig or a
cabbage. I saw Sir Charles Lemon yesterday, who was kind as well as
civil in his manner; and promises to be a pleasant neighbor. There are
several of the British Association heroes here; but not Whewell, or any
one whom I know."

"_August 17th_.--At the Polytechnic Meeting here we had several very
eminent men; among others, Professor Owen, said to be the first of
comparative anatomists, and Conybeare the geologist. Both of these
gave evening Lectures; and after Conybeare's, at which I happened to be
present, I said I would, if they chose, make some remarks on the
Busts which happened to be standing there, intended for prizes in the
department of the Fine Arts. They agreed gladly. The heads were Homer,
Pericles, Augustus, Dante and Michael Angelo. I got into the box-like
platform, with these on a shelf before me; and began a talk which
must have lasted some three quarters of an hour; describing partly the
characters and circumstances of the men, illustrated by anecdotes and
compared with their physiognomies, and partly the several styles of
sculpture exhibited in the Casts, referring these to what I considered
the true principles of the Art. The subject was one that interests
me, and I got on in famous style; and had both pit and galleries all
applauding, in a way that had had no precedent during any other part
of the meeting. Conybeare paid me high compliments; Owen looked much
pleased,--an honor well purchased by a year's hard work;--and everybody,
in short, seemed delighted. Susan was not there, and I had nothing to
make me nervous; so that I worked away freely, and got vigorously over
the ground. After so many years' disuse of rhetoric, it was a pleasant
surprise to myself to find that I could still handle the old weapons
without awkwardness. More by good luck than good guidance, it has done
my health no harm. I have been at Sir Charles Lemon's, though only to
pay a morning visit, having declined to stay there or dine, the hours
not suiting me. They were very civil. The person I saw most of was
his sister, Lady Dunstanville; a pleasant, well-informed and well-bred
woman. He seems a most amiable, kindly man, of fair good sense and
cultivated tastes.--I had a letter to-day from my Mother [in Scotland];
who says she sent you one which you were to forward me; which I hope
soon to have."

"_August 29th_.--I returned yesterday from Carclew, Sir C. Lemon's fine
place about five miles off; where I had been staying a couple of days,
with apparently the heartiest welcome. Susan was asked; but wanting a
Governess, could not leave home.

"Sir Charles is a widower (his Wife was sister to Lord Ilchester)
without children; but had a niece staying with him, and his sister
Lady Dunstanville, a pleasant and very civil woman. There were also Mr.
Bunbury, eldest son of Sir Henry Bunbury, a man of much cultivation and
strong talents; Mr. Fox Talbot, son, I think, of another Ilchester
lady, and brother of _the_ Talbot of Wales, but himself a man of
large fortune, and known for photogenic and other scientific plans of
extracting sunbeams from cucumbers. He also is a man of known ability,
but chiefly employed in that peculiar department. _Item_ Professors
Lloyd and Owen: the former, of Dublin, son of the late Provost, I
had seen before and knew; a great mathematician and optician, and a
discoverer in those matters; with a clever little Wife, who has a great
deal of knowledge, quite free from pretension. Owen is a first-rate
comparative anatomist, they say the greatest since Cuvier; lives in
London, and lectures there. On the whole, he interested me more than any
of them,--by an apparent force and downrightness of mind, combined with
much simplicity and frankness.

"Nothing could be pleasanter and easier than the habits of life, with
what to me was a very unusual degree of luxury, though probably nothing
but what is common among people of large fortune. The library and
pictures are nothing extraordinary. The general tone of good nature,
good sense and quiet freedom, was what struck me most; and I think
besides this there was a disposition to be cordially courteous towards
me....

"I took Edward a ride of two hours yesterday on Calvert's pony, and he
is improving fast in horsemanship. The school appears to answer very
well. We shall have the Governess in a day or two, which will be a great
satisfaction. Will you send my Mother this scribble with my love; and
believe me,

                        "Your affectionate son,
                                                      "JOHN STERLING."

One other little event dwells with me, out of those Falmouth times,
exact date now forgotten; a pleasant little matter, in which Sterling,
and principally the Misses Fox, bright cheery young creatures, were
concerned; which, for the sake of its human interest, is worth mention.
In a certain Cornish mine, said the Newspapers duly specifying it,
two miners deep down in the shaft were engaged putting in a shot for
blasting: they had completed their affair, and were about to give the
signal for being hoisted up,--one at a time was all their coadjutor at
the top could manage, and the second was to kindle the match, and then
mount with all speed. Now it chanced while they were both still below,
one of them thought the match too long; tried to break it shorter, took
a couple of stones, a flat and a sharp, to cut it shorter; did cut it
of the due length, but, horrible to relate, kindled it at the same time,
and both were still below! Both shouted vehemently to the coadjutor at
the windlass, both sprang at the basket; the windlass man could not move
it with them both. Here was a moment for poor miner Jack and miner Will!
Instant horrible death hangs over both,--when Will generously resigns
himself: "Go aloft, Jack," and sits down; "away; in one minute I shall
be in Heaven!" Jack bounds aloft, the explosion instantly follows,
bruises his face as he looks over; he is safe above ground: and poor
Will? Descending eagerly they find Will too, as if by miracle, buried
under rocks which had arched themselves over him, and little injured: he
too is brought up safe, and all ends joyfully, say the Newspapers.

Such a piece of manful promptitude, and salutary human heroism, was
worth investigating. It was investigated; found to be accurate to the
letter,--with this addition and explanation, that Will, an honest,
ignorant good man, entirely given up to Methodism, had been perfect in
the "faith of assurance," certain that _he_ should get to Heaven if
he died, certain that Jack would not, which had been the ground of his
decision in that great moment;--for the rest, that he much wished
to learn reading and writing, and find some way of life above ground
instead of below. By aid of the Misses Fox and the rest of that family,
a subscription (modest _Anti_-Hudson testimonial) was raised to this
Methodist hero: he emerged into daylight with fifty pounds in his
pocket; did strenuously try, for certain months, to learn reading and
writing; found he could not learn those arts or either of them; took his
money and bought cows with it, wedding at the same time some religious
likely milkmaid; and is, last time I heard of him, a prosperous modest
dairyman, thankful for the upper light and safety from the wrath to
come. Sterling had some hand in this affair: but, as I said, it was the
two young ladies of the family that mainly did it.

In the end of 1841, after many hesitations and revisals, _The Election_
came out; a tiny Duodecimo without name attached; [24] again inquiring of
the public what its suffrage was; again to little purpose. My vote had
never been loud for this step, but neither was it quite adverse; and
now, in reading the poor little Poem over again, after ten years'
space, I find it, with a touching mixture of pleasure and repentance,
considerably better than it then seemed to me. My encouragement, if not
to print this poem, yet to proceed with Poetry, since there was such a
resolution for it, might have been a little more decided!

This is a small Piece, but aims at containing great things; a _multum
in parvo_ after its sort; and is executed here and there with undeniable
success. The style is free and flowing, the rhyme dances along with a
certain joyful triumph; everything of due brevity withal. That mixture
of mockery on the surface, which finely relieves the real earnestness
within, and flavors even what is not very earnest and might even be
insipid otherwise, is not ill managed: an amalgam difficult to effect
well in writing; nay, impossible in writing,--unless it stand already
done and effected, as a general fact, in the writer's mind and
character; which will betoken a certain ripeness there.

As I said, great things are intended in this little Piece; the motto
itself foreshadowing them:--

     "_Fluellen_.   Ancient Pistol, I do partly understand your
                    meaning.
     _Pistol_.      Why, then, rejoice therefor."

A stupid commonplace English Borough has lost its Member suddenly, by
apoplexy or otherwise; resolves, in the usual explosive temper of mind,
to replace him by one of two others; whereupon strange stirring-up of
rival-attorney and other human interests and catastrophes. "Frank Vane"
(Sterling himself), and "Peter Mogg," the pattern English blockhead of
elections: these are the candidates. There are, of course, fierce rival
attorneys; electors of all creeds and complexions to be canvassed: a
poor stupid Borough thrown all into red or white heat; into blazing
paroxysms of activity and enthusiasm, which render the inner life of it
(and of England and the world through it) luminously transparent, so to
speak;--of which opportunity our friend and his "Muse" take dexterous
advantage, to delineate the same. His pictures are uncommonly good;
brief, joyous, sometimes conclusively true: in rigorously compressed
shape; all is merry freshness and exuberance: we have leafy summer
embowering red bricks and small human interests, presented as in glowing
miniature; a mock-heroic action fitly interwoven;--and many a clear
glance is carelessly given into the deepest things by the way. Very
happy also is the little love-episode; and the absorption of all the
interest into that, on the part of Frank Vane and of us, when once this
gallant Frank,--having fairly from his barrel-head stated his own (and
John Sterling's) views on the aspects of the world, and of course having
quite broken down with his attorney and his public,--handsomely, by
stratagem, gallops off with the fair Anne; and leaves free field to
Mogg, free field to the Hippopotamus if it like. This portrait of Mogg
may be considered to have merit:--

     "Though short of days, how large the mind of man;
     A godlike force enclosed within a span!
     To climb the skies we spurn our nature's clog,
     And toil as Titans to elect a Mogg.

     "And who was Mogg?  O Muse! the man declare,
     How excellent his worth, his parts how rare.
     A younger son, he learnt in Oxford's halls
     The spheral harmonies of billiard-balls,
     Drank, hunted, drove, and hid from Virtue's frown
     His venial follies in Decorum's gown.
     Too wise to doubt on insufficient cause,
     He signed old Cranmer's lore without a pause;
     And knew that logic's cunning rules are taught
     To guard our creed, and not invigorate thought,--
     As those bronze steeds at Venice, kept for pride,
     Adorn a Town where not one man can ride.

     "From Isis sent with all her loud acclaims,
     The Laws he studied on the banks of Thames.
     Park, race and play, in his capacious plan,
     Combined with Coke to form the finished man,
     Until the wig's ambrosial influence shed
     Its last full glories on the lawyer's head.

     "But vain are mortal schemes.  The eldest son
     At Harrier Hall had scarce his stud begun,
     When Death's pale courser took the Squire away
     To lands where never dawns a hunting day:
     And so, while Thomas vanished 'mid the fog,
     Bright rose the morning-star of Peter Mogg." [25]

And this little picture, in a quite opposite way:--

     "Now, in her chamber all alone, the maid
     Her polished limbs and shoulders disarrayed;
     One little taper gave the only light,
     One little mirror caught so dear a sight;
     'Mid hangings dusk and shadows wide she stood,
     Like some pale Nymph in dark-leafed solitude
     Of rocks and gloomy waters all alone,
     Where sunshine scarcely breaks on stump or stone
     To scare the dreamy vision.  Thus did she,
     A star in deepest night, intent but free,
     Gleam through the eyeless darkness, heeding not
     Her beauty's praise, but musing o'er her lot.

     "Her garments one by one she laid aside,
     And then her knotted hair's long locks untied
     With careless hand, and down her cheeks they fell,
     And o'er her maiden bosom's blue-veined swell.
     The right-hand fingers played amidst her hair,
     And with her reverie wandered here and there:
     The other hand sustained the only dress
     That now but half concealed her loveliness;
     And pausing, aimlessly she stood and thought,
     In virgin beauty by no fear distraught."

Manifold, and beautiful of their sort, are Anne's musings, in this
interesting attitude, in the summer midnight, in the crisis of her
destiny now near;--at last:--

     "But Anne, at last her mute devotions o'er,
     Perceived the feet she had forgot before
     Of her too shocking nudity; and shame
     Flushed from her heart o'er all the snowy frame:
     And, struck from top to toe with burning dread,
     She blew the light out, and escaped to bed." [26]

--which also is a very pretty movement.

It must be owned withal, the Piece is crude in parts, and far enough
from perfect. Our good painter has yet several things to learn, and
to unlearn. His brush is not always of the finest; and dashes about,
sometimes, in a recognizably sprawling way: but it hits many a feature
with decisive accuracy and felicity; and on the palette, as usual, lie
the richest colors. A grand merit, too, is the brevity of everything; by
no means a spontaneous, or quite common merit with Sterling.

This new poetic Duodecimo, as the last had done and as the next also
did, met with little or no recognition from the world: which was not
very inexcusable on the world's part; though many a poem with far less
proof of merit than this offers, has run, when the accidents favored it,
through its tens of editions, and raised the writer to the demigods for
a year or two, if not longer. Such as it is, we may take it as marking,
in its small way, in a noticed or unnoticed manner, a new height arrived
at by Sterling in his Poetic course; and almost as vindicating the
determination he had formed to keep climbing by that method. Poor Poem,
or rather Promise of a Poem! In Sterling's brave struggle, this little
_Election_ is the highest point he fairly lived to see attained, and
openly demonstrated in print. His next public adventure in this kind
was of inferior worth; and a third, which had perhaps intrinsically gone
much higher than any of its antecessors, was cut off as a fragment, and
has not hitherto been published. Steady courage is needed on the Poetic
course, as on all courses!--

Shortly after this Publication, in the beginning of 1842, poor Calvert,
long a hopeless sufferer, was delivered by death: Sterling's faithful
fellow-pilgrim could no more attend him in his wayfarings through this
world. The weary and heavy-laden man had borne his burden well. Sterling
says of him to Hare: "Since I wrote last, I have lost Calvert; the
man with whom, of all others, I have been during late years the most
intimate. Simplicity, benevolence, practical good sense and moral
earnestness were his great unfailing characteristics; and no man, I
believe, ever possessed them more entirely. His illness had latterly
so prostrated him, both in mind and body, that those who most loved him
were most anxious for his departure." There was something touching in
this exit; in the quenching of so kind and bright a little life under
the dark billows of death. To me he left a curious old Print of James
Nayler the Quaker, which I still affectionately preserve.


Sterling, from this greater distance, came perhaps rather seldomer to
London; but we saw him still at moderate intervals; and, through his
family here and other direct and indirect channels, were kept in lively
communication with him. Literature was still his constant pursuit; and,
with encouragement or without, Poetic composition his chosen department
therein. On the ill success of _The Election_, or any ill success with
the world, nobody ever heard him utter the least murmur; condolence upon
that or any such subject might have been a questionable operation, by no
means called for! Nay, my own approval, higher than this of the world,
had been languid, by no means enthusiastic. But our valiant friend took
all quietly; and was not to be repulsed from his Poetics either by the
world's coldness or by mine; he labored at his _Strafford_;--determined
to labor, in all ways, till he felt the end of his tether in this
direction.

He sometimes spoke, with a certain zeal, of my starting a Periodical:
Why not lift up some kind of war-flag against the obese platitudes, and
sickly superstitious aperies and impostures of the time? But I had to
answer, "Who will join it, my friend?" He seemed to say, "I, for one;"
and there was occasionally a transient temptation in the thought, but
transient only. No fighting regiment, with the smallest attempt towards
drill, co-operation, commissariat, or the like unspeakable advantages,
could be raised in Sterling's time or mine; which truly, to honest
fighters, is a rather grievous want. A grievous, but not quite a fatal
one. For, failing this, failing all things and all men, there remains
the solitary battle (and were it by the poorest weapon, the tongue only,
or were it even by wise abstinence and silence and without any weapon),
such as each man for himself can wage while he has life: an indubitable
and infinitely comfortable fact for every man! Said battle shaped itself
for Sterling, as we have long since seen, chiefly in the poetic form, in
the singing or hymning rather than the speaking form; and in that he was
cheerfully assiduous according to his light. The unfortunate _Strafford_
is far on towards completion; a _Coeur-de-Lion_, of which we shall hear
farther, "_Coeur-de-Lion_, greatly the best of all his Poems," unluckily
not completed, and still unpublished, already hangs in the wind.

His Letters to friends continue copious; and he has, as always, a
loyally interested eye on whatsoever of notable is passing in the world.
Especially on whatsoever indicates to him the spiritual condition of the
world. Of "Strauss," in English or in German, we now hear nothing more;
of Church matters, and that only to special correspondents, less and
less. Strauss, whom he used to mention, had interested him only as a
sign of the times; in which sense alone do we find, for a year or two
back, any notice of the Church, or its affairs by Sterling; and at last
even this as good as ceases: "Adieu, O Church; thy road is that way,
mine is this: in God's name, adieu!" "What we are going _to_," says he
once, "is abundantly obscure; but what all men are going _from_, is very
plain."--Sifted out of many pages, not of sufficient interest, here are
one or two miscellaneous sentences, about the date we are now arrived
at:--

                           _To Dr. Symonds_.

"_Falmouth, 3d November_, 1841.--Yesterday was my Wedding-day: eleven
years of marriage; and on the whole my verdict is clear for matrimony.
I solemnized the day by reading _John Gilpin_ to the children, who
with their Mother are all pretty well.... There is a trick of sham
Elizabethan writing now prevalent, that looks plausible, but in most
cases means nothing at all. Darley has real (lyrical) genius; Taylor,
wonderful sense, clearness and weight of purpose; Tennyson, a rich and
exquisite fancy. All the other men of our tiny generation that I know
of are, in Poetry, either feeble or fraudulent. I know nothing of the
Reviewer you ask about."

                            _To his Mother_

"_December 11th_.--I have seen no new books; but am reading your last.
I got hold of the two first Numbers of the _Hoggarty Diamond_; and
read them with extreme delight. What is there better in Fielding or
Goldsmith? The man is a true genius; and, with quiet and comfort, might
produce masterpieces that would last as long as any we have, and delight
millions of unborn readers. There is more truth and nature in one of
these papers than in all ----'s Novels together."--Thackeray, always
a close friend of the Sterling house, will observe that this is dated
1841, not 1851, and have his own reflections on the matter!

                            _To the Same_.

"_December 17th_.--I am not much surprised at Lady ----'s views of
Coleridge's little Book on _Inspiration_.--Great part of the obscurity
of the Letters arises from his anxiety to avoid the difficulties and
absurdities of the common views, and his panic terror of saying anything
that bishops and good people would disapprove. He paid a heavy price,
viz. all his own candor and simplicity, in hope of gaining the favor of
persons like Lady ----; and you see what his reward is! A good lesson
for us all."

                            _To the Same_.

"_February 1st_, 1842.--English Toryism has, even in my eyes, about as
much to say for itself as any other form of doctrine; but Irish Toryism
is the downright proclamation of brutal injustice, and all in the name
of God and the Bible! It is almost enough to make one turn Mahometan,
but for the fear of the four wives."

                           _To his Father_.

"_March 12th_, 1842.--... Important to me as these matters are, it
almost seems as if there were something unfeeling in writing of them,
under the pressure of such news as ours from India. If the Cabool Troops
have perished, England has not received such a blow from an enemy, nor
anything approaching it, since Buckingham's Expedition to the Isle
of Rhe. Walcheren destroyed us by climate; and Corunna, with all its
losses, had much of glory. But here we are dismally injured by mere
Barbarians, in a War on our part shamefully unjust as well as foolish:
a combination of disgrace and calamity that would have shocked Augustus
even more than the defeat of Varus. One of the four officers with
Macnaghten was George Lawrence, a brother-in-law of Nat Barton; a
distinguished man, and the father of five totally unprovided children.
He is a prisoner, if not since murdered. Macnaghten I do not pity; he
was the prime author of the whole mad War. But Burnes; and the women;
and our regiments! India, however, I feel sure, is safe."


So roll the months at Falmouth; such is the ticking of the great
World-Horologe as heard there by a good ear. "I willingly add," so ends
he, once, "that I lately found somewhere this fragment of an Arab's
love-song: 'O Ghalia! If my father were a jackass, I would sell him to
purchase Ghalia!' A beautiful parallel to the French _'Avec cette sauce
on mangerait son pere_.'"



CHAPTER IV. NAPLES: POEMS.

In the bleak weather of this spring, 1842, he was again abroad for a
little while; partly from necessity, or at least utility; and partly, as
I guess, because these circumstances favored, and he could with a good
countenance indulge a little wish he had long had. In the Italian Tour,
which ended suddenly by Mrs. Sterling's illness recalling him, he had
missed Naples; a loss which he always thought to be considerable;
and which, from time to time, he had formed little projects, failures
hitherto, for supplying. The rigors of spring were always dangerous to
him in England, and it was always of advantage to get out of them: and
then the sight of Naples, too; this, always a thing to be done some day,
was now possible. Enough, with the real or imaginary hope of bettering
himself in health, and the certain one of seeing Naples, and catching a
glance of Italy again, he now made a run thither. It was not long after
Calvert's death. The Tragedy of _Strafford_ lay finished in his desk.
Several things, sad and bright, were finished. A little intermezzo of
ramble was not unadvisable.

His tour by water and by land was brief and rapid enough; hardly above
two months in all. Of which the following Letters will, with some
abridgment, give us what details are needful:--

                "_To Charles Barton, Esq., Leamington_.
                                          "FALMOUTH, 25th March, 1842.

"MY DEAR CHARLES,--My attempts to shoot you flying with my paper pellets
turned out very ill. I hope young ladies succeed better when they happen
to make appointments with you. Even now, I hardly know whether you
have received a Letter I wrote on Sunday last, and addressed to The
Cavendish. I sent it thither by Susan's advice.

"In this missive,--happily for us both, it did not contain a
hundred-pound note or any trifle of that kind,--I informed you that I
was compelled to plan an expedition towards the South Pole; stopping,
however, in the Mediterranean; and that I designed leaving this on
Monday next for Cadiz or Gibraltar, and then going on to Malta, whence
Italy and Sicily would be accessible. Of course your company would be
a great pleasure, if it were possible for you to join me. The delay in
hearing from you, through no fault of yours, has naturally put me out a
little; but, on the whole, my plan still holds, and I shall leave this
on Monday for Gibraltar, where the _Great Liverpool_ will catch me, and
carry me to Malta. The _Great Liverpool_ leaves Southampton on the 1st
of April, and Falmouth on the 2d; and will reach Gibraltar in from four
to five days.

"Now, if you _should_ be able and disposed to join me, you have only to
embark in that sumptuous tea-kettle, and pick me up under the guns of
the Rock. We could then cruise on to Malta, Sicily, Naples, Rome, &c.,
_a discretion_. It is just _possible_, though extremely improbable,
that my steamer of Monday (most likely the _Montrose_) may not reach
Gibraltar so soon as the _Liverpool_. If so, and if you should actually
be on board, you must stop at Gibraltar. But there are ninety-nine
chances to one against this. Write at all events to Susan, to let her
know what you propose.

"I do not wait till the _Great Liverpool_ goes, because the object for
me is to get into a warm climate as soon as possible. I am decidedly
better.

                      "Your affectionate Brother,
                                                      "JOHN STERLING."

Barton did not go with him, none went; but he arrives safe, and not
_hurt_ in health, which is something.

              "_To Mrs. Sterling, Knightsbridge, London_.
                                             "MALTA, 14th April, 1842.

"DEAREST MOTHER,--I am writing to Susan through France, by to-morrow's
mail; and will also send you a line, instead of waiting for the longer
English conveyance.

"We reached this the day before yesterday, in the evening; having had
a strong breeze against us for a day or two before; which made me
extremely uncomfortable,--and indeed my headache is hardly gone yet.
From about the 4th to the 9th of the month, we had beautiful weather,
and I was happy enough. You will see by the map that the straightest
line from Gibraltar to this place goes close along the African coast;
which accordingly we saw with the utmost clearness; and found it
generally a line of mountains, the higher peaks and ridges covered with
snow. We went close in to Algiers; which looks strong, but entirely from
art. The town lies on the slope of a straight coast; and is not at all
embayed, though there is some little shelter for shipping within the
mole. It is a square patch of white buildings huddled together; fringed
with batteries; and commanded by large forts on the ridge above: a most
uncomfortable-looking place; though, no doubt, there are _cafes_ and
billiard-rooms and a theatre within,--for the French like to have their
Houris, &c., on _this_ side of Paradise, if possible.

"Our party of fifty people (we had taken some on board at Gibraltar)
broke up, on reaching this; never, of course, to meet again. The greater
part do not proceed to Alexandria. Considering that there was a bundle
of midshipmen, ensigns, &c., we had as much reason among us as could
perhaps be looked for; and from several I gained bits of information and
traits of character, though nothing very remarkable....

"I have established myself in an inn, rather than go to Lady
Louis's; [27] I not feeling quite equal to company, except in moderate
doses. I have, however, seen her a good deal; and dine there to-day,
very privately, for Sir John is not quite well, and they will have no
guests. The place, however, is full of official banqueting, for various
unimportant reasons. When here before, I was in much distress and
anxiety, on my way from Rome; and I suppose this it was that prevented
its making the same impression on me as now, when it seems really the
stateliest town I have ever seen. The architecture is generally of a
corrupt Roman kind; with something of the varied and picturesque look,
though much more massive, of our Elizabethan buildings. We have the
finest English summer and a pellucid sky.... Your affectionate

                                                      "JOHN STERLING."

At Naples next, for three weeks, was due admiration of the sceneries
and antiquities, Bay and Mountain, by no means forgetting Art and
the Museum: "to Pozzuoli, to Baiae, round the Promontory of
Sorrento;"--above all, "twice to Pompeii," where the elegance and
classic simplicity of Ancient Housekeeping strikes us much; and again to
Paestum, where "the Temple of Neptune is far the noblest building I
have ever seen; and makes both Greek and Revived Roman seem quite
barbaric.... Lord Ponsonby lodges in the same house with me;--but, of
course, I do not countenance an adherent of a beaten Party!" [28]--Or let
us take this more compendious account, which has much more of human in
it, from an onward stage, ten days later:--

             "_To Thomas Carlyle, Esq., Chelsea, London_.
                                                "ROME, 13th May, 1842,

"MY DEAR CARLYLE,--I hope I wrote to you before leaving England, to tell
you of the necessity for my doing so. Though coming to Italy, there
was little comfort in the prospect of being divided from my family, and
pursuits which grew on me every day. However, I tried to make the best
of it, and have gained both health and pleasure.

"In spite of scanty communications from England (owing to the
uncertainty of my position), a word or two concerning you and your dear
Wife have reached me. Lately it has often occurred to me, that the sight
of the Bay of Naples, of the beautiful coast from that to this place,
and of Rome itself, all bathed in summer sunshine, and green with spring
foliage, would be some consolation to her. [29] Pray give her my love.

"I have been two days here; and almost the first thing I did was to
visit the Protestant burial-ground, and the graves of those I knew when
here before. But much as being now alone here, I feel the difference,
there is no scene where Death seems so little dreadful and miserable as
in the lonelier neighborhoods of this old place. All one's impressions,
however, as to that and everything else, appear to me, on reflection,
more affected than I had for a long time any notion of, by one's own
isolation. All the feelings and activities which family, friends and
occupation commonly engage, are turned, here in one's solitude, with
strange force into the channels of mere observation and contemplation;
and the objects one is conversant with seem to gain a tenfold
significance from the abundance of spare interest one now has to bestow
on them. This explains to me a good deal of the peculiar effect that
Italy has always had on me: and something of that artistic enthusiasm
which I remember you used to think so singular in Goethe's _Travels_.
Darley, who is as much a brooding hermit in England as here, felt
nothing but disappointment from a country which fills me with childish
wonder and delight.

"Of you I have received some slight notice from Mrs. Strachey; who is
on her way hither; and will (she writes) be at Florence on the 15th, and
here before the end of the month. She notices having received a Letter
of yours which had pleased her much. She now proposes spending the
summer at Sorrento, or thereabouts; and if mere delight of landscape and
climate were enough, Adam and Eve, had their courier taken them to that
region, might have done well enough without Paradise,--and not been
tempted, either, by any Tree of Knowledge; a kind that does not flourish
in the Two Sicilies.

"The ignorance of the Neapolitans, from the highest to the lowest, is
very eminent; and excites the admiration of all the rest of Italy. In
the great building containing all the Works of Art, and a Library
of 150,000 volumes, I asked for the best existing Book (a German one
published ten years ago) on the Statues in that very Collection; and,
after a rabble of clerks and custodes, got up to a dirty priest, who
bowing to the ground regretted 'they did not possess it,' but at last
remembered that 'they _had_ entered into negotiations on the subject,
which as yet had been unsuccessful.'--The favorite device on the walls
at Naples is a vermilion Picture of a Male and Female Soul respectively
up to the waist (the waist of a _soul_) in fire, and an Angel above
each, watering the sufferers from a watering-pot. This is intended
to gain alms for Masses. The same populace sit for hours on the Mole,
listening to rhapsodists who recite Ariosto. I have seen I think five of
them all within a hundred yards of each other, and some sets of fiddlers
to boot. Yet there are few parts of the world where I have seen less
laughter than there. The Miracle of Januarius's Blood is, on the whole,
my most curious experience. The furious entreaties, shrieks and sobs, of
a set of old women, yelling till the Miracle was successfully performed,
are things never to be forgotten.

"I spent three weeks in this most glittering of countries, and saw most
of the usual wonders,--the Paestan Temples being to me much the most
valuable. But Pompeii and all that it has yielded, especially the Fresco
Paintings, have also an infinite interest. When one considers that this
prodigious series of beautiful designs supplied the place of our common
room-papers,--the wealth of poetic imagery among the Ancients, and the
corresponding traditional variety and elegance of pictorial treatment,
seem equally remarkable. The Greek and Latin Books do not give one quite
so fully this sort of impression; because they afford no direct measure
of the extent of their own diffusion. But these are ornaments from the
smaller class of decent houses in a little Country Town; and the greater
number of them, by the slightness of the execution, show very clearly
that they were adapted to ordinary taste, and done by mere artisans.
In general clearness, symmetry and simplicity of feeling, I cannot say
that, on the whole, the works of Raffaelle equal them; though of course
he has endless beauties such as we could not find unless in the great
original works from which these sketches at Pompeii were taken. Yet with
all my much increased reverence for the Greeks, it seems more plain than
ever that they had hardly anything of the peculiar devotional feeling of
Christianity.

"Rome, which I loved before above all the earth, now delights me more
than ever;--though at this moment there is rain falling that would not
discredit Oxford Street. The depth, sincerity and splendor that there
once was in the semi-paganism of the old Catholics comes out in St.
Peter's and its dependencies, almost as grandly as does Greek and Roman
Art in the Forum and the Vatican Galleries. I wish you were here: but,
at all events, hope to see you and your Wife once more during this
summer.

                                "Yours,
                                                      "JOHN STERLING."

At Paris, where he stopped a day and night, and generally through his
whole journey from Marseilles to Havre, one thing attended him: the
prevailing epidemic of the place and year; now gone, and nigh forgotten,
as other influenzas are. He writes to his Father: "I have not yet met a
single Frenchman, who could give me any rational explanation _why_
they were all in such a confounded rage against us. Definite causes of
quarrel a statesman may know how to deal with, inasmuch as the removal
of them may help to settle the dispute. But it must be a puzzling task
to negotiate about instincts; to which class, as it seems to me, we
must have recourse for an understanding of the present abhorrence which
everybody on the other side of the Channel not only feels, but makes a
point to boast of, against the name of Britain. France is slowly arming,
especially with Steam, _en attendant_ a more than possible contest, in
which they reckon confidently on the eager co-operation of the Yankees;
as, _vice versa_, an American told me that his countrymen do on that of
France. One person at Paris (M. ---- whom you know) provoked me to
tell him that 'England did not want another battle of Trafalgar; but if
France did, she might compel England to gratify her.'"--After a couple
of pleasant and profitable months, he was safe home again in the first
days of June; and saw Falmouth not under gray iron skies, and whirls of
March dust, but bright with summer opulence and the roses coming out.

It was what I call his "_fifth_ peregrinity;" his fifth and last. He
soon afterwards came up to London; spent a couple of weeks, with all his
old vivacity, among us here. The AEsculapian oracles, it would appear,
gave altogether cheerful prophecy; the highest medical authority
"expresses the most decided opinion that I have gradually mended for
some years; and in truth I have not, for six or seven, been so free
from serious symptoms of illness as at present." So uncertain are all
oracles, AEsculapian and other!

During this visit, he made one new acquaintance which he much
valued; drawn thither, as I guess, by the wish to take counsel about
_Strafford_. He writes to his Clifton friend, under date, 1st July 1842:
"Lockhart, of the _Quarterly Review_, I made my first oral acquaintance
with; and found him as neat, clear and cutting a brain as you would
expect; but with an amount of knowledge, good nature and liberal
anti-bigotry, that would much surprise many. The tone of his children
towards him seemed to me decisive of his real kindness. He quite
agreed with me as to the threatening seriousness of our present social
perplexities, and the necessity and difficulty of doing something
effectual for so satisfying the manual multitude as not to overthrow all
legal security....

"Of other persons whom I saw in London," continues he, "there are
several that would much interest you,--though I missed Tennyson, by
a mere chance.... John Mill has completely finished, and sent to the
bookseller, his great work on Logic; the labor of many years of a
singularly subtle, patient and comprehensive mind. It will be our chief
speculative monument of this age. Mill and I could not meet above two
or three times; but it was with the openness and freshness of school-boy
friends, though our friendship only dates from the manhood of both."

He himself was busier than ever; occupied continually with all manner of
Poetic interests. _Coeur-de-Lion_, a new and more elaborate attempt in
the mock-heroic or comico-didactic vein, had been on hand for some time,
the scope of it greatly deepening and expanding itself since it first
took hold of him; and now, soon after the Naples journey, it rose into
shape on the wider plan; shaken up probably by this new excitement, and
indebted to Calabria, Palermo and the Mediterranean scenes for much of
the vesture it had. With this, which opened higher hopes for him than
any of his previous efforts, he was now employing all his time and
strength;--and continued to do so, this being the last effort granted
him among us.

Already, for some months, _Strafford_ lay complete: but how to get it
from the stocks; in what method to launch it? The step was questionable.
Before going to Italy he had sent me the Manuscript; still loyal and
friendly; and willing to hear the worst that could be said of his poetic
enterprise. I had to afflict him again, the good brave soul, with the
deliberate report that I could _not_ accept this Drama as his Picture
of the Life of Strafford, or as any _Picture_ of that strange Fact. To
which he answered, with an honest manfulness, in a tone which is now
pathetic enough to me, that he was much grieved yet much obliged, and
uncertain how to decide. On the other hand, Mr. Hare wrote, warmly
eulogizing. Lockhart too spoke kindly, though taking some exceptions.
It was a questionable case. On the whole, _Strafford_ remained, for the
present, unlaunched; and _Coeur de-Lion_ was getting its first timbers
diligently laid down. So passed, in peaceable seclusion, in wholesome
employment and endeavor, the autumn and winter of 1842-43. On
Christmas-day, he reports to his Mother:--

"I wished to write to you yesterday; but was prevented by the important
business of preparing a Tree, in the German fashion, for the children.
This project answered perfectly, as it did last year; and gave them the
greatest pleasure. I wish you and my Father could have been here to see
their merry faces. Johnny was in the thick of the fun, and much happier
than Lord Anson on capturing the galleon. We are all going on well and
quietly, but with nothing very new among us.... The last book I have
lighted on is Moffat's _Missionary Labors in South Africa_; which is
worth reading. There is the best collection of lion stories in it that I
have ever seen. But the man is, also, really a very good fellow; and fit
for something much better than most lions are. He is very ignorant,
and mistaken in some things; but has strong sense and heart; and his
Narrative adds another to the many proofs of the enormous power of
Christianity on rude minds. Nothing can be more chaotic, that is human
at all, than the notions of these poor Blacks, even after what is called
their conversion; but the effect is produced. They do adopt pantaloons,
and abandon polygamy; and I suppose will soon have newspapers and
literary soirees."



CHAPTER V. DISASTER ON DISASTER.

DURING all these years of struggle and wayfaring, his Father's household
at Knightsbridge had stood healthful, happy, increasing in wealth, free
diligence, solidity and honest prosperity: a fixed sunny islet, towards
which, in all his voyagings and overclouded roamings, he could look with
satisfaction, as to an ever-open port of refuge.

The elder Sterling, after many battles, had reached his field of
conquest in these years; and was to be regarded as a victorious man.
Wealth sufficient, increasing not diminishing, had rewarded his labors
in the _Times_, which were now in their full flower; he had influence
of a sort; went busily among busy public men; and enjoyed, in the
questionable form attached to journalism and anonymity, a social
consideration and position which were abundantly gratifying to him. A
singular figure of the epoch; and when you came to know him, which it
was easy to fail of doing if you had not eyes and candid insight, a
gallant, truly gifted, and manful figure, of his kind. We saw much of
him in this house; much of all his family; and had grown to love them
all right well,--him too, though that was the difficult part of the
feat. For in his Irish way he played the conjurer very much,--"three
hundred and sixty-five opinions in the year upon every subject," as a
wag once said. In fact his talk, ever ingenious, emphatic and spirited
in detail, was much defective in earnestness, at least in clear
earnestness, of purport and outcome; but went tumbling as if in mere
welters of explosive unreason; a volcano heaving under vague deluges of
scoriae, ashes and imponderous pumice-stones, you could not say in what
direction, nor well whether in any. Not till after good study did you
see the deep molten lava-flood, which simmered steadily enough, and
showed very well by and by whither it was bound. For I must say
of Edward Sterling, after all his daily explosive sophistries, and
fallacies of talk, he had a stubborn instinctive sense of what was
manful, strong and worthy; recognized, with quick feeling, the charlatan
under his solemnest wig; knew as clearly as any man a pusillanimous
tailor in buckram, an ass under the lion's skin, and did with his whole
heart despise the same.

The sudden changes of doctrine in the _Times_, which failed not to
excite loud censure and indignant amazement in those days, were first
intelligible to you when you came to interpret them as his changes.
These sudden whirls from east to west on his part, and total changes of
party and articulate opinion at a day's warning, lay in the nature of
the man, and could not be helped; products of his fiery impatience,
of the combined impetuosity and limitation of an intellect, which did
nevertheless continually gravitate towards what was loyal, true and
right on all manner of subjects. These, as I define them, were the mere
scoriae and pumice wreck of a steady central lava-flood, which truly was
volcanic and explosive to a strange degree, but did rest as few others
on the grand fire-depths of the world. Thus, if he stormed along, ten
thousand strong, in the time of the Reform Bill, indignantly denouncing
Toryism and its obsolete insane pretensions; and then if, after some
experience of Whig management, he discerned that Wellington and Peel,
by whatever name entitled, were the men to be depended on by
England,--there lay in all this, visible enough, a deeper consistency
far more important than the superficial one, so much clamored after by
the vulgar. Which is the lion's-skin; which is the real lion? Let a man,
if he is prudent, ascertain that before speaking;--but above and beyond
all things, _let_ him ascertain it, and stand valiantly to it when
ascertained! In the latter essential part of the operation Edward
Sterling was honorably successful to a really marked degree; in the
former, or prudential part, very much the reverse, as his history in the
Journalistic department at least, was continually teaching him.

An amazingly impetuous, hasty, explosive man, this "Captain Whirlwind,"
as I used to call him! Great sensibility lay in him, too; a real
sympathy, and affectionate pity and softness, which he had an
over-tendency to express even by tears,--a singular sight in so leonine
a man. Enemies called them maudlin and hypocritical, these tears; but
that was nowise the complete account of them. On the whole, there did
conspicuously lie a dash of ostentation, a self-consciousness apt to
become loud and braggart, over all he said and did and felt: this was
the alloy of the man, and you had to be thankful for the abundant gold
along with it.

Quizzing enough he got among us for all this, and for the singular
_chiaroscuro_ manner of procedure, like that of an Archimagus
Cagliostro, or Kaiser Joseph Incognito, which his anonymous
known-unknown thunderings in the _Times_ necessitated in him; and much
we laughed,--not without explosive counter-banterings on his part;--but,
in fine, one could not do without him; one knew him at heart for a right
brave man. "By Jove, sir!" thus he would swear to you, with radiant
face; sometimes, not often, by a deeper oath. With persons of dignity,
especially with women, to whom he was always very gallant, he had
courtly delicate manners, verging towards the wire-drawn and elaborate;
on common occasions, he bloomed out at once into jolly familiarity of
the gracefully boisterous kind, reminding you of mess-rooms and old
Dublin days. His off-hand mode of speech was always precise, emphatic,
ingenious: his laugh, which was frequent rather than otherwise, had a
sincerity of banter, but no real depth of sense for the ludicrous; and
soon ended, if it grew too loud, in a mere dissonant scream. He was
broad, well-built, stout of stature; had a long lowish head, sharp gray
eyes, with large strong aquiline face to match; and walked, or sat, in
an erect decisive manner. A remarkable man; and playing, especially in
those years 1830-40, a remarkable part in the world.

For it may be said, the emphatic, big-voiced, always influential and
often strongly unreasonable _Times_ Newspaper was the express emblem of
Edward Sterling; he, more than any other man or circumstance, _was_
the _Times_ Newspaper, and thundered through it to the shaking of the
spheres. And let us assert withal that his and its influence, in those
days, was not ill grounded but rather well; that the loud manifold
unreason, often enough vituperated and groaned over, was of the surface
mostly; that his conclusions, unreasonable, partial, hasty as they might
at first be, gravitated irresistibly towards the right: in virtue of
which grand quality indeed, the root of all good insight in man, his
_Times_ oratory found acceptance and influential audience, amid the loud
whirl of an England itself logically very stupid, and wise chiefly by
instinct.

England listened to this voice, as all might observe; and to one who
knew England and it, the result was not quite a strange one, and was
honorable rather than otherwise to both parties. A good judge of men's
talents has been heard to say of Edward Sterling: "There is not a
_faculty of improvising_ equal to this in all my circle. Sterling rushes
out into the clubs, into London society, rolls about all day, copiously
talking modish nonsense or sense, and listening to the like, with the
multifarious miscellany of men; comes home at night; redacts it into a
_Times_ Leader,--and is found to have hit the essential purport of the
world's immeasurable babblement that day, with an accuracy beyond all
other men. This is what the multifarious Babel sound did mean to say in
clear words; this, more nearly than anything else. Let the most gifted
intellect, capable of writing epics, try to write such a Leader for the
Morning Newspapers! No intellect but Edward Sterling's can do it.
An improvising faculty without parallel in my experience."--In this
"improvising faculty," much more nobly developed, as well as in other
faculties and qualities with unexpectedly new and improved figure, John
Sterling, to the accurate observer, showed himself very much the son of
Edward.

Connected with this matter, a remarkable Note has come into my hands;
honorable to the man I am writing of, and in some sort to another higher
man; which, as it may now (unhappily for us all) be published without
scruple, I will not withhold here. The support, by Edward Sterling
and the _Times_, of Sir Robert Peel's first Ministry, and generally of
Peel's statesmanship, was a conspicuous fact in its day; but the return
it met with from the person chiefly interested may be considered well
worth recording. The following Letter, after meandering through I know
not what intricate conduits, and consultations of the Mysterious
Entity whose address it bore, came to Edward Sterling as the real
flesh-and-blood proprietor, and has been found among his papers. It is
marked _Private_:--

               "(Private) _To the Editor of the Times_.
                                         "WHITEHALL, 18th April, 1835.

"SIR,--Having this day delivered into the hands of the King the Seals
of Office, I can, without any imputation of an interested motive, or any
impediment from scrupulous feelings of delicacy, express my deep sense
of the powerful support which that Government over which I had the honor
to preside received from the _Times_ Newspaper.

"If I do not offer the expressions of personal gratitude, it is because
I feel that such expressions would do injustice to the character of a
support which was given exclusively on the highest and most independent
grounds of public principle. I can say this with perfect truth, as I
am addressing one whose person even is unknown to me, and who during my
tenure of power studiously avoided every species of intercourse which
could throw a suspicion upon the motives by which he was actuated. I
should, however, be doing injustice to my own feelings, if I were to
retire from Office without one word of acknowledgment; without at
least assuring you of the admiration with which I witnessed, during the
arduous contest in which I was engaged, the daily exhibition of that
extraordinary ability to which I was indebted for a support, the more
valuable because it was an impartial and discriminating support.--I have
the honor to be, Sir,

            "Ever your most obedient and faithful servant,
                                                        "ROBERT PEEL."

To which, with due loftiness and diplomatic gravity and brevity,
there is Answer, Draught of Answer in Edward Sterling's hand, from the
Mysterious Entity so honored, in the following terms:--

       "_To the Right Hon. Sir Robert Peel, Bart., &c. &c. &c_.

"SIR,--It gives me sincere satisfaction to learn from the Letter with
which you have honored me, bearing yesterday's date, that you estimate
so highly the efforts which have been made during the last five months
by the _Times_ Newspaper to support the cause of rational and wholesome
Government which his Majesty had intrusted to your guidance; and that
you appreciate fairly the disinterested motive, of regard to the public
welfare, and to that alone, through which this Journal has been prompted
to pursue a policy in accordance with that of your Administration. It
is, permit me to say, by such motives only, that the _Times_, ever
since I have known it, has been influenced, whether in defence of the
Government of the day, or in constitutional resistance to it: and indeed
there exist no other motives of action for a Journalist, compatible
either with the safety of the press, or with the political morality of
the great bulk of its readers.--With much respect, I have the honor to
be, Sir, &c. &c. &c.

                                          "THE EDITOR OF THE 'TIMES.'"

Of this Note I do not think there was the least whisper during Edward
Sterling's lifetime; which fact also one likes to remember of him,
so ostentatious and little-reticent a man. For the rest, his loyal
admiration of Sir Robert Peel,--sanctioned, and as it were almost
consecrated to his mind, by the great example of the Duke of
Wellington, whom he reverenced always with true hero-worship,--was not
a journalistic one, but a most intimate authentic feeling, sufficiently
apparent in the very heart of his mind. Among the many opinions "liable
to three hundred and sixty-five changes in the course of the year," this
in reference to Peel and Wellington was one which ever changed, but was
the same all days and hours. To which, equally genuine, and coming still
oftener to light in those times, there might one other be added, one and
hardly more: fixed contempt, not unmingled with detestation, for Daniel
O'Connell. This latter feeling, we used often laughingly to say, was
his grand political principle, the one firm centre where all else went
revolving. But internally the other also was deep and constant; and
indeed these were properly his _two_ centres,--poles of the same axis,
negative and positive, the one presupposing the other.

O'Connell he had known in young Dublin days;--and surely no man could
well venerate another less! It was his deliberate, unalterable opinion
of the then Great O, that good would never come of him; that only
mischief, and this in huge measure, would come. That however showy, and
adroit in rhetoric and management, he was a man of incurably commonplace
intellect, and of no character but a hollow, blustery, pusillanimous
and unsound one; great only in maudlin patriotisms, in speciosities,
astucities,--in the miserable gifts for becoming Chief _Demagogos_,
Leader of a deep-sunk Populace towards _its_ Lands of Promise; which
trade, in any age or country, and especially in the Ireland of this age,
our indignant friend regarded (and with reason) as an extremely ugly one
for a man. He had himself zealously advocated Catholic Emancipation,
and was not without his Irish patriotism, very different from the Orange
sort; but the "Liberator" was not admirable to him, and grew daily less
so to an extreme degree. Truly, his scorn of the said Liberator, now
riding in supreme dominion on the wings of _blarney_, devil-ward of a
surety, with the Liberated all following and huzzaing; his fierce gusts
of wrath and abhorrence over him,--rose occasionally almost to the
sublime. We laughed often at these vehemences:--and they were not wholly
laughable; there was something very serious, and very true, in them!
This creed of Edward Sterling's would not now, in either pole of its
axis, look so strange as it then did in many quarters.


During those ten years which might be defined as the culminating period
of Edward Sterling's life, his house at South Place, Knights bridge, had
worn a gay and solid aspect, as if built at last on the high table-land
of sunshine and success, the region of storms and dark weather now
all victoriously traversed and lying safe below. Health, work, wages,
whatever is needful to a man, he had, in rich measure; and a frank stout
heart to guide the same: he lived in such style as pleased him; drove
his own chariot up and down (himself often acting as Jehu, and reminding
you a little of _Times_ thunder even in driving); consorted, after
a fashion, with the powerful of the world; saw in due vicissitude a
miscellany of social faces round him,--pleasant parties, which he liked
well enough to garnish by a lord; "Irish lord, if no better might be,"
as the banter went. For the rest, he loved men of worth and intellect,
and recognized them well, whatever their title: this was his own patent
of worth which Nature had given him; a central light in the man,
which illuminated into a kind of beauty, serious or humorous, all the
artificialities he had accumulated on the surface of him. So rolled his
days, not quietly, yet prosperously, in manifold commerce with men.
At one in the morning, when all had vanished into sleep, his lamp
was kindled in his library; and there, twice or thrice a week, for a
three-hours' space, he launched his bolts, which next morning were to
shake the high places of the world.

John's relation to his Father, when one saw John here, was altogether
frank, joyful and amiable: he ignored the _Times_ thunder for most part,
coldly taking the Anonymous for non-extant; spoke of it floutingly, if
he spoke at all: indeed a pleasant half-bantering dialect was the
common one between Father and Son; and they, especially with the gentle,
simple-hearted, just-minded Mother for treble-voice between them, made a
very pretty glee-harmony together.

So had it lasted, ever since poor John's voyagings began; his Father's
house standing always as a fixed sunny islet with safe harbor for him.
So it could not always last. This sunny islet was now also to break and
go down: so many firm islets, fixed pillars in his fluctuating world,
pillar after pillar, were to break and go down; till swiftly all, so
to speak, were sunk in the dark waters, and he with them! Our little
History is now hastening to a close.


In the beginning of 1843 news reached us that Sterling had, in his too
reckless way, encountered a dangerous accident: maids, in the room where
he was, were lifting a heavy table; he, seeing them in difficulty, had
snatched at the burden; heaved it away,--but had broken a blood-vessel
by the business; and was now, after extensive hemorrhage, lying
dangerously ill. The doctors hoped the worst was over; but the case was
evidently serious. In the same days, too, his Mother had been seized
here by some painful disease, which from its continuance grew alarming.
Sad omens for Edward Sterling, who by this time had as good as ceased
writing or working in the _Times_, having comfortably winded up his
affairs there; and was looking forward to a freer idle life befitting
his advanced years henceforth. Fatal eclipse had fallen over that
household of his; never to be lifted off again till all darkened into
night.

By dint of watchful nursing, John Sterling got on foot once more: but
his Mother did not recover, quite the contrary. Her case too grew very
questionable. Disease of the heart, said the medical men at last; not
immediately, not perhaps for a length of years, dangerous to life, said
they; but without hope of cure. The poor lady suffered much; and, though
affecting hope always, grew weaker and weaker. John ran up to Town in
March; I saw him, on the morrow or next day after, in his own room at
Knightsbridge: he had caught fresh cold overnight, the servant having
left his window up, but I was charged to say nothing of it, not to
flutter the already troubled house: he was going home again that very
day, and nothing ill would come of it. We understood the family at
Falmouth, his Wife being now near her confinement again, could at any
rate comport with no long absence. He was cheerful, even rudely merry;
himself pale and ill, his poor Mother's cough audible occasionally
through the wall. Very kind, too, and gracefully affectionate; but I
observed a certain grimness in his mood of mind, and under his light
laughter lay something unusual, something stern, as if already dimmed
in the coming shadows of Fate. "Yes, yes, you are a good man: but I
understand they mean to appoint you to Rhadamanthus's post, which has
been vacant for some time; and you will see how you like that!" This
was one of the things he said; a strange effulgence of wild drollery
flashing through the ice of earnest pain and sorrow. He looked paler
than usual: almost for the first time, I had myself a twinge of
misgiving as to his own health; for hitherto I had been used to blame
as much as pity his fits of dangerous illness, and would often angrily
remonstrate with him that he might have excellent health, would he but
take reasonable care of himself, and learn the art of sitting still.
Alas, as if he _could_ learn it; as if Nature had not laid her ban on
him even there, and said in smiles and frowns manifoldly, "No, that thou
shalt not learn!"

He went that day; he never saw his good true Mother more. Very shortly
afterwards, in spite of doctors' prophecies, and affectionate illusions,
she grew alarmingly and soon hopelessly worse. Here are his last two
Letters to her:--

              "_To Mrs. Sterling, Knightsbridge, London_.
                                            "FALMOUTH 8th April, 1843.

"DEAREST MOTHER,--I could do you no good, but it would be the greatest
comfort to me if I could be near you. Nothing would detain me but
Susan's condition. I feel that until her confinement is over, I ought to
remain here,--unless you wished me to go to you; in which case she would
be the first to send me off. Happily she is doing as well as possible,
and seems even to gain strength every day. She sends her love to you.

"The children are all doing well. I rode with Edward to-day through some
of the pleasant lanes in the neighborhood; and was delighted, as I have
often been at the same season, to see the primroses under every hedge.
It is pleasant to think that the Maker of them can make other flowers
for the gardens of his other mansions. We have here a softness in the
air, a smoothness of the clouds, and a mild sunshine, that combine in
lovely peace with the first green of spring and the mellow whiteness of
the sails upon the quiet sea. The whole aspect of the world is full of
a quiet harmony, that influences even one's bodily frame, and seems to
make one's very limbs aware of something living, good and immortal in
all around us. Knowing how you suffer, and how weak you are, anything is
a blessing to me that helps me to rise out of confusion and grief into
the sense of God and joy. I could not indeed but feel how much happier I
should have been, this morning, had you been with me, and delighting as
you would have done in all the little as well as the large beauty of the
world. But it was still a satisfaction to feel how much I owe to you of
the power of perceiving meaning, reality and sweetness in all healthful
life. And thus I could fancy that you were still near me; and that I
could see you, as I have so often seen you, looking with earnest eyes at
wayside flowers.

"I would rather not have written what must recall your thoughts to your
present sufferings: but, dear Mother, I wrote only what I felt; and
perhaps you would rather have it so, than that I should try to find
other topics. I still hope to be with you before long. Meanwhile and
always, God bless you, is the prayer of

                        "Your affectionate son,
                                                      "JOHN STERLING."

                            _To the same_.
                                          "FALMOUTH, 12th April, 1843.

"DEAREST MOTHER,--I have just received my Father's Letter; which gives
me at least the comfort of believing that you do not suffer very much
pain. That your mind has remained so clear and strong, is an infinite
blessing.

"I do not know anything in the world that would make up to me at all for
wanting the recollection of the days I spent with you lately, when I was
amazed at the freshness and life of all your thoughts. It brought back
far-distant years, in the strangest, most peaceful way. I felt myself
walking with you in Greenwich Park, and on the seashore at Sandgate;
almost even I seemed a baby, with you bending over me. Dear Mother,
there is surely something uniting us that cannot perish. I seem so sure
of a love which shall last and reunite us, that even the remembrance,
painful as that is, of all my own follies and ill tempers, cannot shake
this faith. When I think of you, and know how you feel towards me, and
have felt for every moment of almost forty years, it would be too dark
to believe that we shall never meet again. It was from you that I first
learnt to think, to feel, to imagine, to believe; and these powers,
which cannot be extinguished, will one day enter anew into communion
with you. I have bought it very dear by the prospect of losing you in
this world,--but since you have been so ill, everything has seemed to me
holier, loftier and more lasting, more full of hope and final joy.

"It would be a very great happiness to see you once more even here; but
I do not know if that will be granted to me. But for Susan's state, I
should not hesitate an instant; as it is, my duty seems to be to remain,
and I have no right to repine. There is no sacrifice that she would not
make for me, and it would be too cruel to endanger her by mere anxiety
on my account. Nothing can exceed her sympathy with my sorrow. But she
cannot know, no one can, the recollections of all you have been and
done for me; which now are the most sacred and deepest, as well as
most beautiful, thoughts that abide with me. May God bless you, dearest
Mother. It is much to believe that He feels for you all that you have
ever felt for your children.

                                                      "JOHN STERLING."

A day or two after this, "on Good Friday, 1843," his Wife got happily
through her confinement, bringing him, he writes, "a stout little girl,
who and the Mother are doing as well as possible." The little girl still
lives and does well; but for the Mother there was another lot. Till the
Monday following she too did altogether well, he affectionately watching
her; but in the course of that day, some change for the worse was
noticed, though nothing to alarm either the doctors or him; he watched
by her bedside all night, still without alarm; but sent again in the
morning, Tuesday morning, for the doctors,--Who did not seem able
to make much of the symptoms. She appeared weak and low, but made no
particular complaint. The London post meanwhile was announced; Sterling
went into another room to learn what tidings of his Mother it brought
him. Returning speedily with a face which in vain strove to be calm,
his Wife asked, How at Knightsbridge? "My Mother is dead," answered
Sterling; "died on Sunday: She is gone." "Poor old man!" murmured the
other, thinking of old Edward Sterling now left alone in the world; and
these were her own last words: in two hours more she too was dead. In
two hours Mother and Wife were suddenly both snatched away from him.

"It came with awful suddenness!" writes he to his Clifton friend. "Still
for a short time I had my Susan: but I soon saw that the medical
men were in terror; and almost within half an hour of that fatal
Knightsbridge news, I began to suspect our own pressing danger. I
received her last breath upon my lips. Her mind was much sunk, and
her perceptions slow; but a few minutes before the last, she must have
caught the idea of dissolution; and signed that I should kiss her. She
faltered painfully, 'Yes! yes!'--returned with fervency the pressure of
my lips; and in a few moments her eyes began to fix, her pulse to cease.
She too is gone from me!" It was Tuesday morning, April 18th, 1843. His
Mother had died on the Sunday before.


He had loved his excellent kind Mother, as he ought and well might: in
that good heart, in all the wanderings of his own, there had ever been
a shrine of warm pity, of mother's love and blessed soft affections
for him; and now it was closed in the Eternities forevermore. His poor
Life-partner too, his other self, who had faithfully attended him so
long in all his pilgrimings, cheerily footing the heavy tortuous ways
along with him, can follow him no farther; sinks now at his side: "The
rest of your pilgrimings alone, O Friend,--adieu, adieu!" She too
is forever hidden from his eyes; and he stands, on the sudden, very
solitary amid the tumult of fallen and falling things. "My little baby
girl is doing well; poor little wreck cast upon the sea-beach of life.
My children require me tenfold now. What I shall do, is all confusion
and darkness."

The younger Mrs. Sterling was a true good woman; loyal-hearted, willing
to do well, and struggling wonderfully to do it amid her languors and
infirmities; rescuing, in many ways, with beautiful female heroism and
adroitness, what of fertility their uncertain, wandering, unfertile
way of life still left possible, and cheerily making the most of it. A
genial, pious and harmonious fund of character was in her; and withal an
indolent, half-unconscious force of intellect, and justness and delicacy
of perception, which the casual acquaintance scarcely gave her credit
for. Sterling much respected her decision in matters literary; often
altering and modifying where her feeling clearly went against him; and
in verses especially trusting to her ear, which was excellent, while he
knew his own to be worth little. I remember her melodious rich plaintive
tone of voice; and an exceedingly bright smile which she sometimes had,
effulgent with sunny gayety and true humor, among other fine qualities.

Sterling has lost much in these two hours; how much that has long been
can never again be for him! Twice in one morning, so to speak, has a
mighty wind smitten the corners of his house; and much lies in dismal
ruins round him.



CHAPTER VI. VENTNOR: DEATH.

In this sudden avalanche of sorrows Sterling, weak and worn as we have
seen, bore up manfully, and with pious valor fronted what had come upon
him. He was not a man to yield to vain wailings, or make repinings at
the unalterable: here was enough to be long mourned over; but here,
for the moment, was very much imperatively requiring to be done. That
evening, he called his children round him; spoke words of religious
admonition and affection to them; said, "He must now be a Mother as well
as Father to them." On the evening of the funeral, writes Mr. Hare, he
bade them good-night, adding these words, "If I am taken from you, God
will take care of you." He had six children left to his charge, two of
them infants; and a dark outlook ahead of them and him. The good Mrs.
Maurice, the children's young Aunt, present at this time and often
afterwards till all ended, was a great consolation.


Falmouth, it may be supposed, had grown a sorrowful place to him,
peopled with haggard memories in his weak state; and now again, as had
been usual with him, change of place suggested itself as a desirable
alleviation;--and indeed, in some sort, as a necessity. He has "friends
here," he admits to himself, "whose kindness is beyond all price, all
description;" but his little children, if anything befell him, have no
relative within two hundred miles. He is now sole watcher over them; and
his very life is so precarious; nay, at any rate, it would appear, he
has to leave Falmouth every spring, or run the hazard of worse. Once
more, what is to be done? Once more,--and now, as it turned out, for the
last time.

A still gentler climate, greater proximity to London, where his Brother
Anthony now was and most of his friends and interests were: these
considerations recommended Ventnor, in the beautiful Southeastern corner
of the Isle of Wight; where on inquiry an eligible house was found for
sale. The house and its surrounding piece of ground, improvable both,
were purchased; he removed thither in June of this year 1843; and set
about improvements and adjustments on a frank scale. By the decease of
his Mother, he had become rich in money; his share of the West-India
properties having now fallen to him, which, added to his former
incomings, made a revenue he could consider ample and abundant. Falmouth
friends looked lovingly towards him, promising occasional visits; old
Herstmonceux, which he often spoke of revisiting but never did, was not
far off; and London, with all its resources and remembrances, was now
again accessible. He resumed his work; and had hopes of again achieving
something.

The Poem of _Coeur-de-Lion_ has been already mentioned, and the wider
form and aim it had got since he first took it in hand. It was above a
year before the date of these tragedies and changes, that he had sent
me a Canto, or couple of Cantos, of _Coeur-de-Lion_; loyally again
demanding my opinion, harsh as it had often been on that side. This
time I felt right glad to answer in another tone: "That here was real
felicity and ingenuity, on the prescribed conditions; a decisively
rhythmic quality in this composition; thought and phraseology actually
_dancing_, after a sort. What the plan and scope of the Work might be,
he had not said, and I could not judge; but here was a light opulence of
airy fancy, picturesque conception, vigorous delineation, all marching
on as with cheerful drum and fife, if without more rich and complicated
forms of melody: if a man _would_ write in metre, this sure enough
was the way to try doing it." For such encouragement from that stinted
quarter, Sterling, I doubt not, was very thankful; and of course it
might co-operate with the inspirations from his Naples Tour to further
him a little in this his now chief task in the way of Poetry; a thought
which, among my many almost pathetic remembrances of contradictions to
his Poetic tendency, is pleasant for me.

But, on the whole, it was no matter. With or without encouragement, he
was resolute to persevere in Poetry, and did persevere. When I think now
of his modest, quiet steadfastness in this business of Poetry; how, in
spite of friend and foe, he silently persisted, without wavering, in
the form of utterance he had chosen for himself; and to what length he
carried it, and vindicated himself against us all;--his character comes
out in a new light to me, with more of a certain central inflexibility
and noble silent resolution than I had elsewhere noticed in it. This
summer, moved by natural feelings, which were sanctioned, too, and in a
sort sanctified to him, by the remembered counsel of his late Wife,
he printed the _Tragedy of Strafford_. But there was in the public no
contradiction to the hard vote I had given about it: the little
Book fell dead-born; and Sterling had again to take his
disappointment;--which it must be owned he cheerfully did; and, resolute
to try it again and ever again, went along with his _Coeur-de-Lion_,
as if the public had been all with him. An honorable capacity to stand
single against the whole world; such as all men need, from time to time!
After all, who knows whether, in his overclouded, broken, flighty way
of life, incapable of long hard drudgery, and so shut out from the solid
forms of Prose, this Poetic Form, which he could well learn as he could
all forms, was not the suitablest for him?

This work of _Coeur-de-Lion_ he prosecuted steadfastly in his new home;
and indeed employed on it henceforth all the available days that were
left him in this world. As was already said, he did not live to complete
it; but some eight Cantos, three or four of which I know to possess high
worth, were finished, before Death intervened, and there he had to leave
it. Perhaps it will yet be given to the public; and in that case be
better received than the others were, by men of judgment; and serve to
put Sterling's Poetic pretensions on a much truer footing. I can say,
that to readers who do prefer a poetic diet, this ought to be welcome:
if you can contrive to love the thing which is still called "poetry" in
these days, here is a decidedly superior article in that kind,--richer
than one of a hundred that you smilingly consume.

In this same month of June, 1843, while the house at Ventnor was
getting ready, Sterling was again in London for a few days. Of course
at Knightsbridge, now fallen under such sad change, many private matters
needed to be settled by his Father and Brother and him. Captain Anthony,
now minded to remove with his family to London and quit the military
way of life, had agreed to purchase the big family house, which he still
occupies; the old man, now rid of that encumbrance, retired to a smaller
establishment of his own; came ultimately to be Anthony's guest, and
spent his last days so. He was much lamed and broken, the half of his
old life suddenly torn away;--and other losses, which he yet knew not
of, lay close ahead of him. In a year or two, the rugged old man, borne
down by these pressures, quite gave way; sank into paralytic and
other infirmities; and was released from life's sorrows, under his son
Anthony's roof, in the fall of 1847.--The house in Knightsbridge was,
at the time we now speak of, empty except of servants; Anthony having
returned to Dublin, I suppose to conclude his affairs there, prior to
removal. John lodged in a Hotel.

We had our fair share of his company in this visit, as in all the past
ones; but the intercourse, I recollect, was dim and broken, a disastrous
shadow hanging over it, not to be cleared away by effort. Two American
gentlemen, acquaintances also of mine, had been recommended to him, by
Emerson most likely: one morning Sterling appeared here with a strenuous
proposal that we should come to Knightsbridge, and dine with him and
them. Objections, general dissuasions were not wanting: The empty dark
house, such needless trouble, and the like;--but he answered in his
quizzing way, "Nature herself prompts you, when a stranger comes, to
give him a dinner. There are servants yonder; it is all easy; come; both
of you are bound to come." And accordingly we went. I remember it as
one of the saddest dinners; though Sterling talked copiously, and our
friends, Theodore Parker one of them, were pleasant and distinguished
men. All was so haggard in one's memory, and half consciously in one's
anticipations; sad, as if one had been dining in a will, in the crypt of
a mausoleum. Our conversation was waste and logical, I forget quite on
what, not joyful and harmoniously effusive: Sterling's silent sadness
was painfully apparent through the bright mask he had bound himself
to wear. Withal one could notice now, as on his last visit, a certain
sternness of mood, unknown in better days; as if strange gorgon-faces
of earnest Destiny were more and more rising round him, and the time for
sport were past. He looked always hurried, abrupt, even beyond wont; and
indeed was, I suppose, overwhelmed in details of business.

One evening, I remember, he came down hither, designing to have a
freer talk with us. We were all sad enough; and strove rather to avoid
speaking of what might make us sadder. Before any true talk had been
got into, an interruption occurred, some unwelcome arrival; Sterling
abruptly rose; gave me the signal to rise; and we unpolitely walked
away, adjourning to his Hotel, which I recollect was in the Strand, near
Hungerford Market; some ancient comfortable quaint-looking place, off
the street; where, in a good warm queer old room, the remainder of our
colloquy was duly finished. We spoke of Cromwell, among other things
which I have now forgotten; on which subject Sterling was trenchant,
positive, and in some essential points wrong,--as I said I would
convince him some day. "Well, well!" answered he, with a shake of
the head.--We parted before long; bedtime for invalids being come:
he escorted me down certain carpeted backstairs, and would not be
forbidden: we took leave under the dim skies;--and alas, little as I
then dreamt of it, this, so far as I can calculate, must have been the
last time I ever saw him in the world. Softly as a common evening, the
last of the evenings had passed away, and no other would come for me
forevermore.

Through the summer he was occupied with fitting up his new residence,
selecting governesses, servants; earnestly endeavoring to set his house
in order, on the new footing it had now assumed. Extensive improvements
in his garden and grounds, in which he took due interest to the
last, were also going on. His Brother, and Mr. Maurice his
brother-in-law,--especially Mrs. Maurice the kind sister, faithfully
endeavoring to be as a mother to her poor little nieces,--were
occasionally with him. All hours available for labor on his literary
tasks, he employed, almost exclusively I believe, on _Coeur-de-Lion_;
with what energy, the progress he had made in that Work, and in the art
of Poetic composition generally, amid so many sore impediments, best
testifies. I perceive, his life in general lay heavier on him than it
had done before; his mood of mind is grown more sombre;--indeed the very
solitude of this Ventnor as a place, not to speak of other solitudes,
must have been new and depressing. But he admits no hypochondria, now or
ever; occasionally, though rarely, even flashes of a kind of wild gayety
break through. He works steadily at his task, with all the strength left
him; endures the past as he may, and makes gallant front against the
world. "I am going on quietly here, rather than happily," writes he to
his friend Newman; "sometimes quite helpless, not from distinct illness,
but from sad thoughts and a ghastly dreaminess. The heart is gone out of
my life. My children, however, are doing well; and the place is cheerful
and mild."

From Letters of this period I might select some melancholy enough; but
will prefer to give the following one (nearly the last I can give), as
indicative of a less usual temper:--

             "_To Thomas Carlyle, Esq., Chelsea, London_.
                                         "VENTNOR, 7th December, 1843.

"MY DEAR CARLYLE,--My Irish Newspaper was _not_ meant as a hint that
I wanted a Letter. It contained an absurd long Advertisement,--some
project for regenerating human knowledge, &c. &c.; to which I prefixed
my private mark (a blot), thinking that you might be pleased to know of
a fellow-laborer somewhere in Tipperary.

"Your Letter, like the Scriptural oil,--(they had no patent lamps then,
and used the best oil, 7s. per gallon),--has made my face to shine.
There is but one person in the world, I shall not tell you who, from
whom a Letter would give me so much pleasure. It would be nearly as good
at Pekin, in the centre of the most enlightened Mandarins; but here at
Ventnor, where there are few Mandarins and no enlightenment,--fountains
in the wilderness, even were they miraculous, are nothing compared with
your handwriting. Yet it is sad that you should be so melancholy. I
often think that though Mercury was the pleasanter fellow, and probably
the happier, Saturn was the greater god;--rather cannibal or so, but one
excuses it in him, as in some other heroes one knows of.

"It is, as you say, your destiny to write about Cromwell: and you
will make a book of him, at which the ears of our grandchildren will
tingle;--and as one may hope that the ears of human nature will be
growing longer and longer, the tingling will be proportionately greater
than we are accustomed to. Do what you can, I fear there will be little
gain from the Royalists. There is something very small about the biggest
of them that I have ever fallen in with, unless you count old Hobbes a
Royalist.

"Curious to see that you have them exactly preserved in the Country
Gentlemen of our day; while of the Puritans not a trace remains except
in History. Squirism had already, in that day, become the _caput
mortuum_ that it is now; and has therefore, like other mummies, been
able to last. What was opposed to it was the Life of Puritanism,--then
on the point of disappearing; and it too has left its mummy at Exeter
Hall on the platform and elsewhere. One must go back to the Middle
Ages to see Squirism as rampant and vivacious as Biblicism was in the
Seventeenth Century: and I suppose our modern Country Gentlemen are
about as near to what the old Knights and Barons were who fought the
Crusades, as our modern Evangelicals to the fellows who sought the Lord
by the light of their own pistol-shots.

"Those same Crusades are now pleasant matter for me. You remember, or
perhaps you do not, a thing I once sent you about Coeur-de-Lion. Long
since, I settled to make the Cantos you saw part of a larger Book; and
worked at it, last autumn and winter, till I had a bad illness. I am
now at work on it again; and go full sail, like _my_ hero. There are six
Cantos done, roughly, besides what you saw. I have struck out most
of the absurdest couplets, and given the whole a higher though still
sportive tone. It is becoming a kind of _Odyssey_, with a laughing and
Christian Achilles for hero. One may manage to wrap, in that chivalrous
brocade, many things belonging to our Time, and capable of interesting
it. The thing is not bad; but will require great labor. Only it is labor
that I thoroughly like; and which keeps the maggots out of one's brain,
until their time.

"I have never spoken to you, never been able to speak to you, of the
change in my life,--almost as great, one fancies, as one's own death.
Even now, although it seems as if I had so much to say, I cannot. If
one could imagine--... But it is no use; I cannot write wisely on
this matter. I suppose no human being was ever devoted to another more
entirely than she; and that makes the change not less but more bearable.
It seems as if she could not be gone quite; and that indeed is my faith.

"Mr. James, your New-England friend, was here only for a few days; I saw
him several times, and liked him. They went, on the 24th of last month,
back to London,--or so purposed,--because there is no pavement here for
him to walk on. I want to know where he is, and thought I should be able
to learn from you. I gave him a Note for Mill, who perhaps may have seen
him. I think this is all at present from,

                                "Yours,
                                                      "JOHN STERLING."

Of his health, all this while, we had heard little definite; and
understood that he was very quiet and careful; in virtue of which grand
improvement we vaguely considered all others would follow. Once let him
learn well to be _slow_ as the common run of men are, would not all be
safe and well? Nor through the winter, or the cold spring months, did
bad news reach us; perhaps less news of any kind than had been usual,
which seemed to indicate a still and wholesome way of life and work. Not
till "April 4th, 1844," did the new alarm occur: again on some slight
accident, the breaking of a blood-vessel; again prostration under
dangerous sickness, from which this time he never rose.

There had been so many sudden failings and happy risings again in our
poor Sterling's late course of health, we had grown so accustomed to
mingle blame of his impetuosity with pity for his sad overthrows, we did
not for many weeks quite realize to ourselves the stern fact that here
at length had the peculiar fall come upon us,--the last of all
these falls! This brittle life, which had so often held together and
victoriously rallied under pressures and collisions, could not rally
always, and must one time be shivered. It was not till the summer came
and no improvement; and not even then without lingering glimmers of hope
against hope, that I fairly had to own what had now come, what was now
day by day sternly advancing with the steadiness of Time.

From the first, the doctors spoke despondently; and Sterling himself
felt well that there was no longer any chance of life. He had often said
so, in his former illnesses, and thought so, yet always till now with
some tacit grain of counter-hope; he had never clearly felt so as now:
Here _is_ the end; the great change is now here!--Seeing how it was,
then, he earnestly gathered all his strength to do this last act of
his tragedy, as he had striven to do the others, in a pious and manful
manner. As I believe we can say he did; few men in any time _more_
piously or manfully. For about six months he sat looking steadfastly, at
all moments, into the eyes of Death; he too who had eyes to _see_ Death
and the Terrors and Eternities; and surely it was with perfect courage
and piety, and valiant simplicity of heart, that he bore himself, and
did and thought and suffered, in this trying predicament, more terrible
than the usual death of men. All strength left to him he still employed
in working: day by day the end came nearer, but day by day also some new
portion of his adjustments was completed, by some small stage his
task was nearer done. His domestic and other affairs, of all sorts, he
settled to the last item. Of his own Papers he saved a few, giving brief
pertinent directions about them; great quantities, among which a certain
Autobiography begun some years ago at Clifton, he ruthlessly burnt,
judging that the best. To his friends he left messages, memorials of
books: I have a _Gough's Camden_, and other relics, which came to me in
that way, and are among my sacred possessions. The very Letters of his
friends he sorted and returned; had each friend's Letters made into a
packet, sealed with black, and duly addressed for delivery when the time
should come.

At an early period of his illness, all visitors had of course been
excluded, except his most intimate ones: before long, so soon as the end
became apparent, he took leave even of his Father, to avoid excitements
and intolerable emotions; and except his Brother and the Maurices, who
were generally about him coming and going, none were admitted. This
latter form of life, I think, continued for above three months. Men were
still working about his grounds, of whom he took some charge; needful
works, great and small, let them not pause on account of him. He still
rose from bed; had still some portion of his day which he could spend
in his Library. Besides business there, he read a good deal,--earnest
books; the Bible, most earnest of books, his chief favorite. He still
even wrote a good deal. To his eldest Boy, now Mr. Newman's ward, who
had been removed to the Maurices' since the beginning of this illness,
he addressed, every day or two, sometimes daily, for eight or
nine weeks, a Letter, of general paternal advice and exhortation;
interspersing sparingly, now and then, such notices of his own feelings
and condition as could be addressed to a boy. These Letters, I have
lately read: they give, beyond any he has written, a noble image of the
intrinsic Sterling;--the same face we had long known; but painted now
as on the azure of Eternity, serene, victorious, divinely sad; the dusts
and extraneous disfigurements imprinted on it by the world, now
washed away. One little Excerpt, not the best, but the fittest for its
neighborhood here, will be welcome to the reader:--

               "_To Master Edward C. Sterling, London_.
                                  "HILLSIDE, VENTNOR, 29th June, 1844.

"MY DEAR BOY,--We have been going on here as quietly as possible, with
no event that I know of. There is nothing except books to occupy me.
But you may suppose that my thoughts often move towards you, and that
I fancy what you may be doing in the great City,--the greatest on the
Earth,--where I spent so many years of my life. I first saw London when
I was between eight and nine years old, and then lived in or near it for
the whole of the next ten, and more there than anywhere else for seven
years longer. Since then I have hardly ever been a year without seeing
the place, and have often lived in it for a considerable time. There
I grew from childhood to be a man. My little Brothers and Sisters, and
since, my Mother, died and are buried there. There I first saw your
Mamma, and was there married. It seems as if, in some strange way,
London were a part of Me or I of London. I think of it often, not as
full of noise and dust and confusion, but as something silent, grand and
everlasting.

"When I fancy how you are walking in the same streets, and moving along
the same river, that I used to watch so intently, as if in a dream, when
younger than you are,--I could gladly burst into tears, not of
grief, but with a feeling that there is no name for. Everything is so
wonderful, great and holy, so sad and yet not bitter, so full of Death
and so bordering on Heaven. Can you understand anything of this? If
you can, you will begin to know what a serious matter our Life is;
how unworthy and stupid it is to trifle it away without heed; what a
wretched, insignificant, worthless creature any one comes to be, who
does not as soon as possible bend his whole strength, as in stringing a
stiff bow, to doing whatever task lies first before him....

"We have a mist here to-day from the sea. It reminds me of that which I
used to see from my house in St, Vincent, rolling over the great volcano
and the mountains round it. I used to look at it from our windows with
your Mamma, and you a little baby in her arms.

"This Letter is not so well written as I could wish, but I hope you will
be able to read it.

                       "Your affectionate Papa,
                                                      "JOHN STERLING."

These Letters go from June 9th to August 2d, at which latter date
vacation-time arrived, and the Boy returned to him. The Letters are
preserved; and surely well worth preserving.

In this manner he wore the slow doomed months away. Day after day his
little period of Library went on waning, shrinking into less and less;
but I think it never altogether ended till the general end came.--For
courage, for active audacity we had all known Sterling; but such a fund
of mild stoicism, of devout patience and heroic composure, we did
not hitherto know in him. His sufferings, his sorrows, all his
unutterabilities in this slow agony, he held right manfully down;
marched loyally, as at the bidding of the Eternal, into the dread
Kingdoms, and no voice of weakness was heard from him. Poor noble
Sterling, he had struggled so high and gained so little here! But this
also he did gain, to be a brave man; and it was much.

Summer passed into Autumn: Sterling's earthly businesses, to the last
detail of them, were now all as good as done: his strength too was
wearing to its end, his daily turn in the Library shrunk now to a span.
He had to hold himself as if in readiness for the great voyage at any
moment. One other Letter I must give; not quite the last message I had
from Sterling, but the last that can be inserted here: a brief Letter,
fit to be forever memorable to the receiver of it:--

             "_To Thomas Carlyle, Esq., Chelsea, London_.
                                "HILLSIDE, VENTNOR, 10th August, 1844.

MY DEAR CARLYLE,--For the first time for many months it seems possible
to send you a few words; merely, however, for Remembrance and Farewell.
On higher matters there is nothing to say. I tread the common road into
the great darkness, without any thought of fear, and with very much of
hope. Certainty indeed I have none. With regard to You and Me I cannot
begin to write; having nothing for it but to keep shut the lid of those
secrets with all the iron weights that are in my power. Towards me it is
still more true than towards England that no man has been and done like
you. Heaven bless you! If I can lend a hand when THERE, that will not be
wanting. It is all very strange, but not one hundredth part so sad as it
seems to the standers-by.

"Your Wife knows my mind towards her, and will believe it without
asseverations.

                          "Yours to the last,
                                                      "JOHN STERLING."

It was a bright Sunday morning when this letter came to me: if in the
great Cathedral of Immensity I did no worship that day, the fault surely
was my own. Sterling affectionately refused to see me; which also was
kind and wise. And four days before his death, there are some stanzas of
verse for me, written as if in star-fire and immortal tears; which are
among my sacred possessions, to be kept for myself alone.

His business with the world was done; the one business now to await
silently what may lie in other grander worlds. "God is great," he was
wont to say: "God is great." The Maurices were now constantly near him;
Mrs. Maurice assiduously watching over him. On the evening of Wednesday
the 18th of September, his Brother, as he did every two or three days,
came down; found him in the old temper, weak in strength but not very
sensibly weaker; they talked calmly together for an hour; then Anthony
left his bedside, and retired for the night, not expecting any change.
But suddenly, about eleven o'clock, there came a summons and alarm:
hurrying to his Brother's room, he found his Brother dying; and in
a short while more the faint last struggle was ended, and all those
struggles and strenuous often-foiled endeavors of eight-and-thirty years
lay hushed in death.



CHAPTER VII. CONCLUSION.

Sterling was of rather slim but well-boned wiry figure, perhaps an inch
or two from six feet in height; of blonde complexion, without color, yet
not pale or sickly; dark-blonde hair, copious enough, which he usually
wore short. The general aspect of him indicated freedom, perfect
spontaneity, with a certain careless natural grace. In his apparel, you
could notice, he affected dim colors, easy shapes; cleanly always, yet
even in this not fastidious or conspicuous: he sat or stood, oftenest,
in loose sloping postures; walked with long strides, body carelessly
bent, head flung eagerly forward, right hand perhaps grasping a
cane, and rather by the middle to swing it, than by the end to use it
otherwise. An attitude of frank, cheerful impetuosity, of hopeful speed
and alacrity; which indeed his physiognomy, on all sides of it, offered
as the chief expression. Alacrity, velocity, joyous ardor, dwelt in the
eyes too, which were of brownish gray, full of bright kindly life,
rapid and frank rather than deep or strong. A smile, half of kindly
impatience, half of real mirth, often sat on his face. The head was
long; high over the vertex; in the brow, of fair breadth, but not high
for such a man.

In the voice, which was of good tenor sort, rapid and strikingly
distinct, powerful too, and except in some of the higher notes
harmonious, there was a clear-ringing _metallic_ tone,--which I often
thought was wonderfully physiognomic. A certain splendor, beautiful,
but not the deepest or the softest, which I could call a splendor as
of burnished metal,--fiery valor of heart, swift decisive insight and
utterance, then a turn for brilliant elegance, also for ostentation,
rashness, &c. &c.,--in short, a flash as of clear-glancing sharp-cutting
steel, lay in the whole nature of the man, in his heart and in his
intellect, marking alike the excellence and the limits of them both.
His laugh, which on light occasions was ready and frequent, had in it no
great depth of gayety, or sense for the ludicrous in men or things; you
might call it rather a good smile become vocal than a deep real laugh:
with his whole man I never saw him laugh. A clear sense of the humorous
he had, as of most other things; but in himself little or no true
humor;--nor did he attempt that side of things. To call him deficient
in sympathy would seem strange, him whose radiances and resonances went
thrilling over all the world, and kept him in brotherly contact with
all: but I may say his sympathies dwelt rather with the high and sublime
than with the low or ludicrous; and were, in any field, rather light,
wide and lively, than deep, abiding or great.

There is no Portrait of him which tolerably resembles. The miniature
Medallion, of which Mr. Hare has given an Engraving, offers us, with
no great truth in physical details, one, and not the best, superficial
expression of his face, as if that with vacuity had been what the face
contained; and even that Mr. Hare's engraver has disfigured into the
nearly or the utterly irrecognizable. Two Pencil-sketches, which no
artist could approve of, hasty sketches done in some social hour, one
by his friend Spedding, one by Banim the Novelist, whom he slightly
knew and had been kind to, tell a much truer story so far as they go:
of these his Brother has engravings; but these also I must suppress as
inadequate for strangers.


Nor in the way of Spiritual Portraiture does there, after so much
writing and excerpting, anything of importance remain for me to say.
John Sterling and his Life in this world were--such as has been already
said. In purity of character, in the so-called moralities, in all manner
of proprieties of conduct, so as tea-tables and other human tribunals
rule them, he might be defined as perfect, according to the world's
pattern: in these outward tangible respects the world's criticism of him
must have been praise and that only. An honorable man, and good citizen;
discharging, with unblamable correctness, all functions and duties
laid on him by the customs (_mores_) of the society he lived in,--with
correctness and something more. In all these particulars, a man
perfectly _moral_, or of approved virtue according to the rules.

Nay in the far more essential tacit virtues, which are not marked on
stone tables, or so apt to be insisted on by human creatures over tea
or elsewhere,--in clear and perfect fidelity to Truth wherever found,
in childlike and soldier-like, pious and valiant loyalty to the Highest,
and what of good and evil that might send him,--he excelled among good
men. The joys and the sorrows of his lot he took with true simplicity
and acquiescence. Like a true son, not like a miserable mutinous rebel,
he comported himself in this Universe. Extremity of distress--and surely
his fervid temper had enough of contradiction in this world--could not
tempt him into impatience at any time. By no chance did you ever hear
from him a whisper of those mean repinings, miserable arraignings and
questionings of the Eternal Power, such as weak souls even well disposed
will sometimes give way to in the pressure of their despair; to the like
of this he never yielded, or showed the least tendency to yield;--which
surely was well on his part. For the Eternal Power, I still remark,
will not answer the like of this, but silently and terribly accounts it
impious, blasphemous and damnable, and now as heretofore will visit it
as such. Not a rebel but a son, I said; willing to suffer when
Heaven said, Thou shalt;--and withal, what is perhaps rarer in such a
combination, willing to rejoice also, and right cheerily taking the good
that was sent, whensoever or in whatever form it came.

A pious soul we may justly call him; devoutly submissive to the will
of the Supreme in all things: the highest and sole essential form which
Religion can assume in man, and without which all forms of religion are
a mockery and a delusion in man. Doubtless, in so clear and filial a
heart there must have dwelt the perennial feeling of silent worship;
which silent feeling, as we have seen, he was eager enough to express by
all good ways of utterance; zealously adopting such appointed forms and
creeds as the dignitaries of the World had fixed upon and solemnly named
recommendable; prostrating his heart in such Church, by such accredited
rituals and seemingly fit or half-fit methods, as his poor time and
country had to offer him,--not rejecting the said methods till they
stood convicted of palpable unfitness and then doing it right gently
withal, rather letting them drop as pitiably dead for him, than angrily
hurling them out of doors as needing to be killed. By few Englishmen
of his epoch had the thing called Church of England been more loyally
appealed to as a spiritual mother.

And yet, as I said before, it may be questioned whether piety, what we
call devotion or worship, was the principle deepest in him. In spite of
his Coleridge discipleship, and his once headlong operations following
thereon, I used to judge that his piety was prompt and pure rather than
great or intense; that, on the whole, religious devotion was not the
deepest element of him. His reverence was ardent and just, ever ready
for the thing or man that deserved revering, or seemed to deserve it:
but he was of too joyful, light and hoping a nature to go to the depths
of that feeling, much more to dwell perennially in it. He had no fear
in his composition; terror and awe did not blend with his respect of
anything. In no scene or epoch could he have been a Church Saint, a
fanatic enthusiast, or have worn out his life in passive martyrdom,
sitting patient in his grim coal-mine, looking at the "three ells" of
Heaven high overhead there. In sorrow he would not dwell; all sorrow
he swiftly subdued, and shook away from him. How could you have made an
Indian Fakir of the Greek Apollo, "whose bright eye lends brightness,
and never yet saw a shadow"?--I should say, not religious reverence,
rather artistic admiration was the essential character of him: a fact
connected with all other facts in the physiognomy of his life and self,
and giving a tragic enough character to much of the history he had among
us.

Poor Sterling, he was by nature appointed for a Poet, then,--a Poet
after his sort, or recognizer and delineator of the Beautiful; and not
for a Priest at all? Striving towards the sunny heights, out of such
a level and through such an element as ours in these days is, he had
strange aberrations appointed him, and painful wanderings amid
the miserable gaslights, bog-fires, dancing meteors and putrid
phosphorescences which form the guidance of a young human soul at
present! Not till after trying all manner of sublimely illuminated
places, and finding that the basis of them was putridity, artificial gas
and quaking bog, did he, when his strength was all done, discover his
true sacred hill, and passionately climb thither while life was fast
ebbing!--A tragic history, as all histories are; yet a gallant, brave
and noble one, as not many are. It is what, to a radiant son of the
Muses, and bright messenger of the harmonious Wisdoms, this poor
world--if he himself have not strength enough, and _inertia_ enough, and
amid his harmonious eloquences silence enough--has provided at present.
Many a high-striving, too hasty soul, seeking guidance towards eternal
excellence from the official Black-artists, and successful Professors
of political, ecclesiastical, philosophical, commercial, general and
particular Legerdemain, will recognize his own history in this image of
a fellow-pilgrim's.

Over-haste was Sterling's continual fault; over-haste, and want of the
due strength,--alas, mere want of the due _inertia_ chiefly; which is
so common a gift for most part; and proves so inexorably needful withal!
But he was good and generous and true; joyful where there was
joy, patient and silent where endurance was required of him; shook
innumerable sorrows, and thick-crowding forms of pain, gallantly away
from him; fared frankly forward, and with scrupulous care to tread on no
one's toes. True, above all, one may call him; a man of perfect veracity
in thought, word and deed. Integrity towards all men,--nay integrity
had ripened with him into chivalrous generosity; there was no guile or
baseness anywhere found in him. Transparent as crystal; he could not
hide anything sinister, if such there had been to hide. A more perfectly
transparent soul I have never known. It was beautiful, to read all those
interior movements; the little shades of affectations, ostentations;
transient spurts of anger, which never grew to the length of settled
spleen: all so naive, so childlike, the very faults grew beautiful to
you.

And so he played his part among us, and has now ended it: in this first
half of the Nineteenth Century, such was the shape of human destinies
the world and he made out between them. He sleeps now, in the little
burying-ground of Bonchurch; bright, ever-young in the memory of others
that must grow old; and was honorably released from his toils before the
hottest of the day.


All that remains, in palpable shape, of John Sterling's activities in
this world are those Two poor Volumes; scattered fragments gathered from
the general waste of forgotten ephemera by the piety of a friend: an
inconsiderable memorial; not pretending to have achieved greatness;
only disclosing, mournfully, to the more observant, that a promise of
greatness was there. Like other such lives, like all lives, this is a
tragedy; high hopes, noble efforts; under thickening difficulties and
impediments, ever-new nobleness of valiant effort;--and the result
death, with conquests by no means corresponding. A life which cannot
challenge the world's attention; yet which does modestly solicit it, and
perhaps on clear study will be found to reward it.

On good evidence let the world understand that here was a remarkable
soul born into it; who, more than others, sensible to its influences,
took intensely into him such tint and shape of feature as the world had
to offer there and then; fashioning himself eagerly by whatsoever of
noble presented itself; participating ardently in the world's battle,
and suffering deeply in its bewilderments;--whose Life-pilgrimage
accordingly is an emblem, unusually significant, of the world's own
during those years of his. A man of infinite susceptivity; who caught
everywhere, more than others, the color of the element he lived in, the
infection of all that was or appeared honorable, beautiful and manful in
the tendencies of his Time;--whose history therefore is, beyond others,
emblematic of that of his Time.

In Sterling's Writings and Actions, were they capable of being well
read, we consider that there is for all true hearts, and especially for
young noble seekers, and strivers towards what is highest, a mirror in
which some shadow of themselves and of their immeasurably complex
arena will profitably present itself. Here also is one encompassed and
struggling even as they now are. This man also had said to himself, not
in mere Catechism-words, but with all his instincts, and the question
thrilled in every nerve of him, and pulsed in every drop of his blood:
"What is the chief end of man? Behold, I too would live and work as
beseems a denizen of this Universe, a child of the Highest God. By what
means is a noble life still possible for me here? Ye Heavens and
thou Earth, oh, how?"--The history of this long-continued prayer and
endeavor, lasting in various figures for near forty years, may now and
for some time coming have something to say to men!


Nay, what of men or of the world? Here, visible to myself, for some
while, was a brilliant human presence, distinguishable, honorable
and lovable amid the dim common populations; among the million little
beautiful, once more a beautiful human soul: whom I, among others,
recognized and lovingly walked with, while the years and the hours were.
Sitting now by his tomb in thoughtful mood, the new times bring a
new duty for me. "Why write the Life of Sterling?" I imagine I had a
commission higher than the world's, the dictate of Nature herself, to do
what is now done. _Sic prosit_.




FOOTNOTES:


[Footnote 1: _John Sterling's Essays and Tales, with Life_ by Archdeacon Hare.
Parker; London, 1848.]

[Footnote 2: _Commons Journals_, iv. 15 (l0th January, 1644-5); and again v. 307
&c., 498 (18th September, 1647-15th March, 1647-8).]

[Footnote 3: _Literary Chronicle_, New Series; London, Saturday, 21 June, 1828,
Art. II.]

[Footnote 4: "The Letters of Vetus from March 10th to May 10th, 1812" (second
edition, London, 1812): Ditto, "Part III., with a Preface and Notes"
(ibid. 1814).]

[Footnote 5: Here, in a Note, is the tragic little Register, with what
indications for us may lie in it:--

     (l.) Robert Sterling died, 4th June, 1815, at Queen Square, in
          his fourth year (John being now nine).
     (2.) Elizabeth died, 12th March, 1818, at Blackfriars Road, in
          her second year.
     (3.) Edward, 30th March, 1818 (same place, same month and year),
          in his ninth.
     (4.) Hester, 21st July, 1818 (three months later), at Blackheath,
          in her eleventh.
     (5.) Catherine Hester Elizabeth, 16th January, 1821, in Seymour
          Street.]

[Footnote 6: _History of the English Universities_. (Translated from the German.)]

[Footnote 7: Mrs. Anthony Sterling, very lately Miss Charlotte Baird.]

[Footnote 8: _Biography_, by Hare, pp. xvi-xxvi.]

[Footnote 9: _Biography_, by Mr. Hare, p. xli.]

[Footnote 10: Hare, pp. xliii-xlvi.]

[Footnote 11: Hare, xlviii, liv, lv.]

[Footnote 12: Hare, p. lvi.]

[Footnote 13: P. lxxviii.]

[Footnote 14: Given in Hare (ii. 188-193).]

[Footnote 15: Came out, as will soon appear, in _Blackwood_ (February, 1838).]

[Footnote 16: "_Hotel de l'Europe, Berlin_," added in Mrs. Sterling's hand.]

[Footnote 17: Hare, ii. 96-167.]

[Footnote 18: Ib. i. 129, 188.]

[Footnote 19: Here in a Note they are, if they can be important to anybody. The
marks of interrogation, attached to some Names as not yet consulted or
otherwise questionable, are in the Secretary's hand:--

     J. D. Acland, Esq.            H. Malden, Esq.
     Hon. W. B. Baring.            J. S. Mill, Esq.
     Rev. J. W. Blakesley.         R. M. Milnes, Esq.
     W. Boxall, Esq.               R. Monteith, Esq.
     T. Carlyle, Esq.              S. A. O'Brien, Esq.
     Hon. R. Cavendish (?)         Sir F. Palgrave (?)
     H. N. Coleridge, Esq. (?)     W. F. Pollok, Esq.
     J. W. Colville, Esq.          Philip Pusey, Esq.
     Allan Cunningham, Esq. (?)    A. Rio, Esq.
     Rev. H. Donn.                 C. Romilly, Esq.
     F. H. Doyle, Esq.             James Spedding, Esq.
     C. L. Eastlake, Esq.          Rev. John Sterling.
     Alex. Ellice, Esq.            Alfred Tennyson, Esq.
     J. F. Elliott, Esq.           Rev. Connop Thirlwall.
     Copley Fielding, Esq.         Rev. W. Hepworth Thompson.
     Rev. J. C. Hare.              Edward Twisleton, Esq.
     Sir Edmund Head (?)           G. S. Venables, Esq.
     D. D. Heath, Esq.             Samuel Wood, Esq.
     G. C. Lewis, Esq.             Rev. T. Worsley.
     H. L. Lushington, Esq.
     The Lord Lyttleton.           James Spedding, _Secretary_.
     C. Macarthy, Esq.                  8th August, 1838.]

[Footnote 20: Hare, p. cxviii.]

[Footnote 21: Of Sterling himself, I suppose.]

[Footnote 22: Hare, ii. p. 252.]

[Footnote 23: _Poems by John Sterling_. London (Moxon), 1839.]

[Footnote 24: _The Election: a Poem, in Seven Books_. London, Murray, 1841.]

[Footnote 25: Pp. 7, 8.]

[Footnote 26: Pp. 89-93.]

[Footnote 27: Sister of Mrs. Strachey and Mrs. Buller: Sir John Louis was now in
a high Naval post at Malta.]

[Footnote 28: Long Letter to his Father: Naples, 3d May, 1842.]

[Footnote 29: Death of her Mother, four mouths before. (_Note of_ 1870.)]

========================================
========================================

SARTOR RESARTUS:

The Life and Opinions of Herr Teufelsdrockh

By Thomas Carlyle.

1831




BOOK I.



CHAPTER I. PRELIMINARY.

Considering our present advanced state of culture, and how the Torch
of Science has now been brandished and borne about, with more or
less effect, for five thousand years and upwards; how, in these times
especially, not only the Torch still burns, and perhaps more fiercely
than ever, but innumerable Rushlights, and Sulphur-matches, kindled
thereat, are also glancing in every direction, so that not the smallest
cranny or dog-hole in Nature or Art can remain unilluminated,--it might
strike the reflective mind with some surprise that hitherto little or
nothing of a fundamental character, whether in the way of Philosophy or
History, has been written on the subject of Clothes.

Our Theory of Gravitation is as good as perfect: Lagrange, it is well
known, has proved that the Planetary System, on this scheme, will endure
forever; Laplace, still more cunningly, even guesses that it could not
have been made on any other scheme. Whereby, at least, our nautical
Logbooks can be better kept; and water-transport of all kinds has grown
more commodious. Of Geology and Geognosy we know enough: what with the
labors of our Werners and Huttons, what with the ardent genius of their
disciples, it has come about that now, to many a Royal Society, the
Creation of a World is little more mysterious than the cooking of a
dumpling; concerning which last, indeed, there have been minds to whom
the question, _How the apples were got in_, presented difficulties. Why
mention our disquisitions on the Social Contract, on the Standard of
Taste, on the Migrations of the Herring? Then, have we not a Doctrine
of Rent, a Theory of Value; Philosophies of Language, of History, of
Pottery, of Apparitions, of Intoxicating Liquors? Man's whole life and
environment have been laid open and elucidated; scarcely a fragment
or fibre of his Soul, Body, and Possessions, but has been probed,
dissected, distilled, desiccated, and scientifically decomposed: our
spiritual Faculties, of which it appears there are not a few, have their
Stewarts, Cousins, Royer Collards: every cellular, vascular, muscular
Tissue glories in its Lawrences, Majendies, Bichats.

How, then, comes it, may the reflective mind repeat, that the grand
Tissue of all Tissues, the only real Tissue, should have been quite
overlooked by Science,--the vestural Tissue, namely, of woollen or
other cloth; which Man's Soul wears as its outmost wrappage and overall;
wherein his whole other Tissues are included and screened, his whole
Faculties work, his whole Self lives, moves, and has its being? For if,
now and then, some straggling broken-winged thinker has cast an owl's
glance into this obscure region, the most have soared over it altogether
heedless; regarding Clothes as a property, not an accident, as quite
natural and spontaneous, like the leaves of trees, like the plumage of
birds. In all speculations they have tacitly figured man as _a Clothed
Animal_; whereas he is by nature a _Naked Animal_; and only in certain
circumstances, by purpose and device, masks himself in Clothes.
Shakespeare says, we are creatures that look before and after: the more
surprising that we do not look round a little, and see what is passing
under our very eyes.

But here, as in so many other cases, Germany, learned, indefatigable,
deep-thinking Germany comes to our aid. It is, after all, a blessing
that, in these revolutionary times, there should be one country where
abstract Thought can still take shelter; that while the din and frenzy
of Catholic Emancipations, and Rotten Boroughs, and Revolts of Paris,
deafen every French and every English ear, the German can stand peaceful
on his scientific watch-tower; and, to the raging, struggling multitude
here and elsewhere, solemnly, from hour to hour, with preparatory blast
of cow-horn, emit his _Horet ihr Herren und lasset's Euch sagen_; in
other words, tell the Universe, which so often forgets that fact, what
o'clock it really is. Not unfrequently the Germans have been blamed for
an unprofitable diligence; as if they struck into devious courses, where
nothing was to be had but the toil of a rough journey; as if, forsaking
the gold-mines of finance and that political slaughter of fat oxen
whereby a man himself grows fat, they were apt to run goose-hunting into
regions of bilberries and crowberries, and be swallowed up at last
in remote peat-bogs. Of that unwise science, which, as our Humorist
expresses it,

                   "By geometric scale
     Doth take the size of pots of ale;"

still more, of that altogether misdirected industry, which is seen
vigorously thrashing mere straw, there can nothing defensive be said.
In so far as the Germans are chargeable with such, let them take the
consequence. Nevertheless be it remarked, that even a Russian steppe
has tumult and gold ornaments; also many a scene that looks desert and
rock-bound from the distance, will unfold itself, when visited,
into rare valleys. Nay, in any case, would Criticism erect not only
finger-posts and turnpikes, but spiked gates and impassable barriers,
for the mind of man? It is written, "Many shall run to and fro, and
knowledge shall be increased." Surely the plain rule is, Let each
considerate person have his way, and see what it will lead to. For not
this man and that man, but all men make up mankind, and their united
tasks the task of mankind. How often have we seen some such adventurous,
and perhaps much-censured wanderer light on some out-lying, neglected,
yet vitally momentous province; the hidden treasures of which he first
discovered, and kept proclaiming till the general eye and effort were
directed thither, and the conquest was completed;--thereby, in these
his seemingly so aimless rambles, planting new standards, founding
new habitable colonies, in the immeasurable circumambient realm of
Nothingness and Night! Wise man was he who counselled that Speculation
should have free course, and look fearlessly towards all the thirty-two
points of the compass, whithersoever and howsoever it listed.


Perhaps it is proof of the stunted condition in which pure Science,
especially pure moral Science, languishes among us English; and how
our mercantile greatness, and invaluable Constitution, impressing a
political or other immediately practical tendency on all English
culture and endeavor, cramps the free flight of Thought,--that this,
not Philosophy of Clothes, but recognition even that we have no such
Philosophy, stands here for the first time published in our language.
What English intellect could have chosen such a topic, or by chance
stumbled on it? But for that same unshackled, and even sequestered
condition of the German Learned, which permits and induces them to fish
in all manner of waters, with all manner of nets, it seems probable
enough, this abtruse Inquiry might, in spite of the results it leads
to, have continued dormant for indefinite periods. The Editor of these
sheets, though otherwise boasting himself a man of confirmed speculative
habits, and perhaps discursive enough, is free to confess, that never,
till these last months, did the above very plain considerations, on our
total want of a Philosophy of Clothes, occur to him; and then, by quite
foreign suggestion. By the arrival, namely, of a new Book from Professor
Teufelsdrockh of Weissnichtwo; treating expressly of this subject,
and in a style which, whether understood or not, could not even by the
blindest be overlooked. In the present Editor's way of thought, this
remarkable Treatise, with its Doctrines, whether as judicially acceded
to, or judicially denied, has not remained without effect.

"_Die Kleider, ihr Werden und Wirken_ (Clothes, their Origin and
Influence): _von Diog. Teufelsdrockh, J. U. D. etc. Stillschweigen und
Cognie. Weissnichtwo_, 1831.

"Here," says the _Weissnichtwo'sche Anzeiger_, "comes a Volume of that
extensive, close-printed, close-meditated sort, which, be it spoken with
pride, is seen only in Germany, perhaps only in Weissnichtwo. Issuing
from the hitherto irreproachable Firm of Stillschweigen and Company,
with every external furtherance, it is of such internal quality as
to set Neglect at defiance.... A work," concludes the well-nigh
enthusiastic Reviewer, "interesting alike to the antiquary, the
historian, and the philosophic thinker; a masterpiece of boldness,
lynx-eyed acuteness, and rugged independent Germanism and Philanthropy
(_derber Kerndeutschheit und Menschenliebe_); which will not, assuredly,
pass current without opposition in high places; but must and will exalt
the almost new name of Teufelsdrockh to the first ranks of Philosophy,
in our German Temple of Honor."

Mindful of old friendship, the distinguished Professor, in this the
first blaze of his fame, which however does not dazzle him, sends hither
a Presentation-copy of his Book; with compliments and encomiums which
modesty forbids the present Editor to rehearse; yet without indicated
wish or hope of any kind, except what may be implied in the concluding
phrase: _Mochte es_ (this remarkable Treatise) _auch im Brittischen
Boden gedeihen_!



CHAPTER II. EDITORIAL DIFFICULTIES.

If for a speculative man, "whose seedfield," in the sublime words of the
Poet, "is Time," no conquest is important but that of new ideas, then
might the arrival of Professor Teufelsdrockh's Book be marked with
chalk in the Editor's calendar. It is indeed an "extensive Volume," of
boundless, almost formless contents, a very Sea of Thought; neither calm
nor clear, if you will; yet wherein the toughest pearl-diver may dive
to his utmost depth, and return not only with sea-wreck but with true
orients.

Directly on the first perusal, almost on the first deliberate
inspection, it became apparent that here a quite new Branch of
Philosophy, leading to as yet undescried ulterior results, was
disclosed; farther, what seemed scarcely less interesting, a quite new
human Individuality, an almost unexampled personal character, that,
namely, of Professor Teufelsdrockh the Discloser. Of both which
novelties, as far as might be possible, we resolved to master the
significance. But as man is emphatically a proselytizing creature, no
sooner was such mastery even fairly attempted, than the new question
arose: How might this acquired good be imparted to others, perhaps in
equal need thereof; how could the Philosophy of Clothes, and the Author
of such Philosophy, be brought home, in any measure, to the business and
bosoms of our own English Nation? For if new-got gold is said to burn
the pockets till it be cast forth into circulation, much more may new
truth.

Here, however, difficulties occurred. The first thought naturally was to
publish Article after Article on this remarkable Volume, in such widely
circulating Critical Journals as the Editor might stand connected with,
or by money or love procure access to. But, on the other hand, was it
not clear that such matter as must here be revealed, and treated of,
might endanger the circulation of any Journal extant? If, indeed, all
party-divisions in the State could have been abolished, Whig, Tory,
and Radical, embracing in discrepant union; and all the Journals of the
Nation could have been jumbled into one Journal, and the Philosophy of
Clothes poured forth in incessant torrents therefrom, the attempt had
seemed possible. But, alas, what vehicle of that sort have we, except
_Fraser's Magazine_? A vehicle all strewed (figuratively speaking)
with the maddest Waterloo-Crackers, exploding distractively and
destructively, wheresoever the mystified passenger stands or sits;
nay, in any case, understood to be, of late years, a vehicle full to
overflowing, and inexorably shut! Besides, to state the Philosophy of
Clothes without the Philosopher, the ideas of Teufelsdrockh without
something of his personality, was it not to insure both of entire
misapprehension? Now for Biography, had it been otherwise admissible,
there were no adequate documents, no hope of obtaining such, but rather,
owing to circumstances, a special despair. Thus did the Editor see
himself, for the while, shut out from all public utterance of these
extraordinary Doctrines, and constrained to revolve them, not without
disquietude, in the dark depths of his own mind.

So had it lasted for some months; and now the Volume on Clothes, read
and again read, was in several points becoming lucid and lucent; the
personality of its Author more and more surprising, but, in spite of all
that memory and conjecture could do, more and more enigmatic; whereby
the old disquietude seemed fast settling into fixed discontent,--when
altogether unexpectedly arrives a Letter from Herr Hofrath Heuschrecke,
our Professor's chief friend and associate in Weissnichtwo, with whom
we had not previously corresponded. The Hofrath, after much quite
extraneous matter, began dilating largely on the "agitation and
attention" which the Philosophy of Clothes was exciting in its own
German Republic of Letters; on the deep significance and tendency of his
Friend's Volume; and then, at length, with great circumlocution, hinted
at the practicability of conveying "some knowledge of it, and of him, to
England, and through England to the distant West:" a work on Professor
Teufelsdrockh "were undoubtedly welcome to the _Family_, the _National_,
or any other of those patriotic _Libraries_, at present the glory
of British Literature;" might work revolutions in Thought; and so
forth;--in conclusion, intimating not obscurely, that should the present
Editor feel disposed to undertake a Biography of Teufelsdrockh, he,
Hofrath Heuschrecke, had it in his power to furnish the requisite
Documents.

As in some chemical mixture, that has stood long evaporating, but would
not crystallize, instantly when the wire or other fixed substance is
introduced, crystallization commences, and rapidly proceeds till the
whole is finished, so was it with the Editor's mind and this offer of
Heuschrecke's. Form rose out of void solution and discontinuity; like
united itself with like in definite arrangement: and soon either in
actual vision and possession, or in fixed reasonable hope, the image of
the whole Enterprise had shaped itself, so to speak, into a solid mass.
Cautiously yet courageously, through the twopenny post, application
to the famed redoubtable OLIVER YORKE was now made: an interview,
interviews with that singular man have taken place; with more of
assurance on our side, with less of satire (at least of open satire)
on his, than we anticipated; for the rest, with such issue as is now
visible. As to those same "patriotic _Libraries_," the Hofrath's counsel
could only be viewed with silent amazement; but with his offer of
Documents we joyfully and almost instantaneously closed. Thus, too, in
the sure expectation of these, we already see our task begun; and this
our _Sartor Resartus_, which is properly a "Life and Opinions of Herr
Teufelsdrockh," hourly advancing.


Of our fitness for the Enterprise, to which we have such title and
vocation, it were perhaps uninteresting to say more. Let the British
reader study and enjoy, in simplicity of heart, what is here presented
him, and with whatever metaphysical acumen and talent for meditation he
is possessed of. Let him strive to keep a free, open sense; cleared
from the mists of prejudice, above all from the paralysis of cant; and
directed rather to the Book itself than to the Editor of the Book.
Who or what such Editor may be, must remain conjectural, and even
insignificant: [*] it is a voice publishing tidings of the Philosophy of
Clothes; undoubtedly a Spirit addressing Spirits: whoso hath ears, let
him hear.

     * With us even he still communicates in some sort of mask,
     or muffler; and, we have reason to think, under a feigned
     name!--O. Y.

On one other point the Editor thinks it needful to give warning: namely,
that he is animated with a true though perhaps a feeble attachment to
the Institutions of our Ancestors; and minded to defend these, according
to ability, at all hazards; nay, it was partly with a view to such
defence that he engaged in this undertaking. To stem, or if that be
impossible, profitably to divert the current of Innovation, such a
Volume as Teufelsdrockh's, if cunningly planted down, were no despicable
pile, or floodgate, in the logical wear.

For the rest, be it nowise apprehended, that any personal connection of
ours with Teufelsdrockh, Heuschrecke or this Philosophy of Clothes, can
pervert our judgment, or sway us to extenuate or exaggerate. Powerless,
we venture to promise, are those private Compliments themselves.
Grateful they may well be; as generous illusions of friendship; as fair
mementos of bygone unions, of those nights and suppers of the gods,
when, lapped in the symphonies and harmonies of Philosophic Eloquence,
though with baser accompaniments, the present Editor revelled in that
feast of reason, never since vouchsafed him in so full measure! But what
then? _Amicus Plato, magis amica veritas_; Teufelsdrockh is our friend,
Truth is our divinity. In our historical and critical capacity, we hope
we are strangers to all the world; have feud or favor with no one,--save
indeed the Devil, with whom, as with the Prince of Lies and Darkness, we
do at all times wage internecine war. This assurance, at an epoch when
puffery and quackery have reached a height unexampled in the annals of
mankind, and even English Editors, like Chinese Shopkeepers, must
write on their door-lintels _No cheating here_,--we thought it good to
premise.



CHAPTER III. REMINISCENCES.

To the Author's private circle the appearance of this singular Work on
Clothes must have occasioned little less surprise than it has to the
rest of the world. For ourselves, at least, few things have been more
unexpected. Professor Teufelsdrockh, at the period of our acquaintance
with him, seemed to lead a quite still and self-contained life: a man
devoted to the higher Philosophies, indeed; yet more likely, if he
published at all, to publish a refutation of Hegel and Bardili, both of
whom, strangely enough, he included under a common ban; than to descend,
as he has here done, into the angry noisy Forum, with an Argument that
cannot but exasperate and divide. Not, that we can remember, was the
Philosophy of Clothes once touched upon between us. If through the
high, silent, meditative Transcendentalism of our Friend we detected
any practical tendency whatever, it was at most Political, and towards a
certain prospective, and for the present quite speculative, Radicalism;
as indeed some correspondence, on his part, with Herr Oken of Jena was
now and then suspected; though his special contributions to the _Isis_
could never be more than surmised at. But, at all events, nothing Moral,
still less anything Didactico-Religious, was looked for from him.

Well do we recollect the last words he spoke in our hearing; which
indeed, with the Night they were uttered in, are to be forever
remembered. Lifting his huge tumbler of _Gukguk_, [*] and for a moment
lowering his tobacco-pipe, he stood up in full Coffee-house (it was _Zur
Grunen Gans_, the largest in Weissnichtwo, where all the Virtuosity,
and nearly all the Intellect of the place assembled of an evening); and
there, with low, soul-stirring tone, and the look truly of an angel,
though whether of a white or of a black one might be dubious, proposed
this toast: _Die Sache der Armen in Gottes und Teufels Namen_ (The Cause
of the Poor, in Heaven's name and--'s)! One full shout, breaking the
leaden silence; then a gurgle of innumerable emptying bumpers, again
followed by universal cheering, returned him loud acclaim. It was the
finale of the night: resuming their pipes; in the highest enthusiasm,
amid volumes of tobacco-smoke; triumphant, cloud-capt without and
within, the assembly broke up, each to his thoughtful pillow. _Bleibt
doch ein echter Spass_- _und Galgen-vogel_, said several; meaning
thereby that, one day, he would probably be hanged for his democratic
sentiments. _Wo steckt doch der Schalk_? added they, looking round: but
Teufelsdrockh had retired by private alleys, and the Compiler of these
pages beheld him no more.

     * Gukguk is unhappily only an academical-beer.

In such scenes has it been our lot to live with this Philosopher,
such estimate to form of his purposes and powers. And yet, thou brave
Teufelsdrockh, who could tell what lurked in thee? Under those thick
locks of thine, so long and lank, overlapping roof-wise the gravest face
we ever in this world saw, there dwelt a most busy brain. In thy eyes
too, deep under their shaggy brows, and looking out so still and dreamy,
have we not noticed gleams of an ethereal or else a diabolic fire, and
half fancied that their stillness was but the rest of infinite motion,
the _sleep_ of a spinning-top? Thy little figure, there as, in loose
ill-brushed threadbare habiliments, thou sattest, amid litter and
lumber, whole days, to "think and smoke tobacco," held in it a mighty
heart. The secrets of man's Life were laid open to thee; thou sawest
into the mystery of the Universe, farther than another; thou hadst _in
petto_ thy remarkable Volume on Clothes. Nay, was there not in that
clear logically founded Transcendentalism of thine; still more, in thy
meek, silent, deep-seated Sansculottism, combined with a true princely
Courtesy of inward nature, the visible rudiments of such speculation?
But great men are too often unknown, or what is worse, misknown.
Already, when we dreamed not of it, the warp of thy remarkable Volume
lay on the loom; and silently, mysterious shuttles were putting in the
woof.


How the Hofrath Heuschrecke is to furnish biographical data, in this
case, may be a curious question; the answer of which, however, is
happily not our concern, but his. To us it appeared, after repeated
trial, that in Weissnichtwo, from the archives or memories of the
best-informed classes, no Biography of Teufelsdrockh was to be gathered;
not so much as a false one. He was a stranger there, wafted thither by
what is called the course of circumstances; concerning whose parentage,
birthplace, prospects, or pursuits, curiosity had indeed made inquiries,
but satisfied herself with the most indistinct replies. For himself, he
was a man so still and altogether unparticipating, that to question
him even afar off on such particulars was a thing of more than usual
delicacy: besides, in his sly way, he had ever some quaint turn, not
without its satirical edge, wherewith to divert such intrusions, and
deter you from the like. Wits spoke of him secretly as if he were a kind
of Melchizedek, without father or mother of any kind; sometimes, with
reference to his great historic and statistic knowledge, and the
vivid way he had of expressing himself like an eye-witness of distant
transactions and scenes, they called him the _Ewige Jude_, Everlasting,
or as we say, Wandering Jew.

To the most, indeed, he had become not so much a Man as a Thing; which
Thing doubtless they were accustomed to see, and with satisfaction;
but no more thought of accounting for than for the fabrication of their
daily _Allgemeine Zeitung_, or the domestic habits of the Sun. Both were
there and welcome; the world enjoyed what good was in them, and thought
no more of the matter. The man Teufelsdrockh passed and repassed, in his
little circle, as one of those originals and nondescripts, more frequent
in German Universities than elsewhere; of whom, though you see them
alive, and feel certain enough that they must have a History, no History
seems to be discoverable; or only such as men give of mountain rocks and
antediluvian ruins: That they have been created by unknown agencies,
are in a state of gradual decay, and for the present reflect light
and resist pressure; that is, are visible and tangible objects in this
phantasm world, where so much other mystery is.

It was to be remarked that though, by title and diploma, _Professor der
Allerley-Wissenschaft_, or as we should say in English, "Professor of
Things in General," he had never delivered any Course; perhaps never
been incited thereto by any public furtherance or requisition. To all
appearance, the enlightened Government of Weissnichtwo, in founding
their New University, imagined they had done enough, if "in times like
ours," as the half-official Program expressed it, "when all things are,
rapidly or slowly, resolving themselves into Chaos, a Professorship of
this kind had been established; whereby, as occasion called, the task
of bodying somewhat forth again from such Chaos might be, even slightly,
facilitated." That actual Lectures should be held, and Public Classes
for the "Science of Things in General," they doubtless considered
premature; on which ground too they had only established the
Professorship, nowise endowed it; so that Teufelsdrockh, "recommended by
the highest Names," had been promoted thereby to a Name merely.

Great, among the more enlightened classes, was the admiration of this
new Professorship: how an enlightened Government had seen into the Want
of the Age (_Zeitbedurfniss_); how at length, instead of Denial
and Destruction, we were to have a science of Affirmation and
Reconstruction; and Germany and Weissnichtwo were where they should be,
in the vanguard of the world. Considerable also was the wonder at the
new Professor, dropt opportunely enough into the nascent University; so
able to lecture, should occasion call; so ready to hold his peace for
indefinite periods, should an enlightened Government consider that
occasion did not call. But such admiration and such wonder, being
followed by no act to keep them living, could last only nine days;
and, long before our visit to that scene, had quite died away. The more
cunning heads thought it was all an expiring clutch at popularity, on
the part of a Minister, whom domestic embarrassments, court intrigues,
old age, and dropsy soon afterwards finally drove from the helm.

As for Teufelsdrockh, except by his nightly appearances at the _Grune
Gans_, Weissnichtwo saw little of him, felt little of him. Here,
over his tumbler of Gukguk, he sat reading Journals; sometimes
contemplatively looking into the clouds of his tobacco-pipe, without
other visible employment: always, from his mild ways, an agreeable
phenomenon there; more especially when he opened his lips for speech; on
which occasions the whole Coffee-house would hush itself into silence,
as if sure to hear something noteworthy. Nay, perhaps to hear a whole
series and river of the most memorable utterances; such as, when once
thawed, he would for hours indulge in, with fit audience: and the more
memorable, as issuing from a head apparently not more interested in
them, not more conscious of them, than is the sculptured stone head of
some public fountain, which through its brass mouth-tube emits water to
the worthy and the unworthy; careless whether it be for cooking
victuals or quenching conflagrations; indeed, maintains the same earnest
assiduous look, whether any water be flowing or not.

To the Editor of these sheets, as to a young enthusiastic Englishman,
however unworthy, Teufelsdrockh opened himself perhaps more than to the
most. Pity only that we could not then half guess his importance, and
scrutinize him with due power of vision! We enjoyed, what not three
men Weissnichtwo could boast of, a certain degree of access to the
Professor's private domicile. It was the attic floor of the highest
house in the Wahngasse; and might truly be called the pinnacle
of Weissnichtwo, for it rose sheer up above the contiguous roofs,
themselves rising from elevated ground. Moreover, with its windows it
looked towards all the four _Orte_ or as the Scotch say, and we ought to
say, _Airts_: the sitting room itself commanded three; another came to
view in the _Schlafgemach_ (bedroom) at the opposite end; to say nothing
of the kitchen, which offered two, as it were, _duplicates_, showing
nothing new. So that it was in fact the speculum or watch-tower of
Teufelsdrockh; wherefrom, sitting at ease he might see the whole
life-circulation of that considerable City; the streets and lanes of
which, with all their doing and driving (_Thun und Treiben_), were for
the most part visible there.

"I look down into all that wasp-nest or bee-hive," we have heard him
say, "and witness their wax-laying and honey-making, and poison-brewing,
and choking by sulphur. From the Palace esplanade, where music plays
while Serene Highness is pleased to eat his victuals, down to the
low lane, where in her door-sill the aged widow, knitting for a thin
livelihood sits to feel the afternoon sun, I see it all; for, except
Schlosskirche weather-cock, no biped stands so high. Couriers arrive
bestrapped and bebooted, bearing Joy and Sorrow bagged up in pouches
of leather: there, top-laden, and with four swift horses, rolls in the
country Baron and his household; here, on timber-leg, the lamed Soldier
hops painfully along, begging alms: a thousand carriages, and wains,
cars, come tumbling in with Food, with young Rusticity, and other Raw
Produce, inanimate or animate, and go tumbling out again with produce
manufactured. That living flood, pouring through these streets, of all
qualities and ages, knowest thou whence it is coming, whither it is
going? _Aus der Ewigkeit, zu der Ewigkeit hin_: From Eternity, onwards
to Eternity! These are Apparitions: what else? Are they not Souls
rendered visible: in Bodies, that took shape and will lose it, melting
into air? Their solid Pavement is a Picture of the Sense; they walk
on the bosom of Nothing, blank Time is behind them and before them. Or
fanciest thou, the red and yellow Clothes-screen yonder, with spurs
on its heels and feather in its crown, is but of To-day, without a
Yesterday or a To-morrow; and had not rather its Ancestor alive when
Hengst and Horsa overran thy Island? Friend, thou seest here a living
link in that Tissue of History, which inweaves all Being: watch well, or
it will be past thee, and seen no more."

"_Ach, mein Lieber_!" said he once, at midnight, when we had returned
from the Coffee-house in rather earnest talk, "it is a true sublimity to
dwell here. These fringes of lamplight, struggling up through smoke and
thousand-fold exhalation, some fathoms into the ancient reign of Night,
what thinks Bootes of them, as he leads his Hunting-Dogs over the Zenith
in their leash of sidereal fire? That stifled hum of Midnight, when
Traffic has lain down to rest; and the chariot-wheels of Vanity, still
rolling here and there through distant streets, are bearing her to
Halls roofed in, and lighted to the due pitch for her; and only Vice
and Misery, to prowl or to moan like nightbirds, are abroad: that hum,
I say, like the stertorous, unquiet slumber of sick Life, is heard in
Heaven! Oh, under that hideous coverlet of vapors, and putrefactions,
and unimaginable gases, what a Fermenting-vat lies simmering and hid!
The joyful and the sorrowful are there; men are dying there, men are
being born; men are praying,--on the other side of a brick partition,
men are cursing; and around them all is the vast, void Night. The proud
Grandee still lingers in his perfumed saloons, or reposes within
damask curtains; Wretchedness cowers into buckle-beds, or shivers
hunger-stricken into its lair of straw: in obscure cellars,
_Rouge-et-Noir_ languidly emits its voice-of-destiny to haggard hungry
Villains; while Councillors of State sit plotting, and playing their
high chess-game, whereof the pawns are Men. The Lover whispers his
mistress that the coach is ready; and she, full of hope and fear, glides
down, to fly with him over the borders: the Thief, still more silently,
sets to his picklocks and crowbars, or lurks in wait till the watchmen
first snore in their boxes. Gay mansions, with supper-rooms and
dancing-rooms, are full of light and music and high-swelling hearts;
but, in the Condemned Cells, the pulse of life beats tremulous and
faint, and bloodshot eyes look out through the darkness, which is around
and within, for the light of a stern last morning. Six men are to be
hanged on the morrow: comes no hammering from the _Rabenstein_?--their
gallows must even now be o' building. Upwards of five hundred thousand
two-legged animals without feathers lie round us, in horizontal
position; their heads all in nightcaps, and full of the foolishest
dreams. Riot cries aloud, and staggers and swaggers in his rank dens of
shame; and the Mother, with streaming hair, kneels over her pallid dying
infant, whose cracked lips only her tears now moisten.--All these heaped
and huddled together, with nothing but a little carpentry and masonry
between them;--crammed in, like salted fish in their barrel;--or
weltering, shall I say, like an Egyptian pitcher of tamed vipers, each
struggling to get its _head above_ the others: _such_ work goes on under
that smoke-counterpane!--But I, _mein Werther_, sit above it all; I am
alone with the stars."

We looked in his face to see whether, in the utterance of such
extraordinary Night-thoughts, no feeling might be traced there; but with
the light we had, which indeed was only a single tallow-light, and far
enough from the window, nothing save that old calmness and fixedness was
visible.

These were the Professor's talking seasons: most commonly he spoke
in mere monosyllables, or sat altogether silent and smoked; while the
visitor had liberty either to say what he listed, receiving for answer
an occasional grunt; or to look round for a space, and then take himself
away. It was a strange apartment; full of books and tattered papers, and
miscellaneous shreds of all conceivable substances, "united in a common
element of dust." Books lay on tables, and below tables; here fluttered
a sheet of manuscript, there a torn handkerchief, or nightcap hastily
thrown aside; ink-bottles alternated with bread-crusts, coffee-pots,
tobacco-boxes, Periodical Literature, and Blucher Boots. Old Lieschen
(Lisekin, 'Liza), who was his bed-maker and stove-lighter, his washer
and wringer, cook, errand-maid, and general lion's-provider, and for the
rest a very orderly creature, had no sovereign authority in this last
citadel of Teufelsdrockh; only some once in the month she half-forcibly
made her way thither, with broom and duster, and (Teufelsdrockh hastily
saving his manuscripts) effected a partial clearance, a jail-delivery
of such lumber as was not Literary. These were her _Erdbeben_
(earthquakes), which Teufelsdrockh dreaded worse than the pestilence;
nevertheless, to such length he had been forced to comply. Glad would
he have been to sit here philosophizing forever, or till the litter, by
accumulation, drove him out of doors: but Lieschen was his right-arm,
and spoon, and necessary of life, and would not be flatly gainsayed. We
can still remember the ancient woman; so silent that some thought her
dumb; deaf also you would often have supposed her; for Teufelsdrockh,
and Teufelsdrockh only, would she serve or give heed to; and with him
she seemed to communicate chiefly by signs; if it were not rather by
some secret divination that she guessed all his wants, and supplied
them. Assiduous old dame! she scoured, and sorted, and swept, in her
kitchen, with the least possible violence to the ear; yet all was tight
and right there: hot and black came the coffee ever at the due moment;
and the speechless Lieschen herself looked out on you, from under her
clean white coif with its lappets, through her clean withered face and
wrinkles, with a look of helpful intelligence, almost of benevolence.

Few strangers, as above hinted, had admittance hither: the only one we
ever saw there, ourselves excepted, was the Hofrath Heuschrecke, already
known, by name and expectation, to the readers of these pages. To us,
at that period, Herr Heuschrecke seemed one of those purse-mouthed,
crane-necked, clean-brushed, pacific individuals, perhaps sufficiently
distinguished in society by this fact, that, in dry weather or in wet,
"they never appear without their umbrella." Had we not known with what
"little wisdom" the world is governed; and how, in Germany as
elsewhere, the ninety-and-nine Public Men can for most part be but mute
train-bearers to the hundredth, perhaps but stalking-horses and willing
or unwilling dupes,--it might have seemed wonderful how Herr Heuschrecke
should be named a _Rath_, or Councillor, and Counsellor, even in
Weissnichtwo. What counsel to any man, or to any woman, could this
particular Hofrath give; in whose loose, zigzag figure; in whose
thin visage, as it went jerking to and fro, in minute incessant
fluctuation,--you traced rather confusion worse confounded; at most,
Timidity and physical Cold? Some indeed said withal, he was "the
very Spirit of Love embodied:" blue earnest eyes, full of sadness and
kindness; purse ever open, and so forth; the whole of which, we shall
now hope, for many reasons, was not quite groundless. Nevertheless
friend Teufelsdrockh's outline, who indeed handled the burin like few
in these cases, was probably the best: _Er hat Gemuth und Geist,
hat wenigstens gehabt, doch ohne Organ, ohne Schicksals-Gunst; ist
gegenwartig aber halb-zerruttet, halb-erstarrt_, "He has heart and
talent, at least has had such, yet without fit mode of utterance, or
favor of Fortune; and so is now half-cracked, half-congealed."--What
the Hofrath shall think of this when he sees it, readers may wonder; we,
safe in the stronghold of Historical Fidelity, are careless.

The main point, doubtless, for us all, is his love of Teufelsdrockh,
which indeed was also by far the most decisive feature of Heuschrecke
himself. We are enabled to assert that he hung on the Professor with the
fondness of a Boswell for his Johnson. And perhaps with the like return;
for Teufelsdrockh treated his gaunt admirer with little outward regard,
as some half-rational or altogether irrational friend, and at best loved
him out of gratitude and by habit. On the other hand, it was curious to
observe with what reverent kindness, and a sort of fatherly protection,
our Hofrath, being the elder, richer, and as he fondly imagined far
more practically influential of the two, looked and tended on his
little Sage, whom he seemed to consider as a living oracle. Let but
Teufelsdrockh open his mouth, Heuschrecke's also unpuckered itself into
a free doorway, besides his being all eye and all ear, so that nothing
might be lost: and then, at every pause in the harangue, he gurgled out
his pursy chuckle of a cough-laugh (for the machinery of laughter took
some time to get in motion, and seemed crank and slack), or else his
twanging nasal, _Bravo! Das glaub' ich_; in either case, by way of
heartiest approval. In short, if Teufelsdrockh was Dalai-Lama, of which,
except perhaps in his self-seclusion, and godlike indifference, there
was no symptom, then might Heuschrecke pass for his chief Talapoin, to
whom no dough-pill he could knead and publish was other than medicinal
and sacred.

In such environment, social, domestic, physical, did Teufelsdrockh, at
the time of our acquaintance, and most likely does he still, live and
meditate. Here, perched up in his high Wahngasse watch-tower, and often,
in solitude, outwatching the Bear, it was that the indomitable
Inquirer fought all his battles with Dulness and Darkness; here, in
all probability, that he wrote this surprising Volume on _Clothes_.
Additional particulars: of his age, which was of that standing middle
sort you could only guess at; of his wide surtout; the color of his
trousers, fashion of his broad-brimmed steeple-hat, and so forth, we
might report, but do not. The Wisest truly is, in these times, the
Greatest; so that an enlightened curiosity leaving Kings and such
like to rest very much on their own basis, turns more and more to the
Philosophic Class: nevertheless, what reader expects that, with all our
writing and reporting, Teufelsdrockh could be brought home to him, till
once the Documents arrive? His Life, Fortunes, and Bodily Presence, are
as yet hidden from us, or matter only of faint conjecture. But, on the
other hand, does not his Soul lie enclosed in this remarkable Volume,
much more truly than Pedro Garcia's did in the buried Bag of Doubloons?
To the soul of Diogenes Teufelsdrockh, to his opinions, namely, on the
"Origin and Influence of Clothes," we for the present gladly return.



CHAPTER IV. CHARACTERISTICS.

It were a piece of vain flattery to pretend that this Work on Clothes
entirely contents us; that it is not, like all works of genius, like
the very Sun, which, though the highest published creation, or work of
genius, has nevertheless black spots and troubled nebulosities amid
its effulgence,--a mixture of insight, inspiration, with dulness,
double-vision, and even utter blindness.

Without committing ourselves to those enthusiastic praises and
prophesyings of the _Weissnichtwo'sche Anzeiger_, we admitted that the
Book had in a high degree excited us to self-activity, which is the
best effect of any book; that it had even operated changes in our way
of thought; nay, that it promised to prove, as it were, the opening of a
new mine-shaft, wherein the whole world of Speculation might henceforth
dig to unknown depths. More specially may it now be declared that
Professor Teufelsdrockh's acquirements, patience of research,
philosophic and even poetic vigor, are here made indisputably manifest;
and unhappily no less his prolixity and tortuosity and manifold
ineptitude; that, on the whole, as in opening new mine-shafts is
not unreasonable, there is much rubbish in his Book, though likewise
specimens of almost invaluable ore. A paramount popularity in England
we cannot promise him. Apart from the choice of such a topic as Clothes,
too often the manner of treating it betokens in the Author a rusticity
and academic seclusion, unblamable, indeed inevitable in a German, but
fatal to his success with our public.

Of good society Teufelsdrockh appears to have seen little, or has mostly
forgotten what he saw. He speaks out with a strange plainness; calls
many things by their mere dictionary names. To him the Upholsterer is no
Pontiff, neither is any Drawing-room a Temple, were it never so begilt
and overhung: "a whole immensity of Brussels carpets, and pier-glasses,
and ormolu," as he himself expresses it, "cannot hide from me that
such Drawing-room is simply a section of Infinite Space, where so many
God-created Souls do for the time meet together." To Teufelsdrockh the
highest Duchess is respectable, is venerable; but nowise for her pearl
bracelets and Malines laces: in his eyes, the star of a Lord is little
less and little more than the broad button of Birmingham spelter in a
Clown's smock; "each is an implement," he says, "in its kind; a tag
for _hooking-together_; and, for the rest, was dug from the earth, and
hammered on a stithy before smith's fingers." Thus does the Professor
look in men's faces with a strange impartiality, a strange scientific
freedom; like a man unversed in the higher circles, like a man dropped
thither from the Moon. Rightly considered, it is in this peculiarity,
running through his whole system of thought, that all these
shortcomings, over-shootings, and multiform perversities, take rise:
if indeed they have not a second source, also natural enough, in his
Transcendental Philosophies, and humor of looking at all Matter and
Material things as Spirit; whereby truly his case were but the more
hopeless, the more lamentable.

To the Thinkers of this nation, however, of which class it is firmly
believed there are individuals yet extant, we can safely recommend the
Work: nay, who knows but among the fashionable ranks too, if it be true,
as Teufelsdrockh maintains, that "within the most starched cravat there
passes a windpipe and weasand, and under the thickliest embroidered
waistcoat beats a heart,"--the force of that rapt earnestness may be
felt, and here and there an arrow of the soul pierce through? In our
wild Seer, shaggy, unkempt, like a Baptist living on locusts and wild
honey, there is an untutored energy, a silent, as it were unconscious,
strength, which, except in the higher walks of Literature, must be rare.
Many a deep glance, and often with unspeakable precision, has he cast
into mysterious Nature, and the still more mysterious Life of Man.
Wonderful it is with what cutting words, now and then, he severs asunder
the confusion; sheers down, were it furlongs deep; into the true centre
of the matter; and there not only hits the nail on the head, but with
crushing force smites it home, and buries it.--On the other hand, let us
be free to admit, he is the most unequal writer breathing. Often after
some such feat, he will play truant for long pages, and go dawdling and
dreaming, and mumbling and maundering the merest commonplaces, as if he
were asleep with eyes open, which indeed he is.

Of his boundless Learning, and how all reading and literature in most
known tongues, from _Sanchoniathon_ to _Dr. Lingard_, from your Oriental
_Shasters_, and _Talmuds_, and _Korans_, with Cassini's _Siamese
fables_, and Laplace's _Mecanique Celeste_, down to _Robinson Crusoe_
and the _Belfast Town and Country Almanack_, are familiar to him,--we
shall say nothing: for unexampled as it is with us, to the Germans such
universality of study passes without wonder, as a thing commendable,
indeed, but natural, indispensable, and there of course. A man that
devotes his life to learning, shall he not be learned?

In respect of style our Author manifests the same genial capability,
marred too often by the same rudeness, inequality, and apparent want of
intercourse with the higher classes. Occasionally, as above hinted, we
find consummate vigor, a true inspiration; his burning thoughts step
forth in fit burning words, like so many full-formed Minervas, issuing
amid flame and splendor from Jove's head; a rich, idiomatic diction,
picturesque allusions, fiery poetic emphasis, or quaint tricksy turns;
all the graces and terrors of a wild Imagination, wedded to the clearest
Intellect, alternate in beautiful vicissitude. Were it not that sheer
sleeping and soporific passages; circumlocutions, repetitions, touches
even of pure doting jargon, so often intervene! On the whole, Professor
Teufelsdrockh, is not a cultivated writer. Of his sentences perhaps not
more than nine-tenths stand straight on their legs; the remainder are
in quite angular attitudes, buttressed up by props (of parentheses and
dashes), and ever with this or the other tagrag hanging from them; a
few even sprawl out helplessly on all sides, quite broken-backed and
dismembered. Nevertheless, in almost his very worst moods, there lies in
him a singular attraction. A wild tone pervades the whole utterance of
the man, like its keynote and regulator; now screwing itself aloft as
into the Song of Spirits, or else the shrill mockery of Fiends; now
sinking in cadences, not without melodious heartiness, though sometimes
abrupt enough, into the common pitch, when we hear it only as a
monotonous hum; of which hum the true character is extremely difficult
to fix. Up to this hour we have never fully satisfied ourselves whether
it is a tone and hum of real Humor, which we reckon among the very
highest qualities of genius, or some echo of mere Insanity and Inanity,
which doubtless ranks below the very lowest.

Under a like difficulty, in spite even of our personal intercourse, do
we still lie with regard to the Professor's moral feeling. Gleams of an
ethereal love burst forth from him, soft wailings of infinite pity;
he could clasp the whole Universe into his bosom, and keep it warm; it
seems as if under that rude exterior there dwelt a very seraph. Then
again he is so sly and still, so imperturbably saturnine; shows such
indifference, malign coolness towards all that men strive after; and
ever with some half-visible wrinkle of a bitter sardonic humor, if
indeed it be not mere stolid callousness,--that you look on him almost
with a shudder, as on some incarnate Mephistopheles, to whom this great
terrestrial and celestial Round, after all, were but some huge foolish
Whirligig, where kings and beggars, and angels and demons, and stars and
street-sweepings, were chaotically whirled, in which only children could
take interest. His look, as we mentioned, is probably the gravest ever
seen: yet it is not of that cast-iron gravity frequent enough among
our own Chancery suitors; but rather the gravity as of some silent,
high-encircled mountain-pool, perhaps the crater of an extinct volcano;
into whose black deeps you fear to gaze: those eyes, those lights that
sparkle in it, may indeed be reflexes of the heavenly Stars, but perhaps
also glances from the region of Nether Fire.

Certainly a most involved, self-secluded, altogether enigmatic nature,
this of Teufelsdrockh! Here, however, we gladly recall to mind that once
we saw him _laugh_; once only, perhaps it was the first and last time in
his life; but then such a peal of laughter, enough to have awakened the
Seven Sleepers! It was of Jean Paul's doing: some single billow in that
vast World-Mahlstrom of Humor, with its heaven-kissing coruscations,
which is now, alas, all congealed in the frost of death! The
large-bodied Poet and the small, both large enough in soul, sat talking
miscellaneously together, the present Editor being privileged to listen;
and now Paul, in his serious way, was giving one of those inimitable
"Extra-Harangues;" and, as it chanced, On the Proposal for a _Cast-metal
King_: gradually a light kindled in our Professor's eyes and face, a
beaming, mantling, loveliest light; through those murky features, a
radiant ever-young Apollo looked; and he burst forth like the neighing
of all Tattersall's,--tears streaming down his cheeks, pipe held aloft,
foot clutched into the air,--loud, long-continuing, uncontrollable; a
laugh not of the face and diaphragm only, but of the whole man from head
to heel. The present Editor, who laughed indeed, yet with measure, began
to fear all was not right: however, Teufelsdrockh, composed himself, and
sank into his old stillness; on his inscrutable countenance there was,
if anything, a slight look of shame; and Richter himself could not rouse
him again. Readers who have any tincture of Psychology know how much
is to be inferred from this; and that no man who has once heartily and
wholly laughed can be altogether irreclaimably bad. How much lies in
Laughter: the cipher-key, wherewith we decipher the whole man! Some men
wear an everlasting barren simper; in the smile of others lies a cold
glitter as of ice: the fewest are able to laugh, what can be called
laughing, but only sniff and titter and snigger from the throat
outwards; or at best, produce some whiffling husky cachinnation, as if
they were laughing through wool: of none such comes good. The man who
cannot laugh is not only fit for treasons, stratagems, and spoils; but
his whole life is already a treason and a stratagem.

Considered as an Author, Herr Teufelsdrockh has one scarcely pardonable
fault, doubtless his worst: an almost total want of arrangement. In this
remarkable Volume, it is true, his adherence to the mere course of Time
produces, through the Narrative portions, a certain show of outward
method; but of true logical method and sequence there is too little.
Apart from its multifarious sections and subdivisions, the Work
naturally falls into two Parts; a Historical-Descriptive, and a
Philosophical-Speculative: but falls, unhappily, by no firm line of
demarcation; in that labyrinthic combination, each Part overlaps, and
indents, and indeed runs quite through the other. Many sections are of
a debatable rubric, or even quite nondescript and unnamable; whereby the
Book not only loses in accessibility, but too often distresses us like
some mad banquet, wherein all courses had been confounded, and fish and
flesh, soup and solid, oyster-sauce, lettuces, Rhine-wine and French
mustard, were hurled into one huge tureen or trough, and the hungry
Public invited to help itself. To bring what order we can out of this
Chaos shall be part of our endeavor.



CHAPTER V. THE WORLD IN CLOTHES.

"As Montesquieu wrote a _Spirit of Laws_," observes our Professor, "so
could I write a _Spirit of Clothes_; thus, with an _Esprit des
Lois_, properly an _Esprit de Coutumes_, we should have an _Esprit de
Costumes_. For neither in tailoring nor in legislating does man
proceed by mere Accident, but the hand is ever guided on by mysterious
operations of the mind. In all his Modes, and habilatory endeavors, an
Architectural Idea will be found lurking; his Body and the Cloth are
the site and materials whereon and whereby his beautified edifice, of
a Person, is to be built. Whether he flow gracefully out in folded
mantles, based on light sandals; tower up in high headgear, from amid
peaks, spangles and bell-girdles; swell out in starched ruffs, buckram
stuffings, and monstrous tuberosities; or girth himself into separate
sections, and front the world an Agglomeration of four limbs,--will
depend on the nature of such Architectural Idea: whether Grecian,
Gothic, Later Gothic, or altogether Modern, and Parisian or
Anglo-Dandiacal. Again, what meaning lies in Color! From the soberest
drab to the high-flaming scarlet, spiritual idiosyncrasies unfold
themselves in choice of Color: if the Cut betoken Intellect and Talent,
so does the Color betoken Temper and Heart. In all which, among nations
as among individuals, there is an incessant, indubitable, though
infinitely complex working of Cause and Effect: every snip of the
Scissors has been regulated and prescribed by ever-active Influences,
which doubtless to Intelligences of a superior order are neither
invisible nor illegible.

"For such superior Intelligences a Cause-and-Effect Philosophy of
Clothes, as of Laws, were probably a comfortable winter-evening
entertainment: nevertheless, for inferior Intelligences, like men, such
Philosophies have always seemed to me uninstructive enough. Nay, what
is your Montesquieu himself but a clever infant spelling Letters from a
hieroglyphical prophetic Book, the lexicon of which lies in Eternity,
in Heaven?--Let any Cause-and-Effect Philosopher explain, not why I wear
such and such a Garment, obey such and such a Law; but even why I am
_here_, to wear and obey anything!--Much, therefore, if not the whole,
of that same _Spirit of Clothes_ I shall suppress, as hypothetical,
ineffectual, and even impertinent: naked Facts, and Deductions drawn
therefrom in quite another than that omniscient style, are my humbler
and proper province."

Acting on which prudent restriction, Teufelsdrockh, has nevertheless
contrived to take in a well-nigh boundless extent of field; at least,
the boundaries too often lie quite beyond our horizon. Selection being
indispensable, we shall here glance over his First Part only in the
most cursory manner. This First Part is, no doubt, distinguished by
omnivorous learning, and utmost patience and fairness: at the same time,
in its results and delineations, it is much more likely to interest the
Compilers of some _Library_ of General, Entertaining, Useful, or even
Useless Knowledge than the miscellaneous readers of these pages. Was it
this Part of the Book which Heuschrecke had in view, when he recommended
us to that joint-stock vehicle of publication, "at present the glory of
British Literature"? If so, the Library Editors are welcome to dig in it
for their own behoof.

To the First Chapter, which turns on Paradise and Fig-leaves, and leads
us into interminable disquisitions of a mythological, metaphorical,
cabalistico-sartorial and quite antediluvian cast, we shall content
ourselves with giving an unconcerned approval. Still less have we to do
with "Lilis, Adam's first wife, whom, according to the Talmudists, he
had before Eve, and who bore him, in that wedlock, the whole progeny of
aerial, aquatic, and terrestrial Devils,"--very needlessly, we think.
On this portion of the Work, with its profound glances into the
_Adam-Kadmon_, or Primeval Element, here strangely brought into relation
with the _Nifl_ and _Muspel_ (Darkness and Light) of the antique North,
it may be enough to say, that its correctness of deduction, and depth of
Talmudic and Rabbinical lore have filled perhaps not the worst Hebraist
in Britain with something like astonishment.

But, quitting this twilight region, Teufelsdrockh hastens from the Tower
of Babel, to follow the dispersion of Mankind over the whole habitable
and habilable globe. Walking by the light of Oriental, Pelasgic,
Scandinavian, Egyptian, Otaheitean, Ancient and Modern researches of
every conceivable kind, he strives to give us in compressed shape (as
the Nurnbergers give an _Orbis Pictus_) an _Orbis Vestitus_; or view of
the costumes of all mankind, in all countries, in all times. It is here
that to the Antiquarian, to the Historian, we can triumphantly say:
Fall to! Here is learning: an irregular Treasury, if you will; but
inexhaustible as the Hoard of King Nibelung, which twelve wagons in
twelve days, at the rate of three journeys a day, could not carry
off. Sheepskin cloaks and wampum belts; phylacteries, stoles, albs;
chlamydes, togas, Chinese silks, Afghaun shawls, trunk-hose, leather
breeches, Celtic hilibegs (though breeches, as the name _Gallia
Braccata_ indicates, are the more ancient), Hussar cloaks, Vandyke
tippets, ruffs, fardingales, are brought vividly before us,--even the
Kilmarnock nightcap is not forgotten. For most part, too, we must
admit that the Learning, heterogeneous as it is, and tumbled down quite
pell-mell, is true concentrated and purified Learning, the drossy parts
smelted out and thrown aside.

Philosophical reflections intervene, and sometimes touching pictures
of human life. Of this sort the following has surprised us. The first
purpose of Clothes, as our Professor imagines, was not warmth or
decency, but ornament. "Miserable indeed," says he, "was the condition
of the Aboriginal Savage, glaring fiercely from under his fleece of
hair, which with the beard reached down to his loins, and hung round him
like a matted cloak; the rest of his body sheeted in its thick
natural fell. He loitered in the sunny glades of the forest, living
on wild-fruits; or, as the ancient Caledonian, squatted himself in
morasses, lurking for his bestial or human prey; without implements,
without arms, save the ball of heavy Flint, to which, that his sole
possession and defence might not be lost, he had attached a long cord
of plaited thongs; thereby recovering as well as hurling it with deadly
unerring skill. Nevertheless, the pains of Hunger and Revenge once
satisfied, his next care was not Comfort but Decoration (_Putz_). Warmth
he found in the toils of the chase; or amid dried leaves, in his hollow
tree, in his bark shed, or natural grotto: but for Decoration he must
have Clothes. Nay, among wild people, we find tattooing and painting
even prior to Clothes. The first spiritual want of a barbarous man
is Decoration, as indeed we still see among the barbarous classes in
civilized countries.

"Reader, the heaven-inspired melodious Singer; loftiest Serene Highness;
nay thy own amber-locked, snow-and-rosebloom Maiden, worthy to glide
sylph-like almost on air, whom thou lovest, worshippest as a divine
Presence, which, indeed, symbolically taken, she is,--has descended,
like thyself, from that same hair-mantled, flint-hurling Aboriginal
Anthropophagus! Out of the eater cometh forth meat; out of the strong
cometh forth sweetness. What changes are wrought, not by Time, yet in
Time! For not Mankind only, but all that Mankind does or beholds, is in
continual growth, re-genesis and self-perfecting vitality. Cast forth
thy Act, thy Word, into the ever-living, ever-working Universe: it is
a seed-grain that cannot die; unnoticed to-day (says one), it will
be found flourishing as a Banyan-grove (perhaps, alas, as a
Hemlock-forest!) after a thousand years.

"He who first shortened the labor of Copyists by device of _Movable
Types_ was disbanding hired Armies, and cashiering most Kings and
Senates, and creating a whole new Democratic world: he had invented
the Art of Printing. The first ground handful of Nitre, Sulphur, and
Charcoal drove Monk Schwartz's pestle through the ceiling: what will
the last do? Achieve the final undisputed prostration of Force under
Thought, of Animal courage under Spiritual. A simple invention it was
in the old-world Grazier,--sick of lugging his slow Ox about the country
till he got it bartered for corn or oil,--to take a piece of Leather,
and thereon scratch or stamp the mere Figure of an Ox (or _Pecus_); put
it in his pocket, and call it _Pecunia_, Money. Yet hereby did Barter
grow Sale, the Leather Money is now Golden and Paper, and all miracles
have been out-miracled: for there are Rothschilds and English National
Debts; and whoso has sixpence is sovereign (to the length of sixpence)
over all men; commands cooks to feed him, philosophers to teach him,
kings to mount guard over him,--to the length of sixpence.--Clothes too,
which began in foolishest love of Ornament, what have they not become!
Increased Security and pleasurable Heat soon followed: but what of
these? Shame, divine Shame (_Schaam_, Modesty), as yet a stranger to the
Anthropophagous bosom, arose there mysteriously under Clothes; a
mystic grove-encircled shrine for the Holy in man. Clothes gave us
individuality, distinctions, social polity; Clothes have made Men of us;
they are threatening to make Clothes-screens of us.

"But, on the whole," continues our eloquent Professor, "Man is a
Tool-using Animal (_Handthierendes Thier_). Weak in himself, and of
small stature, he stands on a basis, at most for the flattest-soled, of
some half-square foot, insecurely enough; has to straddle out his legs,
lest the very wind supplant him. Feeblest of bipeds! Three quintals are
a crushing load for him; the steer of the meadow tosses him aloft, like
a waste rag. Nevertheless he can use Tools; can devise Tools: with these
the granite mountain melts into light dust before him; he kneads glowing
iron, as if it were soft paste; seas are his smooth highway, winds
and fire his unwearying steeds. Nowhere do you find him without Tools;
without Tools he is nothing, with Tools he is all."

Here may we not, for a moment, interrupt the stream of Oratory with a
remark, that this Definition of the Tool-using Animal appears to us, of
all that Animal-sort, considerably the precisest and best? Man is called
a Laughing Animal: but do not the apes also laugh, or attempt to do it;
and is the manliest man the greatest and oftenest laugher? Teufelsdrockh
himself, as we said, laughed only once. Still less do we make of that
other French Definition of the Cooking Animal; which, indeed, for
rigorous scientific purposes, is as good as useless. Can a Tartar be
said to cook, when he only readies his steak by riding on it?
Again, what Cookery does the Greenlander use, beyond stowing up his
whale-blubber, as a marmot, in the like case, might do? Or how would
Monsieur Ude prosper among those Orinoco Indians who, according to
Humboldt, lodge in crow-nests, on the branches of trees; and, for half
the year, have no victuals but pipe-clay, the whole country being under
water? But, on the other hand, show us the human being, of any period or
climate, without his Tools: those very Caledonians, as we saw, had their
Flint-ball, and Thong to it, such as no brute has or can have.

"Man is a Tool-using Animal," concludes Teufelsdrockh, in his abrupt
way; "of which truth Clothes are but one example: and surely if we
consider the interval between the first wooden Dibble fashioned by man,
and those Liverpool Steam-carriages, or the British House of Commons,
we shall note what progress he has made. He digs up certain black stones
from the bosom of the earth, and says to them, _Transport me and this
luggage at the rate of file-and-thirty miles an hour_; and they do
it: he collects, apparently by lot, six hundred and fifty-eight
miscellaneous individuals, and says to them, _Make this nation toil for
us, bleed for us, hunger and, sorrow and sin for us_; and they do it."



CHAPTER VI. APRONS.

One of the most unsatisfactory Sections in the whole Volume is that
on _Aprons_. What though stout old Gao, the Persian Blacksmith, "whose
Apron, now indeed hidden under jewels, because raised in revolt which
proved successful, is still the royal standard of that country;" what
though John Knox's Daughter, "who threatened Sovereign Majesty that she
would catch her husband's head in her Apron, rather than he should lie
and be a bishop;" what though the Landgravine Elizabeth, with many other
Apron worthies,--figure here? An idle wire-drawing spirit, sometimes
even a tone of levity, approaching to conventional satire, is too
clearly discernible. What, for example, are we to make of such sentences
as the following?

"Aprons are Defences; against injury to cleanliness, to safety, to
modesty, sometimes to roguery. From the thin slip of notched silk (as
it were, the emblem and beatified ghost of an Apron), which some
highest-bred housewife, sitting at Nurnberg Work-boxes and Toy-boxes,
has gracefully fastened on; to the thick-tanned hide, girt round him
with thongs, wherein the Builder builds, and at evening sticks his
trowel; or to those jingling sheet-iron Aprons, wherein your otherwise
half-naked Vulcans hammer and smelt in their smelt-furnace,--is there
not range enough in the fashion and uses of this Vestment? How much
has been concealed, how much has been defended in Aprons! Nay, rightly
considered, what is your whole Military and Police Establishment,
charged at uncalculated millions, but a huge scarlet-colored,
iron-fastened Apron, wherein Society works (uneasily enough); guarding
itself from some soil and stithy-sparks, in this Devil's-smithy
(_Teufels-schmiede_) of a world? But of all Aprons the most puzzling
to me hitherto has been the Episcopal or Cassock. Wherein consists the
usefulness of this Apron? The Overseer (_Episcopus_) of Souls, I notice,
has tucked in the corner of it, as if his day's work were done: what
does he shadow forth thereby?" &c. &c.

Or again, has it often been the lot of our readers to read such stuff as
we shall now quote?

"I consider those printed Paper Aprons, worn by the Parisian Cooks, as
a new vent, though a slight one, for Typography; therefore as an
encouragement to modern Literature, and deserving of approval: nor is it
without satisfaction that I hear of a celebrated London Firm having
in view to introduce the same fashion, with important extensions, in
England."--We who are on the spot hear of no such thing; and indeed
have reason to be thankful that hitherto there are other vents for
our Literature, exuberant as it is.--Teufelsdrockh continues: "If such
supply of printed Paper should rise so far as to choke up the highways
and public thoroughfares, new means must of necessity be had recourse
to. In a world existing by Industry, we grudge to employ fire as a
destroying element, and not as a creating one. However, Heaven is
omnipotent, and will find us an outlet. In the mean while, is it not
beautiful to see five million quintals of Rags picked annually from the
Laystall; and annually, after being macerated, hot-pressed, printed on,
and sold,--returned thither; filling so many hungry mouths by the way?
Thus is the Laystall, especially with its Rags or Clothes-rubbish, the
grand Electric Battery, and Fountain-of-motion, from which and to
which the Social Activities (like vitreous and resinous Electricities)
circulate, in larger or smaller circles, through the mighty, billowy,
storm-tost chaos of Life, which they keep alive!"--Such passages fill
us, who love the man, and partly esteem him, with a very mixed feeling.

Farther down we meet with this: "The Journalists are now the true Kings
and Clergy: henceforth Historians, unless they are fools, must write
not of Bourbon Dynasties, and Tudors and Hapsburgs; but of Stamped
Broad-sheet Dynasties, and quite new successive Names, according as
this or the other Able Editor, or Combination of Able Editors, gains the
world's ear. Of the British Newspaper Press, perhaps the most important
of all, and wonderful enough in its secret constitution and procedure, a
valuable descriptive History already exists, in that language, under the
title of _Satan's Invisible World Displayed_; which, however, by search
in all the Weissnichtwo Libraries, I have not yet succeeded in procuring
(_vermochte night aufzutreiben_)."

Thus does the good Homer not only nod, but snore. Thus does
Teufelsdrockh, wandering in regions where he had little business,
confound the old authentic Presbyterian Witchfinder with a new,
spurious, imaginary Historian of the _Brittische Journalistik_; and so
stumble on perhaps the most egregious blunder in Modern Literature!



CHAPTER VII. MISCELLANEOUS-HISTORICAL.

Happier is our Professor, and more purely scientific and historic,
when he reaches the Middle Ages in Europe, and down to the end of the
Seventeenth Century; the true era of extravagance in Costume. It is here
that the Antiquary and Student of Modes comes upon his richest harvest.
Fantastic garbs, beggaring all fancy of a Teniers or a Callot, succeed
each other, like monster devouring monster in a Dream. The whole too
in brief authentic strokes, and touched not seldom with that breath of
genius which makes even old raiment live. Indeed, so learned, precise,
graphical, and every way interesting have we found these Chapters, that
it may be thrown out as a pertinent question for parties concerned,
Whether or not a good English Translation thereof might henceforth be
profitably incorporated with Mr. Merrick's valuable Work _On Ancient
Armor_? Take, by way of example, the following sketch; as authority
for which Paulinus's _Zeitkurzende Lust_ (ii. 678) is, with seeming
confidence, referred to:

"Did we behold the German fashionable dress of the Fifteenth Century, we
might smile; as perhaps those bygone Germans, were they to rise again,
and see our haberdashery, would cross themselves, and invoke the Virgin.
But happily no bygone German, or man, rises again; thus the Present is
not needlessly trammelled with the Past; and only grows out of it, like
a Tree, whose roots are not intertangled with its branches, but lie
peaceably underground. Nay it is very mournful, yet not useless, to see
and know, how the Greatest and Dearest, in a short while, would find his
place quite filled up here, and no room for him; the very Napoleon, the
very Byron, in some seven years, has become obsolete, and were now a
foreigner to his Europe. Thus is the Law of Progress secured; and in
Clothes, as in all other external things whatsoever, no fashion will
continue.

"Of the military classes in those old times, whose buff-belts,
complicated chains and gorgets, huge churn-boots, and other riding and
fighting gear have been bepainted in modern Romance, till the whole has
acquired somewhat of a sign-post character,--I shall here say nothing:
the civil and pacific classes, less touched upon, are wonderful enough
for us.

"Rich men, I find, have _Teusinke_ [a perhaps untranslatable article];
also a silver girdle, whereat hang little bells; so that when a man
walks, it is with continual jingling. Some few, of musical turn, have a
whole chime of bells (_Glockenspiel_) fastened there; which, especially
in sudden whirls, and the other accidents of walking, has a grateful
effect. Observe too how fond they are of peaks, and Gothic-arch
intersections. The male world wears peaked caps, an ell long, which hang
bobbing over the side (_schief_): their shoes are peaked in front,
also to the length of an ell, and laced on the side with tags; even
the wooden shoes have their ell-long noses: some also clap bells on the
peak. Further, according to my authority, the men have breeches without
seat (_ohne Gesass_): these they fasten peakwise to their shirts; and
the long round doublet must overlap them.

"Rich maidens, again, flit abroad in gowns scolloped out behind and
before, so that back and breast are almost bare. Wives of quality, on
the other hand, have train-gowns four or five ells in length; which
trains there are boys to carry. Brave Cleopatras, sailing in their
silk-cloth Galley, with a Cupid for steersman! Consider their welts, a
handbreadth thick, which waver round them by way of hem; the long
flood of silver buttons, or rather silver shells, from throat to shoe,
wherewith these same welt-gowns are buttoned. The maidens have bound
silver snoods about their hair, with gold spangles, and pendent flames
(_Flammen_), that is, sparkling hair-drops: but of their mother's
head-gear who shall speak? Neither in love of grace is comfort
forgotten. In winter weather you behold the whole fair creation (that
can afford it) in long mantles, with skirts wide below, and, for hem,
not one but two sufficient hand-broad welts; all ending atop in a
thick well-starched Ruff, some twenty inches broad: these are their
Ruff-mantles (_Kragenmantel_).

"As yet among the womankind hoop-petticoats are not; but the men have
doublets of fustian, under which lie multiple ruffs of cloth, pasted
together with batter (_mit Teig zusammengekleistert_), which create
protuberance enough. Thus do the two sexes vie with each other in the
art of Decoration; and as usual the stronger carries it."

Our Professor, whether he have humor himself or not, manifests a certain
feeling of the Ludicrous, a sly observance of it which, could emotion
of any kind be confidently predicated of so still a man, we might call
a real love. None of those bell-girdles, bushel-breeches, counted shoes,
or other the like phenomena, of which the History of Dress offers
so many, escape him: more especially the mischances, or striking
adventures, incident to the wearers of such, are noticed with due
fidelity. Sir Walter Raleigh's fine mantle, which he spread in the mud
under Queen Elizabeth's feet, appears to provoke little enthusiasm
in him; he merely asks, Whether at that period the Maiden Queen "was
red-painted on the nose, and white-painted on the cheeks, as her
tire-women, when from spleen and wrinkles she would no longer look in
any glass, were wont to serve her"? We can answer that Sir Walter knew
well what he was doing, and had the Maiden Queen been stuffed parchment
dyed in verdigris, would have done the same.

Thus too, treating of those enormous habiliments, that were not only
slashed and gallooned, but artificially swollen out on the broader
parts of the body, by introduction of Bran,--our Professor fails not to
comment on that luckless Courtier, who having seated himself on a
chair with some projecting nail on it, and therefrom rising, to pay his
_devoir_ on the entrance of Majesty, instantaneously emitted several
pecks of dry wheat-dust: and stood there diminished to a spindle, his
galloons and slashes dangling sorrowful and flabby round him. Whereupon
the Professor publishes this reflection:--

"By what strange chances do we live in History? Erostratus by a torch;
Milo by a bullock; Henry Darnley, an unfledged booby and bustard, by
his limbs; most Kings and Queens by being born under such and such a
bed-tester; Boileau Despreaux (according to Helvetius) by the peck of a
turkey; and this ill-starred individual by a rent in his breeches,--for
no Memoirist of Kaiser Otto's Court omits him. Vain was the prayer of
Themistocles for a talent of Forgetting: my Friends, yield cheerfully to
Destiny, and read since it is written."--Has Teufelsdrockh, to be put in
mind that, nearly related to the impossible talent of Forgetting, stands
that talent of Silence, which even travelling Englishmen manifest?

"The simplest costume," observes our Professor, "which I anywhere find
alluded to in History, is that used as regimental, by Bolivar's Cavalry,
in the late Colombian wars. A square Blanket, twelve feet in diagonal,
is provided (some were wont to cut off the corners, and make it
circular): in the centre a slit is effected eighteen inches long;
through this the mother-naked Trooper introduces his head and neck; and
so rides shielded from all weather, and in battle from many strokes (for
he rolls it about his left arm); and not only dressed, but harnessed and
draperied."

With which picture of a State of Nature, affecting by its singularity,
and Old-Roman contempt of the superfluous, we shall quit this part of
our subject.



CHAPTER VIII. THE WORLD OUT OF CLOTHES.

If in the Descriptive-Historical portion of this Volume, Teufelsdrockh,
discussing merely the _Werden_ (Origin and successive Improvement)
of Clothes, has astonished many a reader, much more will he in the
Speculative-Philosophical portion, which treats of their _Wirken_, or
Influences. It is here that the present Editor first feels the pressure
of his task; for here properly the higher and new Philosophy of Clothes
commences: all untried, almost inconceivable region, or chaos; in
venturing upon which, how difficult, yet how unspeakably important is it
to know what course, of survey and conquest, is the true one; where the
footing is firm substance and will bear us, where it is hollow, or
mere cloud, and may engulf us! Teufelsdrockh undertakes no less than to
expound the moral, political, even religious Influences of Clothes; he
undertakes to make manifest, in its thousand-fold bearings, this grand
Proposition, that Man's earthly interests "are all hooked and buttoned
together, and held up, by Clothes." He says in so many words, "Society
is founded upon Cloth;" and again, "Society sails through the Infinitude
on Cloth, as on a Faust's Mantle, or rather like the Sheet of clean and
unclean beasts in the Apostle's Dream; and without such Sheet or Mantle,
would sink to endless depths, or mount to inane limbos, and in either
case be no more."

By what chains, or indeed infinitely complected tissues, of Meditation
this grand Theorem is here unfolded, and innumerable practical
Corollaries are drawn therefrom, it were perhaps a mad ambition to
attempt exhibiting. Our Professor's method is not, in any case, that of
common school Logic, where the truths all stand in a row, each holding
by the skirts of the other; but at best that of practical Reason'
proceeding by large Intuition over whole systematic groups and kingdoms;
whereby, we might say, a noble complexity, almost like that of Nature,
reigns in his Philosophy, or spiritual Picture of Nature: a mighty maze,
yet, as faith whispers, not without a plan. Nay we complained above,
that a certain ignoble complexity, what we must call mere confusion, was
also discernible. Often, also, we have to exclaim: Would to Heaven
those same Biographical Documents were come! For it seems as if the
demonstration lay much in the Author's individuality; as if it were not
Argument that had taught him, but Experience. At present it is only
in local glimpses, and by significant fragments, picked often at
wide-enough intervals from the original Volume, and carefully collated,
that we can hope to impart some outline or foreshadow of this Doctrine.
Readers of any intelligence are once more invited to favor us with their
most concentrated attention: let these, after intense consideration,
and not till then, pronounce, Whether on the utmost verge of our actual
horizon there is not a looming as of Land; a promise of new Fortunate
Islands, perhaps whole undiscovered Americas, for such as have canvas to
sail thither?--As exordium to the whole, stand here the following long
citation:--

"With men of a speculative turn," writes Teufelsdrockh, "there come
seasons, meditative, sweet, yet awful hours, when in wonder and fear you
ask yourself that unanswerable question: Who am I; the thing that can
say 'I' (_das Wesen das sich ICH nennt_)? The world, with its loud
trafficking, retires into the distance; and, through the paper-hangings,
and stonewalls, and thick-plied tissues of Commerce and Polity, and all
the living and lifeless integuments (of Society and a Body), wherewith
your Existence sits surrounded,--the sight reaches forth into the void
Deep, and you are alone with the Universe, and silently commune with it,
as one mysterious Presence with another.

"Who am I; what is this ME? A Voice, a Motion, an Appearance;--some
embodied, visualized Idea in the Eternal Mind? _Cogito, ergo sum_. Alas,
poor Cogitator, this takes us but a little way. Sure enough, I am;
and lately was not: but Whence? How? Whereto? The answer lies around,
written in all colors and motions, uttered in all tones of jubilee and
wail, in thousand-figured, thousand-voiced, harmonious Nature: but where
is the cunning eye and ear to whom that God-written Apocalypse will
yield articulate meaning? We sit as in a boundless Phantasmagoria and
Dream-grotto; boundless, for the faintest star, the remotest century,
lies not even nearer the verge thereof: sounds and many-colored visions
flit round our sense; but Him, the Unslumbering, whose work both Dream
and Dreamer are, we see not; except in rare half-waking moments, suspect
not. Creation, says one, lies before us, like a glorious Rainbow; but
the Sun that made it lies behind us, hidden from us. Then, in that
strange Dream, how we clutch at shadows as if they were substances;
and sleep deepest while fancying ourselves most awake! Which of your
Philosophical Systems is other than a dream-theorem; a net quotient,
confidently given out, where divisor and dividend are both unknown? What
are all your national Wars, with their Moscow Retreats, and sanguinary
hate-filled Revolutions, but the Somnambulism of uneasy Sleepers? This
Dreaming, this Somnambulism is what we on Earth call Life; wherein the
most indeed undoubtingly wander, as if they knew right hand from left;
yet they only are wise who know that they know nothing.

"Pity that all Metaphysics had hitherto proved so inexpressibly
unproductive! The secret of Man's Being is still like the Sphinx's
secret: a riddle that he cannot rede; and for ignorance of which he
suffers death, the worst death, a spiritual. What are your Axioms, and
Categories, and Systems, and Aphorisms? Words, words. High Air-castles
are cunningly built of Words, the Words well bedded also in good
Logic-mortar; wherein, however, no Knowledge will come to lodge. _The
whole is greater than the part_: how exceedingly true! _Nature abhors a
vacuum_: how exceedingly false and calumnious! Again, _Nothing can act
but where it is_: with all my heart; only, WHERE is it? Be not the slave
of Words: is not the Distant, the Dead, while I love it, and long for
it, and mourn for it, Here, in the genuine sense, as truly as the floor
I stand on? But that same WHERE, with its brother WHEN, are from the
first the master-colors of our Dream-grotto; say rather, the Canvas
(the warp and woof thereof) whereon all our Dreams and Life-visions are
painted. Nevertheless, has not a deeper meditation taught certain
of every climate and age, that the WHERE and WHEN, so mysteriously
inseparable from all our thoughts, are but superficial terrestrial
adhesions to thought; that the Seer may discern them where they mount
up out of the celestial EVERYWHERE and FOREVER: have not all nations
conceived their God as Omnipresent and Eternal; as existing in a
universal HERE, an everlasting Now? Think well, thou too wilt find that
Space is but a mode of our human Sense, so likewise Time; there _is_ no
Space and no Time: WE are--we know not what;--light-sparkles floating in
the ether of Deity!

"So that this so solid-seeming World, after all, were but an air-image,
our ME the only reality: and Nature, with its thousand-fold production
and destruction, but the reflex of our own inward Force, the 'phantasy
of our Dream;' or what the Earth-Spirit in _Faust_ names it, _the living
visible Garment of God_:--

    "'In Being's floods, in Action's storm,
    I walk and work, above, beneath,
    Work and weave in endless motion!
          Birth and Death,
          An infinite ocean;
          A seizing and giving
          The fire of Living:
    'Tis thus at the roaring Loom of Time I ply,
    And weave for God the Garment thou seest Him by.'

Of twenty millions that have read and spouted this thunder-speech of
the _Erdgeist_, are there yet twenty units of us that have learned the
meaning thereof?

"It was in some such mood, when wearied and fordone with these high
speculations, that I first came upon the question of Clothes. Strange
enough, it strikes me, is this same fact of there being Tailors and
Tailored. The Horse I ride has his own whole fell: strip him of the
girths and flaps and extraneous tags I have fastened round him, and the
noble creature is his own sempster and weaver and spinner; nay his
own boot-maker, jeweller, and man-milliner; he bounds free through the
valleys, with a perennial rain-proof court-suit on his body; wherein
warmth and easiness of fit have reached perfection; nay, the graces also
have been considered, and frills and fringes, with gay variety of color,
featly appended, and ever in the right place, are not wanting. While
I--good Heaven!--have thatched myself over with the dead fleeces of
sheep, the bark of vegetables, the entrails of worms, the hides of
oxen or seals, the felt of furred beasts; and walk abroad a moving
Rag-screen, overheaped with shreds and tatters raked from the
Charnel-house of Nature, where they would have rotted, to rot on me more
slowly! Day after day, I must thatch myself anew; day after day, this
despicable thatch must lose some film of its thickness; some film of it,
frayed away by tear and wear, must be brushed off into the Ashpit, into
the Laystall; till by degrees the whole has been brushed thither, and I,
the dust-making, patent Rat-grinder, get new material to grind down.
O subter-brutish! vile! most vile! For have not I too a compact
all-enclosing Skin, whiter or dingier? Am I a botched mass of tailors'
and cobblers' shreds, then; or a tightly articulated, homogeneous little
Figure, automatic, nay alive?

"Strange enough how creatures of the human-kind shut their eyes to
plainest facts; and by the mere inertia of Oblivion and Stupidity, live
at ease in the midst of Wonders and Terrors. But indeed man is, and was
always, a blockhead and dullard; much readier to feel and digest, than
to think and consider. Prejudice, which he pretends to hate, is his
absolute lawgiver; mere use-and-wont everywhere leads him by the nose;
thus let but a Rising of the Sun, let but a Creation of the World
happen _twice_, and it ceases to be marvellous, to be noteworthy,
or noticeable. Perhaps not once in a lifetime does it occur to your
ordinary biped, of any country or generation, be he gold-mantled Prince
or russet-jerkined Peasant, that his Vestments and his Self are not one
and indivisible; that _he_ is naked, without vestments, till he buy or
steal such, and by forethought sew and button them.

"For my own part, these considerations, of our Clothes-thatch, and
how, reaching inwards even to our heart of hearts, it tailorizes and
demoralizes us, fill me with a certain horror at myself and mankind;
almost as one feels at those Dutch Cows, which, during the wet season,
you see grazing deliberately with jackets and petticoats (of striped
sacking), in the meadows of Gouda. Nevertheless there is something great
in the moment when a man first strips himself of adventitious wrappages;
and sees indeed that he is naked, and, as Swift has it, 'a forked
straddling animal with bandy legs;' yet also a Spirit, and unutterable
Mystery of Mysteries."



CHAPTER IX. ADAMITISM.

Let no courteous reader take offence at the opinions broached in the
conclusion of the last Chapter. The Editor himself, on first glancing
over that singular passage, was inclined to exclaim: What, have we got
not only a Sansculottist, but an enemy to Clothes in the abstract? A
new Adamite, in this century, which flatters itself that it is the
Nineteenth, and destructive both to Superstition and Enthusiasm?

Consider, thou foolish Teufelsdrockh, what benefits unspeakable all ages
and sexes derive from Clothes. For example, when thou thyself, a watery,
pulpy, slobbery freshman and new-comer in this Planet, sattest muling
and puking in thy nurse's arms; sucking thy coral, and looking forth
into the world in the blankest manner, what hadst thou been without thy
blankets, and bibs, and other nameless hulls? A terror to thyself and
mankind! Or hast thou forgotten the day when thou first receivedst
breeches, and thy long clothes became short? The village where thou
livedst was all apprised of the fact; and neighbor after neighbor kissed
thy pudding-cheek, and gave thee, as handsel, silver or copper coins, on
that the first gala-day of thy existence. Again, wert not thou, at one
period of life, a Buck, or Blood, or Macaroni, or Incroyable, or Dandy,
or by whatever name, according to year and place, such phenomenon is
distinguished? In that one word lie included mysterious volumes. Nay,
now when the reign of folly is over, or altered, and thy clothes are not
for triumph but for defence, hast thou always worn them perforce, and as
a consequence of Man's Fall; never rejoiced in them as in a warm movable
House, a Body round thy Body, wherein that strange THEE of thine sat
snug, defying all variations of Climate? Girt with thick double-milled
kerseys; half buried under shawls and broadbrims, and overalls and
mudboots, thy very fingers cased in doeskin and mittens, thou hast
bestrode that "Horse I ride;" and, though it were in wild winter, dashed
through the world, glorying in it as if thou wert its lord. In vain did
the sleet beat round thy temples; it lighted only on thy impenetrable,
felted or woven, case of wool. In vain did the winds howl,--forests
sounding and creaking, deep calling unto deep,--and the storms heap
themselves together into one huge Arctic whirlpool: thou flewest through
the middle thereof, striking fire from the highway; wild music hummed
in thy ears, thou too wert as a "sailor of the air;" the wreck of matter
and the crash of worlds was thy element and propitiously wafting tide.
Without Clothes, without bit or saddle, what hadst thou been; what had
thy fleet quadruped been?--Nature is good, but she is not the best: here
truly was the victory of Art over Nature. A thunderbolt indeed might
have pierced thee; all short of this thou couldst defy.

Or, cries the courteous reader, has your Teufelsdrockh forgotten what he
said lately about "Aboriginal Savages," and their "condition miserable
indeed"? Would he have all this unsaid; and us betake ourselves again to
the "matted cloak," and go sheeted in a "thick natural fell"?

Nowise, courteous reader! The Professor knows full well what he is
saying; and both thou and we, in our haste, do him wrong. If Clothes,
in these times, "so tailorize and demoralize us," have they no redeeming
value; can they not be altered to serve better; must they of
necessity be thrown to the dogs? The truth is, Teufelsdrockh, though a
Sansculottist, is no Adamite; and much perhaps as he might wish to go
forth before this degenerate age "as a Sign," would nowise wish to do
it, as those old Adamites did, in a state of Nakedness. The utility of
Clothes is altogether apparent to him: nay perhaps he has an insight
into their more recondite, and almost mystic qualities, what we
might call the omnipotent virtue of Clothes, such as was never before
vouchsafed to any man. For example:--

"You see two individuals," he writes, "one dressed in fine Red, the
other in coarse threadbare Blue: Red says to Blue, 'Be hanged and
anatomized;' Blue hears with a shudder, and (O wonder of wonders!)
marches sorrowfully to the gallows; is there noosed up, vibrates his
hour, and the surgeons dissect him, and fit his bones into a skeleton
for medical purposes. How is this; or what make ye of your _Nothing can
act but where it is_? Red has no physical hold of Blue, no _clutch_
of him, is nowise in _contact_ with him: neither are those ministering
Sheriffs and Lord-Lieutenants and Hangmen and Tipstaves so related to
commanding Red, that he can tug them hither and thither; but each stands
distinct within his own skin. Nevertheless, as it is spoken, so is
it done: the articulated Word sets all hands in Action; and Rope and
Improved-drop perform their work.

"Thinking reader, the reason seems to me twofold: First, that _Man is a
Spirit_, and bound by invisible bonds to _All Men_; secondly, that _he
wears Clothes_, which are the visible emblems of that fact. Has not
your Red hanging-individual a horsehair wig, squirrel-skins, and a
plush-gown; whereby all mortals know that he is a JUDGE?--Society, which
the more I think of it astonishes me the more, is founded upon Cloth.

"Often in my atrabiliar moods, when I read of pompous ceremonials,
Frankfort Coronations, Royal Drawing-rooms, Levees, Couchees; and how
the ushers and macers and pursuivants are all in waiting; how Duke
this is presented by Archduke that, and Colonel A by General B, and
innumerable Bishops, Admirals, and miscellaneous Functionaries, are
advancing gallantly to the Anointed Presence; and I strive, in my remote
privacy, to form a clear picture of that solemnity,--on a sudden, as by
some enchanter's wand, the--shall I speak it?--the Clothes fly off the
whole dramatic corps; and Dukes, Grandees, Bishops, Generals, Anointed
Presence itself, every mother's son of them, stand straddling there, not
a shirt on them; and I know not whether to laugh or weep. This physical
or psychical infirmity, in which perhaps I am not singular, I have,
after hesitation, thought right to publish, for the solace of those
afflicted with the like."

Would to Heaven, say we, thou hadst thought right to keep it secret!
Who is there now that can read the five columns of Presentations in his
Morning Newspaper without a shudder? Hypochondriac men, and all men are
to a certain extent hypochondriac, should be more gently treated. With
what readiness our fancy, in this shattered state of the nerves, follows
out the consequences which Teufelsdrockh, with a devilish coolness, goes
on to draw:--

"What would Majesty do, could such an accident befall in reality; should
the buttons all simultaneously start, and the solid wool evaporate,
in very Deed, as here in Dream? _Ach Gott_! How each skulks into
the nearest hiding-place; their high State Tragedy (_Haupt- und
Staats-Action_) becomes a Pickleherring-Farce to weep at, which is the
worst kind of Farce; _the tables_ (according to Horace), and with them,
the whole fabric of Government, Legislation, Property, Police, and
Civilized Society, _are dissolved_, in wails and howls."

Lives the man that can figure a naked Duke of Windlestraw addressing a
naked House of Lords? Imagination, choked as in mephitic air, recoils
on itself, and will not forward with the picture. The Woolsack, the
Ministerial, the Opposition Benches--_infandum! infandum_! And yet why
is the thing impossible? Was not every soul, or rather every body, of
these Guardians of our Liberties, naked, or nearly so, last night; "a
forked Radish with a head fantastically carved"? And why might he not,
did our stern fate so order it, walk out to St. Stephen's, as well as
into bed, in that no-fashion; and there, with other similar Radishes,
hold a Bed of Justice? "Solace of those afflicted with the like!"
Unhappy Teufelsdrockh, had man ever such a "physical or psychical
infirmity" before? And now how many, perhaps, may thy unparalleled
confession (which we, even to the sounder British world, and goaded on
by Critical and Biographical duty, grudge to reimpart) incurably
infect therewith! Art thou the malignest of Sansculottists, or only the
maddest?

"It will remain to be examined," adds the inexorable Teufelsdrockh,
"in how far the SCARECROW, as a Clothed Person, is not also entitled to
benefit of clergy, and English trial by jury: nay perhaps, considering
his high function (for is not he too a Defender of Property, and
Sovereign armed with the _terrors_ of the Law?), to a certain royal
Immunity and Inviolability; which, however, misers and the meaner class
of persons are not always voluntarily disposed to grant him."

"O my Friends, we are [in Yorick Sterne's words] but as 'turkeys driven,
with a stick and red clout, to the market:' or if some drivers, as
they do in Norfolk, take a dried bladder and put peas in it, the rattle
thereof terrifies the boldest!"



CHAPTER X. PURE REASON.

It must now be apparent enough that our Professor, as above hinted, is
a speculative Radical, and of the very darkest tinge; acknowledging, for
most part, in the solemnities and paraphernalia of civilized Life, which
we make so much of, nothing but so many Cloth-rags, turkey-poles, and
"bladders with dried peas." To linger among such speculations, longer
than mere Science requires, a discerning public can have no wish. For
our purposes the simple fact that such a _Naked World_ is possible,
nay actually exists (under the Clothed one), will be sufficient. Much,
therefore, we omit about "Kings wrestling naked on the green with
Carmen," and the Kings being thrown: "dissect them with scalpels," says
Teufelsdrockh; "the same viscera, tissues, livers, lights, and other
life-tackle, are there: examine their spiritual mechanism; the same
great Need, great Greed, and little Faculty; nay ten to one but the
Carman, who understands draught-cattle, the rimming of wheels, something
of the laws of unstable and stable equilibrium, with other branches
of wagon-science, and has actually put forth his hand and operated on
Nature, is the more cunningly gifted of the two. Whence, then, their
so unspeakable difference? From Clothes." Much also we shall omit about
confusion of Ranks, and Joan and My Lady, and how it would be everywhere
"Hail fellow well met," and Chaos were come again: all which to any one
that has once fairly pictured out the grand mother-idea, _Society in
a state of Nakedness_, will spontaneously suggest itself. Should some
sceptical individual still entertain doubts whether in a world without
Clothes, the smallest Politeness, Polity, or even Police, could exist,
let him turn to the original Volume, and view there the boundless
Serbonian Bog of Sansculottism, stretching sour and pestilential: over
which we have lightly flown; where not only whole armies but whole
nations might sink! If indeed the following argument, in its brief
riveting emphasis, be not of itself incontrovertible and final:--

"Are we Opossums; have we natural Pouches, like the Kangaroo? Or how,
without Clothes, could we possess the master-organ, soul's seat, and
true pineal gland of the Body Social: I mean, a PURSE?"

Nevertheless it is impossible to hate Professor Teufelsdrockh; at worst,
one knows not whether to hate or to love him. For though, in looking at
the fair tapestry of human Life, with its royal and even sacred figures,
he dwells not on the obverse alone, but here chiefly on the reverse; and
indeed turns out the rough seams, tatters, and manifold thrums of that
unsightly wrong-side, with an almost diabolic patience and indifference,
which must have sunk him in the estimation of most readers,--there is
that within which unspeakably distinguishes him from all other past
and present Sansculottists. The grand unparalleled peculiarity of
Teufelsdrockh is, that with all this Descendentalism, he combines a
Transcendentalism, no less superlative; whereby if on the one hand he
degrade man below most animals, except those jacketed Gouda Cows, he, on
the other, exalts him beyond the visible Heavens, almost to an equality
with the Gods.

"To the eye of vulgar Logic," says he, "what is man? An omnivorous Biped
that wears Breeches. To the eye of Pure Reason what is he? A Soul, a
Spirit, and divine Apparition. Round his mysterious ME, there
lies, under all those wool-rags, a Garment of Flesh (or of Senses),
contextured in the Loom of Heaven; whereby he is revealed to his like,
and dwells with them in UNION and DIVISION; and sees and fashions for
himself a Universe, with azure Starry Spaces, and long Thousands of
Years. Deep-hidden is he under that strange Garment; amid Sounds
and Colors and Forms, as it were, swathed in, and inextricably
over-shrouded: yet it is sky-woven, and worthy of a God. Stands he not
thereby in the centre of Immensities, in the conflux of Eternities? He
feels; power has been given him to know, to believe; nay does not the
spirit of Love, free in its celestial primeval brightness, even here,
though but for moments, look through? Well said Saint Chrysostom,
with his lips of gold, 'the true SHEKINAH is Man:' where else is the
GOD'S-PRESENCE manifested not to our eyes only, but to our hearts, as in
our fellow-man?"

In such passages, unhappily too rare, the high Platonic Mysticism of our
Author, which is perhaps the fundamental element of his nature, bursts
forth, as it were, in full flood: and, through all the vapor and tarnish
of what is often so perverse, so mean in his exterior and environment,
we seem to look into a whole inward Sea of Light and Love;--though,
alas, the grim coppery clouds soon roll together again, and hide it from
view.

Such tendency to Mysticism is everywhere traceable in this man; and
indeed, to attentive readers, must have been long ago apparent. Nothing
that he sees but has more than a common meaning, but has two meanings:
thus, if in the highest Imperial Sceptre and Charlemagne-Mantle, as
well as in the poorest Ox-goad and Gypsy-Blanket, he finds Prose, Decay,
Contemptibility; there is in each sort Poetry also, and a reverend
Worth. For Matter, were it never so despicable, is Spirit, the
manifestation of Spirit: were it never so honorable, can it be more? The
thing Visible, nay the thing Imagined, the thing in any way conceived as
Visible, what is it but a Garment, a Clothing of the higher, celestial
Invisible, "unimaginable formless, dark with excess of bright"? Under
which point of view the following passage, so strange in purport, so
strange in phrase, seems characteristic enough:--

"The beginning of all Wisdom is to look fixedly on Clothes, or even with
armed eyesight, till they become _transparent_. 'The Philosopher,' says
the wisest of this age, 'must station himself in the middle:' how true!
The Philosopher is he to whom the Highest has descended, and the Lowest
has mounted up; who is the equal and kindly brother of all.

"Shall we tremble before clothwebs and cobwebs, whether woven in
Arkwright looms, or by the silent Arachnes that weave unrestingly in our
Imagination? Or, on the other hand, what is there that we cannot love;
since all was created by God?

"Happy he who can look through the Clothes of a Man (the woollen, and
fleshly, and official Bank-paper and State-paper Clothes) into the Man
himself; and discern, it may be, in this or the other Dread Potentate,
a more or less incompetent Digestive-apparatus; yet also an inscrutable
venerable Mystery, in the meanest Tinker that sees with eyes!"

For the rest, as is natural to a man of this kind, he deals much in the
feeling of Wonder; insists on the necessity and high worth of universal
Wonder; which he holds to be the only reasonable temper for the denizen
of so singular a Planet as ours. "Wonder," says he, "is the basis of
Worship: the reign of wonder is perennial, indestructible in Man; only
at certain stages (as the present), it is, for some short season, a
reign _in partibus infidelium_." That progress of Science, which is to
destroy Wonder, and in its stead substitute Mensuration and Numeration,
finds small favor with Teufelsdrockh, much as he otherwise venerates
these two latter processes.

"Shall your Science," exclaims he, "proceed in the small chink-lighted,
or even oil-lighted, underground workshop of Logic alone; and man's
mind become an Arithmetical Mill, whereof Memory is the Hopper, and mere
Tables of Sines and Tangents, Codification, and Treatises of what you
call Political Economy, are the Meal? And what is that Science, which
the scientific head alone, were it screwed off, and (like the Doctor's
in the Arabian Tale) set in a basin to keep it alive, could prosecute
without shadow of a heart,--but one other of the mechanical and menial
handicrafts, for which the Scientific Head (having a Soul in it) is too
noble an organ? I mean that Thought without Reverence is barren, perhaps
poisonous; at best, dies like cookery with the day that called it forth;
does not live, like sowing, in successive tilths and wider-spreading
harvests, bringing food and plenteous increase to all Time."

In such wise does Teufelsdrockh deal hits, harder or softer, according
to ability; yet ever, as we would fain persuade ourselves, with
charitable intent. Above all, that class of "Logic-choppers, and
treble-pipe Scoffers, and professed Enemies to Wonder; who, in these
days, so numerously patrol as night-constables about the Mechanics'
Institute of Science, and cackle, like true Old-Roman geese and goslings
round their Capitol, on any alarm, or on none; nay who often, as
illuminated Sceptics, walk abroad into peaceable society, in full
daylight, with rattle and lantern, and insist on guiding you and
guarding you therewith, though the Sun is shining, and the street
populous with mere justice-loving men:" that whole class is
inexpressibly wearisome to him. Hear with what uncommon animation he
perorates:--

"The man who cannot wonder, who does not habitually wonder (and
worship), were he President of innumerable Royal Societies, and carried
the whole _Mecanique Celeste_ and _Hegel's Philosophy_, and the epitome
of all Laboratories and Observatories with their results, in his single
head,--is but a Pair of Spectacles behind which there is no Eye. Let
those who have Eyes look through him, then he may be useful.

"Thou wilt have no Mystery and Mysticism; wilt walk through thy world
by the sunshine of what thou callest Truth, or even by the hand-lamp
of what I call Attorney-Logic; and 'explain' all, 'account' for all, or
believe nothing of it? Nay, thou wilt attempt laughter; whoso recognizes
the unfathomable, all-pervading domain of Mystery, which is everywhere
under our feet and among our hands; to whom the Universe is an Oracle
and Temple, as well as a Kitchen and Cattle-stall,--he shall be a
delirious Mystic; to him thou, with sniffing charity, wilt protrusively
proffer thy hand-lamp, and shriek, as one injured, when he kicks his
foot through it?--_Armer Teufel_! Doth not thy cow calve, doth not
thy bull gender? Thou thyself, wert thou not born, wilt thou not die?
'Explain' me all this, or do one of two things: Retire into private
places with thy foolish cackle; or, what were better, give it up,
and weep, not that the reign of wonder is done, and God's world all
disembellished and prosaic, but that thou hitherto art a Dilettante and
sand-blind Pedant."



CHAPTER XI. PROSPECTIVE.

The Philosophy of Clothes is now to all readers, as we predicted
it would do, unfolding itself into new boundless expansions, of a
cloud-capt, almost chimerical aspect, yet not without azure loomings in
the far distance, and streaks as of an Elysian brightness; the highly
questionable purport and promise of which it is becoming more and more
important for us to ascertain. Is that a real Elysian brightness, cries
many a timid wayfarer, or the reflex of Pandemonian lava? Is it of a
truth leading us into beatific Asphodel meadows, or the yellow-burning
marl of a Hell-on-Earth?

Our Professor, like other Mystics, whether delirious or inspired, gives
an Editor enough to do. Ever higher and dizzier are the heights he leads
us to; more piercing, all-comprehending, all-confounding are his views
and glances. For example, this of Nature being not an Aggregate but a
Whole:--

"Well sang the Hebrew Psalmist: 'If I take the wings of the morning
and dwell in the uttermost parts of the Universe, God is there.' Thou
thyself, O cultivated reader, who too probably art no Psalmist, but a
Prosaist, knowing GOD only by tradition, knowest thou any corner of the
world where at least FORCE is not? The drop which thou shakest from thy
wet hand, rests not where it falls, but to-morrow thou findest it swept
away; already on the wings of the North-wind, it is nearing the Tropic
of Cancer. How came it to evaporate, and not lie motionless? Thinkest
thou there is aught motionless; without Force, and utterly dead?

"As I rode through the Schwarzwald, I said to myself: That little fire
which glows star-like across the dark-growing (_nachtende_) moor, where
the sooty smith bends over his anvil, and thou hopest to replace thy
lost horse-shoe,--is it a detached, separated speck, cut off from the
whole Universe; or indissolubly joined to the whole? Thou fool, that
smithy-fire was (primarily) kindled at the Sun; is fed by air that
circulates from before Noah's Deluge, from beyond the Dog-star; therein,
with Iron Force, and Coal Force, and the far stranger Force of Man, are
cunning affinities and battles and victories of Force brought about; it
is a little ganglion, or nervous centre, in the great vital system of
Immensity. Call it, if thou wilt, an unconscious Altar, kindled on the
bosom of the All; whose iron sacrifice, whose iron smoke and influence
reach quite through the All; whose dingy Priest, not by word, yet by
brain and sinew, preaches forth the mystery of Force; nay preaches forth
(exoterically enough) one little textlet from the Gospel of Freedom, the
Gospel of Man's Force, commanding, and one day to be all-commanding.

"Detached, separated! I say there is no such separation: nothing
hitherto was ever stranded, cast aside; but all, were it only a withered
leaf, works together with all; is borne forward on the bottomless,
shoreless flood of Action, and lives through perpetual metamorphoses.
The withered leaf is not dead and lost, there are Forces in it and
around it, though working in inverse order; else how could it rot?
Despise not the rag from which man makes Paper, or the litter from which
the earth makes Corn. Rightly viewed no meanest object is insignificant;
all objects are as windows, through which the philosophic eye looks into
Infinitude itself."

Again, leaving that wondrous Schwarzwald Smithy-Altar, what vacant,
high-sailing air-ships are these, and whither will they sail with us?

"All visible things are emblems; what thou seest is not there on its
own account; strictly taken, is not there at all: Matter exists only
spiritually, and to represent some Idea, and _body_ it forth. Hence
Clothes, as despicable as we think them, are so unspeakably significant.
Clothes, from the King's mantle downwards, are emblematic, not of want
only, but of a manifold cunning Victory over Want. On the other hand,
all Emblematic things are properly Clothes, thought-woven or hand-woven:
must not the Imagination weave Garments, visible Bodies, wherein the
else invisible creations and inspirations of our Reason are, like
Spirits, revealed, and first become all-powerful; the rather if, as
we often see, the Hand too aid her, and (by wool Clothes or otherwise)
reveal such even to the outward eye?

"Men are properly said to be clothed with Authority, clothed with
Beauty, with Curses, and the like. Nay, if you consider it, what is Man
himself, and his whole terrestrial Life, but an Emblem; a Clothing
or visible Garment for that divine ME of his, cast hither, like a
light-particle, down from Heaven? Thus is he said also to be clothed
with a Body.

"Language is called the Garment of Thought: however, it should rather
be, Language is the Flesh-Garment, the Body, of Thought. I said that
Imagination wove this Flesh-Garment; and does not she? Metaphors are her
stuff: examine Language; what, if you except some few primitive elements
(of natural sound), what is it all but Metaphors, recognized as such,
or no longer recognized; still fluid and florid, or now solid-grown and
colorless? If those same primitive elements are the osseous fixtures in
the Flesh-Garment, Language,--then are Metaphors its muscles and tissues
and living integuments. An unmetaphorical style you shall in vain seek
for: is not your very _Attention_ a _Stretching-to_? The difference
lies here: some styles are lean, adust, wiry, the muscle itself seems
osseous; some are even quite pallid, hunger-bitten and dead-looking;
while others again glow in the flush of health and vigorous self-growth,
sometimes (as in my own case) not without an apoplectic tendency.
Moreover, there are sham Metaphors, which overhanging that same
Thought's-Body (best naked), and deceptively bedizening, or bolstering
it out, may be called its false stuffings, superfluous show-cloaks
(_Putz-Mantel_), and tawdry woollen rags: whereof he that runs and reads
may gather whole hampers,--and burn them."

Than which paragraph on Metaphors did the reader ever chance to see
a more surprisingly metaphorical? However, that is not our chief
grievance; the Professor continues:--

"Why multiply instances? It is written, the Heavens and the Earth shall
fade away like a Vesture; which indeed they are: the Time-vesture of
the Eternal. Whatsoever sensibly exists, whatsoever represents Spirit to
Spirit, is properly a Clothing, a suit of Raiment, put on for a season,
and to be laid off. Thus in this one pregnant subject of CLOTHES,
rightly understood, is included all that men have thought, dreamed,
done, and been: the whole External Universe and what it holds is but
Clothing; and the essence of all Science lies in the PHILOSOPHY OF
CLOTHES."

Towards these dim infinitely expanded regions, close-bordering on
the impalpable Inane, it is not without apprehension, and perpetual
difficulties, that the Editor sees himself journeying and struggling.
Till lately a cheerful daystar of hope hung before him, in the expected
Aid of Hofrath Heuschrecke; which daystar, however, melts now, not into
the red of morning, but into a vague, gray half-light, uncertain
whether dawn of day or dusk of utter darkness. For the last week, these
so-called Biographical Documents are in his hand. By the kindness of
a Scottish Hamburg Merchant, whose name, known to the whole mercantile
world, he must not mention; but whose honorable courtesy, now and often
before spontaneously manifested to him, a mere literary stranger,
he cannot soon forget,--the bulky Weissnichtwo Packet, with all its
Custom-house seals, foreign hieroglyphs, and miscellaneous tokens of
Travel, arrived here in perfect safety, and free of cost. The reader
shall now fancy with what hot haste it was broken up, with what
breathless expectation glanced over; and, alas, with what unquiet
disappointment it has, since then, been often thrown down, and again
taken up.

Hofrath Heuschrecke, in a too long-winded Letter, full of compliments,
Weissnichtwo politics, dinners, dining repartees, and other ephemeral
trivialities, proceeds to remind us of what we knew well already:
that however it may be with Metaphysics, and other abstract Science
originating in the Head (_Verstand_) alone, no Life-Philosophy
(_Lebensphilosophie_), such as this of Clothes pretends to be, which
originates equally in the Character (_Gemuth_), and equally speaks
thereto, can attain its significance till the Character itself is known
and seen; "till the Author's View of the World (_Weltansicht_), and how
he actively and passively came by such view, are clear: in short till
a Biography of him has been philosophico-poetically written, and
philosophico-poetically read.... Nay," adds he, "were the speculative
scientific Truth even known, you still, in this inquiring age, ask
yourself, Whence came it, and Why, and How?--and rest not, till, if
no better may be, Fancy have shaped out an answer; and either in the
authentic lineaments of Fact, or the forged ones of Fiction, a complete
picture and Genetical History of the Man and his spiritual Endeavor lies
before you. But why," says the Hofrath, and indeed say we, "do I dilate
on the uses of our Teufelsdrockh's Biography? The great Herr Minister
von Goethe has penetratingly remarked that Man is properly the _only_
object that interests man:' thus I too have noted, that in Weissnichtwo
our whole conversation is little or nothing else but Biography or
Autobiography; ever humano-anecdotical (_menschlich-anekdotisch_).
Biography is by nature the most universally profitable, universally
pleasant of all things: especially Biography of distinguished
individuals.

"By this time, _mein Verehrtester_ (my Most Esteemed)," continues
he, with an eloquence which, unless the words be purloined from
Teufelsdrockh, or some trick of his, as we suspect, is well-nigh
unaccountable, "by this time you are fairly plunged (_vertieft_) in that
mighty forest of Clothes-Philosophy; and looking round, as all readers
do, with astonishment enough. Such portions and passages as you have
already mastered, and brought to paper, could not but awaken a strange
curiosity touching the mind they issued from; the perhaps unparalleled
psychical mechanism, which manufactured such matter, and emitted it to
the light of day. Had Teufelsdrockh also a father and mother; did he,
at one time, wear drivel-bibs, and live on spoon-meat? Did he ever,
in rapture and tears, clasp a friend's bosom to his; looks he also
wistfully into the long burial-aisle of the Past, where only winds,
and their low harsh moan, give inarticulate answer? Has he fought
duels;--good Heaven! how did he comport himself when in Love? By what
singular stair-steps, in short, and subterranean passages, and sloughs
of Despair, and steep Pisgah hills, has he reached this wonderful
prophetic Hebron (a true Old-Clothes Jewry) where he now dwells?

"To all these natural questions the voice of public History is as yet
silent. Certain only that he has been, and is, a Pilgrim, and Traveller
from a far Country; more or less footsore and travel-soiled; has
parted with road-companions; fallen among thieves, been poisoned by bad
cookery, blistered with bug-bites; nevertheless, at every stage (for
they have let him pass), has had the Bill to discharge. But the whole
particulars of his Route, his Weather-observations, the picturesque
Sketches he took, though all regularly jotted down (in indelible
sympathetic-ink by an invisible interior Penman), are these nowhere
forthcoming? Perhaps quite lost: one other leaf of that mighty Volume
(of human Memory) left to fly abroad, unprinted, unpublished, unbound
up, as waste paper; and to rot, the sport of rainy winds?

"No, _verehrtester Herr Herausgeber_, in no wise! I here, by the
unexampled favor you stand in with our Sage, send not a Biography only,
but an Autobiography: at least the materials for such; wherefrom, if I
misreckon not, your perspicacity will draw fullest insight: and so the
whole Philosophy and Philosopher of Clothes will stand clear to
the wondering eyes of England, nay thence, through America, through
Hindostan, and the antipodal New Holland, finally conquer (_einnehmen_)
great part of this terrestrial Planet!"

And now let the sympathizing reader judge of our feeling when, in
place of this same Autobiography with "fullest insight," we find--Six
considerable PAPER-BAGS, carefully sealed, and marked successively, in
gilt China-ink, with the symbols of the Six southern Zodiacal Signs,
beginning at Libra; in the inside of which sealed Bags lie miscellaneous
masses of Sheets, and oftener Shreds and Snips, written in Professor
Teufelsdrockh's scarce legible _cursiv-schrift_; and treating of all
imaginable things under the Zodiac and above it, but of his own personal
history only at rare intervals, and then in the most enigmatic manner.

Whole fascicles there are, wherein the Professor, or, as he here,
speaking in the third person, calls himself, "the Wanderer," is not once
named. Then again, amidst what seems to be a Metaphysico-theological
Disquisition, "Detached Thoughts on the Steam-engine," or, "The
continued Possibility of Prophecy," we shall meet with some quite
private, not unimportant Biographical fact. On certain sheets stand
Dreams, authentic or not, while the circumjacent waking Actions are
omitted. Anecdotes, oftenest without date of place or time, fly loosely
on separate slips, like Sibylline leaves. Interspersed also are long
purely Autobiographical delineations; yet without connection, without
recognizable coherence; so unimportant, so superfluously minute, they
almost remind us of "P.P. Clerk of this Parish." Thus does famine of
intelligence alternate with waste. Selection, order, appears to be
unknown to the Professor. In all Bags the same imbroglio; only perhaps
in the Bag _Capricorn_, and those near it, the confusion a little
worse confounded. Close by a rather eloquent Oration, "On receiving the
Doctor's-Hat," lie wash-bills, marked _bezahlt_ (settled). His Travels
are indicated by the Street-Advertisements of the various cities he has
visited; of which Street-Advertisements, in most living tongues, here is
perhaps the completest collection extant.

So that if the Clothes-Volume itself was too like a Chaos, we have now
instead of the solar Luminary that should still it, the airy Limbo which
by intermixture will farther volatilize and discompose it! As we shall
perhaps see it our duty ultimately to deposit these Six Paper-Bags in
the British Museum, farther description, and all vituperation of them,
may be spared. Biography or Autobiography of Teufelsdrockh there is,
clearly enough, none to be gleaned here: at most some sketchy,
shadowy fugitive likeness of him may, by unheard-of efforts, partly of
intellect, partly of imagination, on the side of Editor and of Reader,
rise up between them. Only as a gaseous-chaotic Appendix to that
aqueous-chaotic Volume can the contents of the Six Bags hover round us,
and portions thereof be incorporated with our delineation of it.

Daily and nightly does the Editor sit (with green spectacles)
deciphering these unimaginable Documents from their perplexed
_cursiv-schrift_; collating them with the almost equally unimaginable
Volume, which stands in legible print. Over such a universal medley of
high and low, of hot, cold, moist and dry, is he here struggling (by
union of like with like, which is Method) to build a firm Bridge for
British travellers. Never perhaps since our first Bridge-builders, Sin
and Death, built that stupendous Arch from Hell-gate to the Earth, did
any Pontifex, or Pontiff, undertake such a task as the present Editor.
For in this Arch too, leading, as we humbly presume, far otherwards
than that grand primeval one, the materials are to be fished up from the
weltering deep, and down from the simmering air, here one mass, there
another, and cunningly cemented, while the elements boil beneath: nor is
there any supernatural force to do it with; but simply the Diligence
and feeble thinking Faculty of an English Editor, endeavoring to evolve
printed Creation out of a German printed and written Chaos, wherein, as
he shoots to and fro in it, gathering, clutching, piecing the Why to
the far-distant Wherefore, his whole Faculty and Self are like to be
swallowed up.

Patiently, under these incessant toils and agitations, does the Editor,
dismissing all anger, see his otherwise robust health declining; some
fraction of his allotted natural sleep nightly leaving him, and little
but an inflamed nervous-system to be looked for. What is the use of
health, or of life, if not to do some work therewith? And what work
nobler than transplanting foreign Thought into the barren domestic
soil; except indeed planting Thought of your own, which the fewest are
privileged to do? Wild as it looks, this Philosophy of Clothes, can we
ever reach its real meaning, promises to reveal new-coming Eras, the
first dim rudiments and already-budding germs of a nobler Era, in
Universal History. Is not such a prize worth some striving? Forward with
us, courageous reader; be it towards failure, or towards success! The
latter thou sharest with us; the former also is not all our own.




BOOK II.



CHAPTER I. GENESIS.

In a psychological point of view, it is perhaps questionable whether
from birth and genealogy, how closely scrutinized soever, much insight
is to be gained. Nevertheless, as in every phenomenon the Beginning
remains always the most notable moment; so, with regard to any great
man, we rest not till, for our scientific profit or not, the whole
circumstances of his first appearance in this Planet, and what manner of
Public Entry he made, are with utmost completeness rendered manifest.
To the Genesis of our Clothes-Philosopher, then, be this First Chapter
consecrated. Unhappily, indeed, he seems to be of quite obscure
extraction; uncertain, we might almost say, whether of any: so that this
Genesis of his can properly be nothing but an Exodus (or transit out
of Invisibility into Visibility); whereof the preliminary portion is
nowhere forthcoming.

"In the village of Entepfuhl," thus writes he, in the Bag _Libra_,
on various Papers, which we arrange with difficulty, "dwelt Andreas
Futteral and his wife; childless, in still seclusion, and cheerful
though now verging towards old age. Andreas had been grenadier Sergeant,
and even regimental Schoolmaster under Frederick the Great; but
now, quitting the halbert and ferule for the spade and pruning-hook,
cultivated a little Orchard, on the produce of which he,
Cincinnatus-like, lived not without dignity. Fruits, the peach, the
apple, the grape, with other varieties came in their season; all which
Andreas knew how to sell: on evenings he smoked largely, or read (as
beseemed a regimental Schoolmaster), and talked to neighbors that would
listen about the Victory of Rossbach; and how Fritz the Only (_der
Einzige_) had once with his own royal lips spoken to him, had been
pleased to say, when Andreas as camp-sentinel demanded the pass-word,
'_Schweig Hund_ (Peace, hound)!' before any of his staff-adjutants could
answer. '_Das nenn' ich mir einen Konig_, There is what I call a King,'
would Andreas exclaim: 'but the smoke of Kunersdorf was still smarting
his eyes.'

"Gretchen, the housewife, won like Desdemona by the deeds rather than
the looks of her now veteran Othello, lived not in altogether military
subordination; for, as Andreas said, 'the womankind will not drill (_wer
kann die Weiberchen dressiren_):' nevertheless she at heart loved him
both for valor and wisdom; to her a Prussian grenadier Sergeant and
Regiment's Schoolmaster was little other than a Cicero and Cid: what you
see, yet cannot see over, is as good as infinite. Nay, was not Andreas
in very deed a man of order, courage, downrightness (_Geradheit_); that
understood Busching's _Geography_, had been in the victory of Rossbach,
and left for dead in the camisade of Hochkirch? The good Gretchen, for
all her fretting, watched over him and hovered round him as only a true
house-mother can: assiduously she cooked and sewed and scoured for him;
so that not only his old regimental sword and grenadier-cap, but the
whole habitation and environment, where on pegs of honor they hung,
looked ever trim and gay: a roomy painted Cottage, embowered in
fruit-trees and forest-trees, evergreens and honeysuckles; rising
many-colored from amid shaven grass-plots, flowers struggling in
through the very windows; under its long projecting eaves nothing but
garden-tools in methodic piles (to screen them from rain), and seats
where, especially on summer nights, a King might have wished to sit and
smoke, and call it his. Such a Bauergut (Copyhold) had Gretchen given
her veteran; whose sinewy arms, and long-disused gardening talent, had
made it what you saw.

"Into this umbrageous Man's-nest, one meek yellow evening or dusk, when
the Sun, hidden indeed from terrestrial Entepfuhl, did nevertheless
journey visible and radiant along the celestial Balance (_Libra_),
it was that a Stranger of reverend aspect entered; and, with grave
salutation, stood before the two rather astonished housemates. He was
close-muffled in a wide mantle; which without farther parley unfolding,
he deposited therefrom what seemed some Basket, overhung with
green Persian silk; saying only: _Ihr lieben Leute, hier bringe ein
unschatzbares Verleihen; nehmt es in aller Acht, sorgfaltigst benutzt
es: mit hohem Lohn, oder wohl mit schweren Zinsen, wird's einst
zuruckgefordert_. 'Good Christian people, here lies for you an
invaluable Loan; take all heed thereof, in all carefulness employ it:
with high recompense, or else with heavy penalty, will it one day be
required back.' Uttering which singular words, in a clear, bell-like,
forever memorable tone, the Stranger gracefully withdrew; and before
Andreas or his wife, gazing in expectant wonder, had time to fashion
either question or answer, was clean gone. Neither out of doors could
aught of him be seen or heard; he had vanished in the thickets, in the
dusk; the Orchard-gate stood quietly closed: the Stranger was gone once
and always. So sudden had the whole transaction been, in the autumn
stillness and twilight, so gentle, noiseless, that the Futterals could
have fancied it all a trick of Imagination, or some visit from an
authentic Spirit. Only that the green-silk Basket, such as neither
Imagination nor authentic Spirits are wont to carry, still stood visible
and tangible on their little parlor-table. Towards this the astonished
couple, now with lit candle, hastily turned their attention. Lifting
the green veil, to see what invaluable it hid, they descried there, amid
down and rich white wrappages, no Pitt Diamond or Hapsburg Regalia, but,
in the softest sleep, a little red-colored Infant! Beside it, lay a roll
of gold Friedrichs, the exact amount of which was never publicly known;
also a _Taufschein_ (baptismal certificate), wherein unfortunately
nothing but the Name was decipherable, other document or indication none
whatever.

"To wonder and conjecture was unavailing, then and always thenceforth.
Nowhere in Entepfuhl, on the morrow or next day, did tidings transpire
of any such figure as the Stranger; nor could the Traveller, who had
passed through the neighboring Town in coach-and-four, be connected with
this Apparition, except in the way of gratuitous surmise. Meanwhile, for
Andreas and his wife, the grand practical problem was: What to do
with this little sleeping red-colored Infant? Amid amazements and
curiosities, which had to die away without external satisfying, they
resolved, as in such circumstances charitable prudent people needs must,
on nursing it, though with spoon-meat, into whiteness, and if possible
into manhood. The Heavens smiled on their endeavor: thus has that
same mysterious Individual ever since had a status for himself in this
visible Universe, some modicum of victual and lodging and parade-ground;
and now expanded in bulk, faculty and knowledge of good and evil, he, as
HERR DIOGENES TEUFELSDROCKH, professes or is ready to profess, perhaps
not altogether without effect, in the new University of Weissnichtwo,
the new Science of Things in General."

Our Philosopher declares here, as indeed we should think he well might,
that these facts, first communicated, by the good Gretchen Futteral,
In his twelfth year, "produced on the boyish heart and fancy a quite
indelible impression. Who this reverend Personage," he says, "that
glided into the Orchard Cottage when the Sun was in Libra, and then, as
on spirit's wings, glided out again, might be? An inexpressible desire,
full of love and of sadness, has often since struggled within me to
shape an answer. Ever, in my distresses and my loneliness, has Fantasy
turned, full of longing (_sehnsuchtsvoll_), to that unknown Father,
who perhaps far from me, perhaps near, either way invisible, might have
taken me to his paternal bosom, there to lie screened from many a woe.
Thou beloved Father, dost thou still, shut out from me only by thin
penetrable curtains of earthly Space, wend to and fro among the crowd
of the living? Or art thou hidden by those far thicker curtains of the
Everlasting Night, or rather of the Everlasting Day, through which my
mortal eye and outstretched arms need not strive to reach? Alas, I know
not, and in vain vex myself to know. More than once, heart-deluded,
have I taken for thee this and the other noble-looking Stranger; and
approached him wistfully, with infinite regard; but he too had to repel
me, he too was not thou.

"And yet, O Man born of Woman," cries the Autobiographer, with one of
his sudden whirls, "wherein is my case peculiar? Hadst thou, any more
than I, a Father whom thou knowest? The Andreas and Gretchen, or the
Adam and Eve, who led thee into Life, and for a time suckled and pap-fed
thee there, whom thou namest Father and Mother; these were, like mine,
but thy nursing-father and nursing-mother: thy true Beginning and Father
is in Heaven, whom with the bodily eye thou shalt never behold, but only
with the spiritual....

"The little green veil," adds he, among much similar moralizing, and
embroiled discoursing, "I yet keep; still more inseparably the Name,
Diogenes Teufelsdrockh. From the veil can nothing be inferred: a piece
of now quite faded Persian silk, like thousands of others. On the Name I
have many times meditated and conjectured; but neither in this lay
there any clew. That it was my unknown Father's name I must hesitate to
believe. To no purpose have I searched through all the Herald's
Books, in and without the German Empire, and through all manner
of Subscriber-Lists (_Pranumeranten_), Militia-Rolls, and other
Name-catalogues; extraordinary names as we have in Germany, the name
Teufelsdrockh, except as appended to my own person, nowhere occurs.
Again, what may the unchristian rather than Christian 'Diogenes' mean?
Did that reverend Basket-bearer intend, by such designation, to shadow
forth my future destiny, or his own present malign humor? Perhaps the
latter, perhaps both. Thou ill-starred Parent, who like an Ostrich hadst
to leave thy ill-starred offspring to be hatched into self-support by
the mere sky-influences of Chance, can thy pilgrimage have been a smooth
one? Beset by Misfortune thou doubtless hast been; or indeed by the
worst figure of Misfortune, by Misconduct. Often have I fancied how,
in thy hard life-battle, thou wert shot at, and slung at, wounded,
hand-fettered, hamstrung, browbeaten and bedevilled by the Time-Spirit
(_Zeitgeist_) in thyself and others, till the good soul first given thee
was seered into grim rage, and thou hadst nothing for it but to leave
in me an indignant appeal to the Future, and living speaking Protest
against the Devil, as that same Spirit not of the Time only, but of Time
itself, is well named! Which Appeal and Protest, may I now modestly add,
was not perhaps quite lost in air.

"For indeed, as Walter Shandy often insisted, there is much, nay almost
all, in Names. The Name is the earliest Garment you wrap round the
earth-visiting ME; to which it thenceforth cleaves, more tenaciously
(for there are Names that have lasted nigh thirty centuries) than the
very skin. And now from without, what mystic influences does it not send
inwards, even to the centre; especially in those plastic first-times,
when the whole soul is yet infantine, soft, and the invisible seedgrain
will grow to be an all overshadowing tree! Names? Could I unfold the
influence of Names, which are the most important of all Clothings, I
were a second greater Trismegistus. Not only all common Speech, but
Science, Poetry itself is no other, if thou consider it, than a right
_Naming_. Adam's first task was giving names to natural Appearances:
what is ours still but a continuation of the same; be the Appearances
exotic-vegetable, organic, mechanic, stars, or starry movements (as
in Science); or (as in Poetry) passions, virtues, calamities,
God-attributes, Gods?--In a very plain sense the Proverb says, _Call
one a thief, and he will steal_; in an almost similar sense may we not
perhaps say, _Call one Diogenes Teufelsdrockh, and he will open the
Philosophy of Clothes_?"


"Meanwhile the incipient Diogenes, like others, all ignorant of his Why,
his How or Whereabout, was opening his eyes to the kind Light; sprawling
out his ten fingers and toes; listening, tasting, feeling; in a word,
by all his Five Senses, still more by his Sixth Sense of Hunger, and a
whole infinitude of inward, spiritual, half-awakened Senses, endeavoring
daily to acquire for himself some knowledge of this strange Universe
where he had arrived, be his task therein what it might. Infinite was
his progress; thus in some fifteen months, he could perform the miracle
of--Speech! To breed a fresh Soul, is it not like brooding a fresh
(celestial) Egg; wherein as yet all is formless, powerless; yet by
degrees organic elements and fibres shoot through the watery albumen;
and out of vague Sensation grows Thought, grows Fantasy and Force, and
we have Philosophies, Dynasties, nay Poetries and Religions!

"Young Diogenes, or rather young Gneschen, for by such diminutive
had they in their fondness named him, travelled forward to those high
consummations, by quick yet easy stages. The Futterals, to avoid vain
talk, and moreover keep the roll of gold Friedrichs safe, gave out that
he was a grandnephew; the orphan of some sister's daughter, suddenly
deceased, in Andreas's distant Prussian birthland; of whom, as of
her indigent sorrowing widower, little enough was known at Entepfuhl.
Heedless of all which, the Nursling took to his spoon-meat, and throve.
I have heard him noted as a still infant, that kept his mind much to
himself; above all, that seldom or never cried. He already felt
that time was precious; that he had other work cut out for him than
whimpering."


Such, after utmost painful search and collation among these
miscellaneous Paper-masses, is all the notice we can gather of Herr
Teufelsdrockh's genealogy. More imperfect, more enigmatic it can seem
to few readers than to us. The Professor, in whom truly we more and more
discern a certain satirical turn, and deep under-currents of roguish
whim, for the present stands pledged in honor, so we will not doubt him:
but seems it not conceivable that, by the "good Gretchen Futteral,"
or some other perhaps interested party, he has himself been deceived?
Should these sheets, translated or not, ever reach the Entepfuhl
Circulating Library, some cultivated native of that district might feel
called to afford explanation. Nay, since Books, like invisible scouts,
permeate the whole habitable globe, and Timbuctoo itself is not safe
from British Literature, may not some Copy find out even the mysterious
basket-bearing Stranger, who in a state of extreme senility perhaps
still exists; and gently force even him to disclose himself; to claim
openly a son, in whom any father may feel pride?



CHAPTER II. IDYLLIC.

"HAPPY season of Childhood!" exclaims Teufelsdrockh: "Kind Nature, that
art to all a bountiful mother; that visitest the poor man's hut with
auroral radiance; and for thy Nursling hast provided a soft swathing
of Love and infinite Hope, wherein he waxes and slumbers, danced round
(_umgaukelt_) by sweetest Dreams! If the paternal Cottage still shuts us
in, its roof still screens us; with a Father we have as yet a prophet,
priest and king, and an Obedience that makes us free. The young spirit
has awakened out of Eternity, and knows not what we mean by Time; as yet
Time is no fast-hurrying stream, but a sportful sunlit ocean; years to
the child are as ages: ah! the secret of Vicissitude, of that slower or
quicker decay and ceaseless down-rushing of the universal World-fabric,
from the granite mountain to the man or day-moth, is yet unknown; and in
a motionless Universe, we taste, what afterwards in this quick-whirling
Universe is forever denied us, the balm of Rest. Sleep on, thou fair
Child, for thy long rough journey is at hand! A little while, and thou
too shalt sleep no more, but thy very dreams shall be mimic battles;
thou too, with old Arnauld, wilt have to say in stern patience: 'Rest?
Rest? Shall I not have all Eternity to rest in?' Celestial Nepenthe!
though a Pyrrhus conquer empires, and an Alexander sack the world, he
finds thee not; and thou hast once fallen gently, of thy own accord, on
the eyelids, on the heart of every mother's child. For as yet, sleep
and waking are one: the fair Life-garden rustles infinite around, and
everywhere is dewy fragrance, and the budding of Hope; which budding, if
in youth, too frost-nipt, it grow to flowers, will in manhood yield no
fruit, but a prickly, bitter-rinded stone-fruit, of which the fewest can
find the kernel."

In such rose-colored light does our Professor, as Poets are wont, look
back on his childhood; the historical details of which (to say nothing
of much other vague oratorical matter) he accordingly dwells on with an
almost wearisome minuteness. We hear of Entepfuhl standing "in trustful
derangement" among the woody slopes; the paternal Orchard flanking it as
extreme outpost from below; the little Kuhbach gushing kindly by, among
beech-rows, through river after river, into the Donau, into the Black
Sea, into the Atmosphere and Universe; and how "the brave old Linden,"
stretching like a parasol of twenty ells in radius, overtopping all
other rows and clumps, towered up from the central _Agora_ and _Campus
Martius_ of the Village, like its Sacred Tree; and how the old men sat
talking under its shadow (Gneschen often greedily listening), and the
wearied laborers reclined, and the unwearied children sported, and the
young men and maidens often danced to flute-music. "Glorious summer
twilights," cries Teufelsdrockh, "when the Sun, like a proud Conqueror
and Imperial Taskmaster, turned his back, with his gold-purple
emblazonry, and all his fireclad bodyguard (of Prismatic Colors); and
the tired brickmakers of this clay Earth might steal a little frolic,
and those few meek Stars would not tell of them!"

Then we have long details of the _Weinlesen_ (Vintage), the
Harvest-Home, Christmas, and so forth; with a whole cycle of the
Entepfuhl Children's-games, differing apparently by mere superficial
shades from those of other countries. Concerning all which, we shall
here, for obvious reasons, say nothing. What cares the world for our as
yet miniature Philosopher's achievements under that "brave old Linden "?
Or even where is the use of such practical reflections as the following?
"In all the sports of Children, were it only in their wanton breakages
and defacements, you shall discern a creative instinct (_schaffenden
Trieb_): the Mankin feels that he is a born Man, that his vocation is
to work. The choicest present you can make him is a Tool; be it knife or
pen-gun, for construction or for destruction; either way it is for Work,
for Change. In gregarious sports of skill or strength, the Boy trains
himself to Co-operation, for war or peace, as governor or governed:
the little Maid again, provident of her domestic destiny, takes with
preference to Dolls."

Perhaps, however, we may give this anecdote, considering who it is that
relates it: "My first short-clothes were of yellow serge; or rather,
I should say, my first short-cloth, for the vesture was one and
indivisible, reaching from neck to ankle, a mere body with four limbs:
of which fashion how little could I then divine the architectural, how
much less the moral significance!"

More graceful is the following little picture: "On fine evenings I was
wont to carry forth my supper (bread-crumb boiled in milk), and eat it
out-of-doors. On the coping of the Orchard-wall, which I could reach
by climbing, or still more easily if Father Andreas would set up the
pruning-ladder, my porringer was placed: there, many a sunset, have I,
looking at the distant western Mountains, consumed, not without relish,
my evening meal. Those hues of gold and azure, that hush of World's
expectation as Day died, were still a Hebrew Speech for me; nevertheless
I was looking at the fair illuminated Letters, and had an eye for their
gilding."

With "the little one's friendship for cattle and poultry" we shall not
much intermeddle. It may be that hereby he acquired a "certain deeper
sympathy with animated Nature:" but when, we would ask, saw any man,
in a collection of Biographical Documents, such a piece as this:
"Impressive enough (_bedeutungsvoll_) was it to hear, in early morning,
the Swineherd's horn; and know that so many hungry happy quadrupeds
were, on all sides, starting in hot haste to join him, for breakfast on
the Heath. Or to see them at eventide, all marching in again, with short
squeak, almost in military order; and each, topographically correct,
trotting off in succession to the right or left, through its own lane,
to its own dwelling; till old Kunz, at the Village-head, now left alone,
blew his last blast, and retired for the night. We are wont to love the
Hog chiefly in the form of Ham; yet did not these bristly thick-skinned
beings here manifest intelligence, perhaps humor of character; at any
rate, a touching, trustful submissiveness to Man,--who, were he but a
Swineherd, in darned gabardine, and leather breeches more resembling
slate or discolored-tin breeches, is still the Hierarch of this lower
world?"

It is maintained, by Helvetius and his set, that an infant of genius
is quite the same as any other infant, only that certain surprisingly
favorable influences accompany him through life, especially through
childhood, and expand him, while others lie close-folded and continue
dunces. Herein, say they, consists the whole difference between an
inspired Prophet and a double-barrelled Game-preserver: the inner man of
the one has been fostered into generous development; that of the other,
crushed down perhaps by vigor of animal digestion, and the like, has
exuded and evaporated, or at best sleeps now irresuscitably stagnant at
the bottom of his stomach. "With which opinion," cries Teufelsdrockh,
"I should as soon agree as with this other, that an acorn might, by
favorable or unfavorable influences of soil and climate, be nursed into
a cabbage, or the cabbage-seed into an oak.

"Nevertheless," continues he, "I too acknowledge the all-but omnipotence
of early culture and nurture: hereby we have either a doddered dwarf
bush, or a high-towering, wide-shadowing tree; either a sick yellow
cabbage, or an edible luxuriant green one. Of a truth, it is the duty of
all men, especially of all philosophers, to note down with accuracy the
characteristic circumstances of their Education, what furthered, what
hindered, what in any way modified it: to which duty, nowadays so
pressing for many a German Autobiographer, I also zealously address
myself."--Thou rogue! Is it by short clothes of yellow serge, and
swineherd horns, that an infant of genius is educated? And yet, as
usual, it ever remains doubtful whether he is laughing in his sleeve at
these Autobiographical times of ours, or writing from the abundance of
his own fond ineptitude. For he continues: "If among the ever-streaming
currents of Sights, Hearings, Feelings for Pain or Pleasure, whereby, as
in a Magic Hall, young Gneschen went about environed, I might venture to
select and specify, perhaps these following were also of the number:

"Doubtless, as childish sports call forth Intellect, Activity, so the
young creature's Imagination was stirred up, and a Historical tendency
given him by the narrative habits of Father Andreas; who, with his
battle-reminiscences, and gray austere yet hearty patriarchal aspect,
could not but appear another Ulysses and 'much-enduring Man.' Eagerly I
hung upon his tales, when listening neighbors enlivened the hearth; from
these perils and these travels, wild and far almost as Hades itself, a
dim world of Adventure expanded itself within me. Incalculable also
was the knowledge I acquired in standing by the Old Men under the
Linden-tree: the whole of Immensity was yet new to me; and had not these
reverend seniors, talkative enough, been employed in partial surveys
thereof for nigh fourscore years? With amazement I began to discover
that Entepfuhl stood in the middle of a Country, of a World; that there
was such a thing as History, as Biography to which I also, one day, by
hand and tongue, might contribute.

"In a like sense worked the _Postwagen_ (Stage-coach), which,
slow-rolling under its mountains of men and luggage, wended through our
Village: northwards, truly, in the dead of night; yet southwards visibly
at eventide. Not till my eighth year did I reflect that this Postwagen
could be other than some terrestrial Moon, rising and setting by mere
Law of Nature, like the heavenly one; that it came on made highways,
from far cities towards far cities; weaving them like a monstrous
shuttle into closer and closer union. It was then that, independently
of Schiller's _Wilhelm Tell_, I made this not quite insignificant
reflection (so true also in spiritual things): _Any road, this simple
Entepfuhl road, will lead you to the end of the World_!

"Why mention our Swallows, which, out of far Africa, as I learned,
threading their way over seas and mountains, corporate cities and
belligerent nations, yearly found themselves with the month of
May, snug-lodged in our Cottage Lobby? The hospitable Father (for
cleanliness' sake) had fixed a little bracket plumb under their nest:
there they built, and caught flies, and twittered, and bred; and all, I
chiefly, from the heart loved them. Bright, nimble creatures, who
taught you the mason-craft; nay, stranger still, gave you a masonic
incorporation, almost social police? For if, by ill chance, and when
time pressed, your House fell, have I not seen five neighborly
Helpers appear next day; and swashing to and fro, with animated, loud,
long-drawn chirpings, and activity almost super-hirundine, complete it
again before nightfall?

"But undoubtedly the grand summary of Entepfuhl child's culture,
where as in a funnel its manifold influences were concentrated and
simultaneously poured down on us, was the annual Cattle-fair. Here,
assembling from all the four winds, came the elements of an unspeakable
hurry-burly. Nut-brown maids and nut-brown men, all clear-washed,
loud-laughing, bedizened and beribanded; who came for dancing, for
treating, and if possible, for happiness. Topbooted Graziers from the
North; Swiss Brokers, Italian Drovers, also topbooted, from the South;
these with their subalterns in leather jerkins, leather skull-caps, and
long ox-goads; shouting in half-articulate speech, amid the inarticulate
barking and bellowing. Apart stood Potters from far Saxony, with their
crockery in fair rows; Nurnberg Pedlers, in booths that to me seemed
richer than Ormuz bazaars; Showmen from the Lago Maggiore; detachments
of the _Wiener Schub_ (Offscourings of Vienna) vociferously
superintending games of chance. Ballad-singers brayed, Auctioneers
grew hoarse; cheap New Wine (_heuriger_) flowed like water, still
worse confounding the confusion; and high over all, vaulted, in
ground-and-lofty tumbling, a particolored Merry-Andrew, like the genius
of the place and of Life itself.

"Thus encircled by the mystery of Existence; under the deep heavenly
Firmament; waited on by the four golden Seasons, with their vicissitudes
of contribution, for even grim Winter brought its skating-matches and
shooting-matches, its snow-storms and Christmas-carols,--did the Child
sit and learn. These things were the Alphabet, whereby in aftertime
he was to syllable and partly read the grand Volume of the World: what
matters it whether such Alphabet be in large gilt letters or in small
ungilt ones, so you have an eye to read it? For Gneschen, eager to
learn, the very act of looking thereon was a blessedness that gilded
all: his existence was a bright, soft element of Joy; out of which, as
in Prospero's Island, wonder after wonder bodied itself forth, to teach
by charming.

"Nevertheless, I were but a vain dreamer to say, that even then my
felicity was perfect. I had, once for all, come down from Heaven into
the Earth. Among the rainbow colors that glowed on my horizon, lay even
in childhood a dark ring of Care, as yet no thicker than a thread, and
often quite overshone; yet always it reappeared, nay ever waxing broader
and broader; till in after-years it almost overshadowed my whole canopy,
and threatened to engulf me in final night. It was the ring of Necessity
whereby we are all begirt; happy he for whom a kind heavenly Sun
brightens it into a ring of Duty, and plays round it with beautiful
prismatic diffractions; yet ever, as basis and as bourn for our whole
being, it is there.

"For the first few years of our terrestrial Apprenticeship, we have not
much work to do; but, boarded and lodged gratis, are set down mostly
to look about us over the workshop, and see others work, till we have
understood the tools a little, and can handle this and that. If good
Passivity alone, and not good Passivity and good Activity together, were
the thing wanted, then was my early position favorable beyond the most.
In all that respects openness of Sense, affectionate Temper, ingenuous
Curiosity, and the fostering of these, what more could I have wished?
On the other side, however, things went not so well. My Active Power
(_Thatkraft_) was unfavorably hemmed in; of which misfortune how many
traces yet abide with me! In an orderly house, where the litter of
children's sports is hateful enough, your training is too stoical;
rather to bear and forbear than to make and do. I was forbid much:
wishes in any measure bold I had to renounce; everywhere a strait bond
of Obedience inflexibly held me down. Thus already Freewill often came
in painful collision with Necessity; so that my tears flowed, and at
seasons the Child itself might taste that root of bitterness, wherewith
the whole fruitage of our life is mingled and tempered.

"In which habituation to Obedience, truly, it was beyond measure safer
to err by excess than by defect. Obedience is our universal duty and
destiny; wherein whoso will not bend must break: too early and too
thoroughly we cannot be trained to know that Would, in this world of
ours, is as mere zero to Should, and for most part as the smallest of
fractions even to Shall. Hereby was laid for me the basis of worldly
Discretion, nay of Morality itself. Let me not quarrel with my
upbringing. It was rigorous, too frugal, compressively secluded, every
way unscientific: yet in that very strictness and domestic solitude
might there not lie the root of deeper earnestness, of the stem from
which all noble fruit must grow? Above all, how unskilful soever, it was
loving, it was well-meant, honest; whereby every deficiency was helped.
My kind Mother, for as such I must ever love the good Gretchen, did me
one altogether invaluable service: she taught me, less indeed by word
than by act and daily reverent look and habitude, her own simple version
of the Christian Faith. Andreas too attended Church; yet more like
a parade-duty, for which he in the other world expected pay with
arrears,--as, I trust, he has received; but my Mother, with a true
woman's heart, and fine though uncultivated sense, was in the strictest
acceptation Religious. How indestructibly the Good grows, and propagates
itself, even among the weedy entanglements of Evil! The highest whom
I knew on Earth I here saw bowed down, with awe unspeakable, before a
Higher in Heaven: such things, especially in infancy, reach inwards to
the very core of your being; mysteriously does a Holy of Holies build
itself into visibility in the mysterious deeps; and Reverence, the
divinest in man, springs forth undying from its mean envelopment of
Fear. Wouldst thou rather be a peasant's son that knew, were it never so
rudely, there was a God in Heaven and in Man; or a duke's son that only
knew there were two-and-thirty quarters on the family-coach?"

To which last question we must answer: Beware, O Teufelsdrockh, of
spiritual pride!



CHAPTER III. PEDAGOGY.

Hitherto we see young Gneschen, in his indivisible case of yellow serge,
borne forward mostly on the arms of kind Nature alone; seated, indeed,
and much to his mind, in the terrestrial workshop, but (except his
soft hazel eyes, which we doubt not already gleamed with a still
intelligence) called upon for little voluntary movement there. Hitherto,
accordingly, his aspect is rather generic, that of an incipient
Philosopher and Poet in the abstract; perhaps it would puzzle Herr
Heuschrecke himself to say wherein the special Doctrine of Clothes is
as yet foreshadowed or betokened. For with Gneschen, as with others, the
Man may indeed stand pictured in the Boy (at least all the pigments are
there); yet only some half of the Man stands in the Child, or young Boy,
namely, his Passive endowment, not his Active. The more impatient are we
to discover what figure he cuts in this latter capacity; how, when, to
use his own words, "he understands the tools a little, and can handle
this or that," he will proceed to handle it.

Here, however, may be the place to state that, in much of our
Philosopher's history, there is something of an almost Hindoo character:
nay perhaps in that so well-fostered and every way excellent "Passivity"
of his, which, with no free development of the antagonist Activity,
distinguished his childhood, we may detect the rudiments of much that,
in after days, and still in these present days, astonishes the world.
For the shallow-sighted, Teufelsdrockh is oftenest a man without
Activity of any kind, a No-man; for the deep-sighted, again, a man
with Activity almost superabundant, yet so spiritual, close-hidden,
enigmatic, that no mortal can foresee its explosions, or even when
it has exploded, so much as ascertain its significance. A dangerous,
difficult temper for the modern European; above all, disadvantageous in
the hero of a Biography! Now as heretofore it will behoove the Editor of
these pages, were it never so unsuccessfully, to do his endeavor.

Among the earliest tools of any complicacy which a man, especially a man
of letters, gets to handle, are his Class-books. On this portion of his
History, Teufelsdrockh looks down professedly as indifferent. Reading he
"cannot remember ever to have learned;" so perhaps had it by nature.
He says generally: "Of the insignificant portion of my Education, which
depended on Schools, there need almost no notice be taken. I learned
what others learn; and kept it stored by in a corner of my head,
seeing as yet no manner of use in it. My Schoolmaster, a down-bent,
broken-hearted, underfoot martyr, as others of that guild are, did
little for me, except discover that he could do little: he, good soul,
pronounced me a genius, fit for the learned professions; and that I must
be sent to the Gymnasium, and one day to the University. Meanwhile,
what printed thing soever I could meet with I read. My very copper
pocket-money I laid out on stall-literature; which, as it accumulated,
I with my own hands sewed into volumes. By this means was the young
head furnished with a considerable miscellany of things and shadows
of things: History in authentic fragments lay mingled with Fabulous
chimeras, wherein also was reality; and the whole not as dead stuff, but
as living pabulum, tolerably nutritive for a mind as yet so peptic."

That the Entepfuhl Schoolmaster judged well, we now know. Indeed,
already in the youthful Gneschen, with all his outward stillness, there
may have been manifest an inward vivacity that promised much; symptoms
of a spirit singularly open, thoughtful, almost poetical. Thus, to say
nothing of his Suppers on the Orchard-wall, and other phenomena of that
earlier period, have many readers of these pages stumbled, in their
twelfth year, on such reflections as the following? "It struck me much,
as I sat by the Kuhbach, one silent noontide, and watched it flowing,
gurgling, to think how this same streamlet had flowed and gurgled,
through all changes of weather and of fortune, from beyond the earliest
date of History. Yes, probably on the morning when Joshua forded Jordan;
even as at the mid-day when Caesar, doubtless with difficulty, swam the
Nile, yet kept his _Commentaries_ dry,--this little Kuhbach, assiduous
as Tiber, Eurotas or Siloa, was murmuring on across the wilderness, as
yet unnamed, unseen: here, too, as in the Euphrates and the Ganges, is
a vein or veinlet of the grand World-circulation of Waters, which, with
its atmospheric arteries, has lasted and lasts simply with the World.
Thou fool! Nature alone is antique, and the oldest art a mushroom; that
idle crag thou sittest on is six thousand years of age." In which little
thought, as in a little fountain, may there not lie the beginning of
those well-nigh unutterable meditations on the grandeur and mystery
of TIME, and its relation to ETERNITY, which play such a part in this
Philosophy of Clothes?

Over his Gymnasic and Academic years the Professor by no means lingers
so lyrical and joyful as over his childhood. Green sunny tracts there
are still; but intersected by bitter rivulets of tears, here and there
stagnating into sour marshes of discontent. "With my first view of the
Hinterschlag Gymnasium," writes he, "my evil days began. Well do I still
remember the red sunny Whitsuntide morning, when, trotting full of hope
by the side of Father Andreas, I entered the main street of the place,
and saw its steeple-clock (then striking Eight) and _Schuldthurm_
(Jail), and the aproned or disaproned Burghers moving in to breakfast:
a little dog, in mad terror, was rushing past; for some human imps
had tied a tin kettle to its tail; thus did the agonized creature,
loud-jingling, career through the whole length of the Borough, and
become notable enough. Fit emblem of many a Conquering Hero, to
whom Fate (wedding Fantasy to Sense, as it often elsewhere does) has
malignantly appended a tin kettle of Ambition, to chase him on; which
the faster he runs, urges him the faster, the more loudly and more
foolishly! Fit emblem also of much that awaited myself, in that
mischievous Den; as in the World, whereof it was a portion and epitome!

"Alas, the kind beech-rows of Entepfuhl were hidden in the distance: I
was among strangers, harshly, at best indifferently, disposed towards
me; the young heart felt, for the first time, quite orphaned and alone."
His school-fellows, as is usual, persecuted him: "They were Boys," he
says, "mostly rude Boys, and obeyed the impulse of rude Nature, which
bids the deer-herd fall upon any stricken hart, the duck-flock put to
death any broken-winged brother or sister, and on all hands the strong
tyrannize over the weak." He admits that though "perhaps in an unusual
degree morally courageous," he succeeded ill in battle, and would fain
have avoided it; a result, as would appear, owing less to his small
personal stature (for in passionate seasons he was "incredibly nimble"),
than to his "virtuous principles:" "if it was disgraceful to be beaten,"
says he, "it was only a shade less disgraceful to have so much as
fought; thus was I drawn two ways at once, and in this important element
of school-history, the war-element, had little but sorrow." On the
whole, that same excellent "Passivity," so notable in Teufelsdrockh's
childhood, is here visibly enough again getting nourishment. "He wept
often; indeed to such a degree that he was nicknamed _Der Weinende_ (the
Tearful), which epithet, till towards his thirteenth year, was indeed
not quite unmerited. Only at rare intervals did the young soul burst
forth into fire-eyed rage, and, with a stormfulness (_Ungestum_) under
which the boldest quailed, assert that he too had Rights of Man, or at
least of Mankin." In all which, who does not discern a fine flower-tree
and cinnamon-tree (of genius) nigh choked among pumpkins, reed-grass and
ignoble shrubs; and forced if it would live, to struggle upwards only,
and not outwards; into a _height_ quite sickly, and disproportioned to
its _breadth_?

We find, moreover, that his Greek and Latin were "mechanically" taught;
Hebrew scarce even mechanically; much else which they called History,
Cosmography, Philosophy, and so forth, no better than not at all. So
that, except inasmuch as Nature was still busy; and he himself "went
about, as was of old his wont, among the Craftsmen's workshops, there
learning many things;" and farther lighted on some small store
of curious reading, in Hans Wachtel the Cooper's house, where he
lodged,--his time, it would appear, was utterly wasted. Which facts the
Professor has not yet learned to look upon with any contentment. Indeed,
throughout the whole of this Bag _Scorpio_, where we now are, and often
in the following Bag, he shows himself unusually animated on the matter
of Education, and not without some touch of what we might presume to be
anger.

"My Teachers," says he, "were hide-bound Pedants, without knowledge of
man's nature, or of boy's; or of aught save their lexicons and quarterly
account-books. Innumerable dead Vocables (no dead Language, for they
themselves knew no Language) they crammed into us, and called it
fostering the growth of mind. How can an inanimate, mechanical
Gerund-grinder, the like of whom will, in a subsequent century, be
manufactured at Nurnberg out of wood and leather, foster the growth
of anything; much more of Mind, which grows, not like a vegetable (by
having its roots littered with etymological compost), but like a spirit,
by mysterious contact of Spirit; Thought kindling itself at the fire of
living Thought? How shall _he_ give kindling, in whose own inward
man there is no live coal, but all is burnt out to a dead grammatical
cinder? The Hinterschlag Professors knew syntax enough; and of the human
soul thus much: that it had a faculty called Memory, and could be acted
on through the muscular integument by appliance of birch-rods.

"Alas, so is it everywhere, so will it ever be; till the Hod-man is
discharged, or reduced to hod-bearing; and an Architect is hired, and on
all hands fitly encouraged: till communities and individuals discover,
not without surprise, that fashioning the souls of a generation by
Knowledge can rank on a level with blowing their bodies to pieces by
Gunpowder; that with Generals and Field-marshals for killing, there
should be world-honored Dignitaries, and were it possible, true
God-ordained Priests, for teaching. But as yet, though the Soldier wears
openly, and even parades, his butchering-tool, nowhere, far as I have
travelled, did the Schoolmaster make show of his instructing-tool: nay,
were he to walk abroad with birch girt on thigh, as if he therefrom
expected honor, would there not, among the idler class, perhaps a
certain levity be excited?"

In the third year of this Gymnasic period, Father Andreas seems to have
died: the young Scholar, otherwise so maltreated, saw himself for the
first time clad outwardly in sables, and inwardly in quite inexpressible
melancholy. "The dark bottomless Abyss, that lies under our feet, had
yawned open; the pale kingdoms of Death, with all their innumerable
silent nations and generations, stood before him; the inexorable word,
NEVER! now first showed its meaning. My Mother wept, and her sorrow got
vent; but in my heart there lay a whole lake of tears, pent up in
silent desolation. Nevertheless the unworn Spirit is strong; Life is
so healthful that it even finds nourishment in Death: these stern
experiences, planted down by Memory in my Imagination, rose there to a
whole cypress-forest, sad but beautiful; waving, with not unmelodious
sighs, in dark luxuriance, in the hottest sunshine, through long years
of youth:--as in manhood also it does, and will do; for I have now
pitched my tent under a Cypress-tree; the Tomb is now my inexpugnable
Fortress, ever close by the gate of which I look upon the hostile
armaments, and pains and penalties of tyrannous Life placidly enough,
and listen to its loudest threatenings with a still smile. O ye loved
ones, that already sleep in the noiseless Bed of Rest, whom in life I
could only weep for and never help; and ye, who wide-scattered still
toil lonely in the monster-bearing Desert, dyeing the flinty ground with
your blood,--yet a little while, and we shall all meet THERE, and
our Mother's bosom will screen us all; and Oppression's harness, and
Sorrow's fire-whip, and all the Gehenna Bailiffs that patrol and inhabit
ever-vexed Time, cannot thenceforth harm us any more!"

Close by which rather beautiful apostrophe, lies a labored Character of
the deceased Andreas Futteral; of his natural ability, his deserts in
life (as Prussian Sergeant); with long historical inquiries into the
genealogy of the Futteral Family, here traced back as far as Henry the
Fowler: the whole of which we pass over, not without astonishment. It
only concerns us to add, that now was the time when Mother Gretchen
revealed to her foster-son that he was not at all of this kindred; or
indeed of any kindred, having come into historical existence in the way
already known to us. "Thus was I doubly orphaned," says he; "bereft not
only of Possession, but even of Remembrance. Sorrow and Wonder,
here suddenly united, could not but produce abundant fruit. Such a
disclosure, in such a season, struck its roots through my whole
nature: ever till the years of mature manhood, it mingled with my whole
thoughts, was as the stem whereon all my day-dreams and night-dreams
grew. A certain poetic elevation, yet also a corresponding civic
depression, it naturally imparted: _I was like no other_; in which
fixed idea, leading sometimes to highest, and oftener to frightfullest
results, may there not lie the first spring of tendencies, which in
my Life have become remarkable enough? As in birth, so in action,
speculation, and social position, my fellows are perhaps not numerous."


In the Bag _Sagittarius_, as we at length discover, Teufelsdrockh has
become a University man; though how, when, or of what quality, will
nowhere disclose itself with the smallest certainty. Few things, in the
way of confusion and capricious indistinctness, can now surprise our
readers; not even the total want of dates, almost without parallel in
a Biographical work. So enigmatic, so chaotic we have always found,
and must always look to find, these scattered Leaves. In _Sagittarius_,
however, Teufelsdrockh begins to show himself even more than
usually Sibylline: fragments of all sorts: scraps of regular Memoir,
College-Exercises, Programs, Professional Testimoniums, Milkscores, torn
Billets, sometimes to appearance of an amatory cast; all blown together
as if by merest chance, henceforth bewilder the sane Historian. To
combine any picture of these University, and the subsequent, years; much
more, to decipher therein any illustrative primordial elements of the
Clothes-Philosophy, becomes such a problem as the reader may imagine.

So much we can see; darkly, as through the foliage of some wavering
thicket: a youth of no common endowment, who has passed happily through
Childhood, less happily yet still vigorously through Boyhood, now at
length perfect in "dead vocables," and set down, as he hopes, by the
living Fountain, there to superadd Ideas and Capabilities. From such
Fountain he draws, diligently, thirstily, yet never or seldom with his
whole heart, for the water nowise suits his palate; discouragements,
entanglements, aberrations are discoverable or supposable. Nor perhaps
are even pecuniary distresses wanting; for "the good Gretchen, who in
spite of advices from not disinterested relatives has sent him
hither, must after a time withdraw her willing but too feeble hand."
Nevertheless in an atmosphere of Poverty and manifold Chagrin, the Humor
of that young Soul, what character is in him, first decisively reveals
itself; and, like strong sunshine in weeping skies, gives out variety of
colors, some of which are prismatic. Thus, with the aid of Time and of
what Time brings, has the stripling Diogenes Teufelsdrockh waxed into
manly stature; and into so questionable an aspect, that we ask with new
eagerness, How he specially came by it, and regret anew that there is
no more explicit answer. Certain of the intelligible and partially
significant fragments, which are few in number, shall be extracted from
that Limbo of a Paper-bag, and presented with the usual preparation.

As if, in the Bag _Scorpio_, Teufelsdrockh had not already expectorated
his antipedagogic spleen; as if, from the name _Sagittarius_, he had
thought himself called upon to shoot arrows, we here again fall in with
such matter as this: "The University where I was educated still stands
vivid enough in my remembrance, and I know its name well; which name,
however, I, from tenderness to existing interests and persons, shall in
nowise divulge. It is my painful duty to say that, out of England and
Spain, ours was the worst of all hitherto discovered Universities.
This is indeed a time when right Education is, as nearly as may be,
impossible: however, in degrees of wrongness there is no limit: nay,
I can conceive a worse system than that of the Nameless itself; as
poisoned victual may be worse than absolute hunger.

"It is written, When the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the
ditch: wherefore, in such circumstances, may it not sometimes be safer,
if both leader and led simply--sit still? Had you, anywhere in Crim
Tartary, walled in a square enclosure; furnished it with a small,
ill-chosen Library; and then turned loose into it eleven hundred
Christian striplings, to tumble about as they listed, from three to
seven years: certain persons, under the title of Professors, being
stationed at the gates, to declare aloud that it was a University, and
exact considerable admission-fees,--you had, not indeed in mechanical
structure, yet in spirit and result, some imperfect resemblance of our
High Seminary. I say, imperfect; for if our mechanical structure was
quite other, so neither was our result altogether the same: unhappily,
we were not in Crim Tartary, but in a corrupt European city, full of
smoke and sin; moreover, in the middle of a Public, which, without far
costlier apparatus than that of the Square Enclosure, and Declaration
aloud, you could not be sure of gulling.

"Gullible, however, by fit apparatus, all Publics are; and gulled,
with the most surprising profit. Towards anything like a _Statistics
of Imposture_, indeed, little as yet has been done: with a strange
indifference, our Economists, nigh buried under Tables for
minor Branches of Industry, have altogether overlooked the grand
all-overtopping Hypocrisy Branch; as if our whole arts of Puffery, of
Quackery, Priestcraft, Kingcraft, and the innumerable other crafts and
mysteries of that genus, had not ranked in Productive Industry at all!
Can any one, for example, so much as say, What moneys, in Literature and
Shoeblacking, are realized by actual Instruction and actual jet Polish;
what by fictitious-persuasive Proclamation of such; specifying,
in distinct items, the distributions, circulations, disbursements,
incomings of said moneys, with the smallest approach to accuracy? But
to ask, How far, in all the several infinitely complected departments
of social business, in government, education, in manual, commercial,
intellectual fabrication of every sort, man's Want is supplied by true
Ware; how far by the mere Appearance of true Ware:--in other words, To
what extent, by what methods, with what effects, in various times and
countries, Deception takes the place of wages of Performance: here
truly is an Inquiry big with results for the future time, but to which
hitherto only the vaguest answer can be given. If for the present, in
our Europe, we estimate the ratio of Ware to Appearance of Ware so high
even as at One to a Hundred (which, considering the Wages of a Pope,
Russian Autocrat, or English Game-Preserver, is probably not far from
the mark),--what almost prodigious saving may there not be anticipated,
as the _Statistics of Imposture_ advances, and so the manufacturing of
Shams (that of Realities rising into clearer and clearer distinction
therefrom) gradually declines, and at length becomes all but wholly
unnecessary!

"This for the coming golden ages. What I had to remark, for the present
brazen one, is, that in several provinces, as in Education, Polity,
Religion, where so much is wanted and indispensable, and so little can
as yet be furnished, probably Imposture is of sanative, anodyne nature,
and man's Gullibility not his worst blessing. Suppose your sinews of
war quite broken; I mean your military chest insolvent, forage all but
exhausted; and that the whole army is about to mutiny, disband, and cut
your and each other's throat,--then were it not well could you, as if
by miracle, pay them in any sort of fairy-money, feed them on coagulated
water, or mere imagination of meat; whereby, till the real supply came
up, they might be kept together and quiet? Such perhaps was the aim of
Nature, who does nothing without aim, in furnishing her favorite,
Man, with this his so omnipotent or rather omnipatient Talent of being
Gulled.

"How beautifully it works, with a little mechanism; nay, almost makes
mechanism for itself! These Professors in the Nameless lived with ease,
with safety, by a mere Reputation, constructed in past times, and then
too with no great effort, by quite another class of persons. Which
Reputation, like a strong brisk-going undershot wheel, sunk into the
general current, bade fair, with only a little annual re-painting on
their part, to hold long together, and of its own accord assiduously
grind for them. Happy that it was so, for the Millers! They themselves
needed not to work; their attempts at working, at what they called
Educating, now when I look back on it, fill me with a certain mute
admiration.

"Besides all this, we boasted ourselves a Rational University; in the
highest degree hostile to Mysticism; thus was the young vacant mind
furnished with much talk about Progress of the Species, Dark Ages,
Prejudice, and the like; so that all were quickly enough blown out into
a state of windy argumentativeness; whereby the better sort had soon to
end in sick, impotent Scepticism; the worser sort explode (_crepiren_)
in finished Self-conceit, and to all spiritual intents become dead.--But
this too is portion of mankind's lot. If our era is the Era of Unbelief,
why murmur under it; is there not a better coming, nay come? As in
long-drawn systole and long-drawn diastole, must the period of Faith
alternate with the period of Denial; must the vernal growth, the summer
luxuriance of all Opinions, Spiritual Representations and Creations,
be followed by, and again follow, the autumnal decay, the winter
dissolution. For man lives in Time, has his whole earthly being,
endeavor and destiny shaped for him by Time: only in the transitory
Time-Symbol is the ever-motionless Eternity we stand on made manifest.
And yet, in such winter-seasons of Denial, it is for the nobler-minded
perhaps a comparative misery to have been born, and to be awake and
work; and for the duller a felicity, if, like hibernating animals,
safe-lodged in some Salamanca University or Sybaris City, or other
superstitious or voluptuous Castle of Indolence, they can slumber
through, in stupid dreams, and only awaken when the loud-roaring
hailstorms have all alone their work, and to our prayers and martyrdoms
the new Spring has been vouchsafed."

That in the environment, here mysteriously enough shadowed forth,
Teufelsdrockh must have felt ill at ease, cannot be doubtful. "The
hungry young," he says, "looked up to their spiritual Nurses; and, for
food, were bidden eat the east-wind. What vain jargon of controversial
Metaphysic, Etymology, and mechanical Manipulation falsely named
Science, was current there, I indeed learned, better perhaps than the
most. Among eleven hundred Christian youths, there will not be wanting
some eleven eager to learn. By collision with such, a certain warmth, a
certain polish was communicated; by instinct and happy accident, I took
less to rioting (_renommiren_), than to thinking and reading, which
latter also I was free to do. Nay from the chaos of that Library, I
succeeded in fishing up more books perhaps than had been known to the
very keepers thereof. The foundation of a Literary Life was hereby laid:
I learned, on my own strength, to read fluently in almost all cultivated
languages, on almost all subjects and sciences; farther, as man is ever
the prime object to man, already it was my favorite employment to read
character in speculation, and from the Writing to construe the Writer.
A certain groundplan of Human Nature and Life began to fashion itself in
me; wondrous enough, now when I look back on it; for my whole Universe,
physical and spiritual, was as yet a Machine! However, such a conscious,
recognized groundplan, the truest I had, _was_ beginning to be there,
and by additional experiments might be corrected and indefinitely
extended."

Thus from poverty does the strong educe nobler wealth; thus in the
destitution of the wild desert does our young Ishmael acquire for
himself the highest of all possessions, that of Self-help. Nevertheless
a desert this was, waste, and howling with savage monsters.
Teufelsdrockh gives us long details of his "fever-paroxysms of Doubt;"
his Inquiries concerning Miracles, and the Evidences of religious Faith;
and how "in the silent night-watches, still darker in his heart than
over sky and earth, he has cast himself before the All-seeing, and with
audible prayers cried vehemently for Light, for deliverance from Death
and the Grave. Not till after long years, and unspeakable agonies, did
the believing heart surrender; sink into spell-bound sleep, under the
nightmare, Unbelief; and, in this hag-ridden dream, mistake God's fair
living world for a pallid, vacant Hades and extinct Pandemonium. But
through such Purgatory pain," continues he, "it is appointed us to
pass; first must the dead Letter of Religion own itself dead, and drop
piecemeal into dust, if the living Spirit of Religion, freed from this
its charnel-house, is to arise on us, new-born of Heaven, and with new
healing under its wings."

To which Purgatory pains, seemingly severe enough, if we add a liberal
measure of Earthly distresses, want of practical guidance, want of
sympathy, want of money, want of hope; and all this in the fervid season
of youth, so exaggerated in imagining, so boundless in desires, yet here
so poor in means,--do we not see a strong incipient spirit oppressed and
overloaded from without and from within; the fire of genius struggling
up among fuel-wood of the greenest, and as yet with more of bitter vapor
than of clear flame?

From various fragments of Letters and other documentary scraps, it is to
be inferred that Teufelsdrockh, isolated, shy, retiring as he was, had
not altogether escaped notice: certain established men are aware of his
existence; and, if stretching out no helpful hand, have at least their
eyes on him. He appears, though in dreary enough humor, to be addressing
himself to the Profession of Law;--whereof, indeed, the world has since
seen him a public graduate. But omitting these broken, unsatisfactory
thrums of Economical relation, let us present rather the following small
thread of Moral relation; and therewith, the reader for himself weaving
it in at the right place, conclude our dim arras-picture of these
University years.

"Here also it was that I formed acquaintance with Herr Towgood, or, as
it is perhaps better written, Herr Toughgut; a young person of quality
(_von Adel_), from the interior parts of England. He stood connected, by
blood and hospitality, with the Counts von Zahdarm, in this quarter of
Germany; to which noble Family I likewise was, by his means, with all
friendliness, brought near. Towgood had a fair talent, unspeakably
ill-cultivated; with considerable humor of character: and, bating his
total ignorance, for he knew nothing except Boxing and a little Grammar,
showed less of that aristocratic impassivity, and silent fury, than for
most part belongs to Travellers of his nation. To him I owe my first
practical knowledge of the English and their ways; perhaps also
something of the partiality with which I have ever since regarded that
singular people. Towgood was not without an eye, could he have come at
any light. Invited doubtless by the presence of the Zahdarm Family,
he had travelled hither, in the almost frantic hope of perfecting his
studies; he, whose studies had as yet been those of infancy, hither to
a University where so much as the notion of perfection, not to say the
effort after it, no longer existed! Often we would condole over the hard
destiny of the Young in this era: how, after all our toil, we were to be
turned out into the world, with beards on our chins indeed, but with few
other attributes of manhood; no existing thing that we were trained to
Act on, nothing that we could so much as Believe. 'How has our head on
the outside a polished Hat,' would Towgood exclaim, 'and in the inside
Vacancy, or a froth of Vocables and Attorney-Logic! At a small cost men
are educated to make leather into shoes; but at a great cost, what am
I educated to make? By Heaven, Brother! what I have already eaten
and worn, as I came thus far, would endow a considerable Hospital of
Incurables.'--'Man, indeed,' I would answer, 'has a Digestive Faculty,
which must be kept working, were it even partly by stealth. But as for
our Miseducation, make not bad worse; waste not the time yet ours, in
trampling on thistles because they have yielded us no figs. _Frisch
zu, Bruder_! Here are Books, and we have brains to read them; here is
a whole Earth and a whole Heaven, and we have eyes to look on them:
_Frisch zu_!'

"Often also our talk was gay; not without brilliancy, and even fire.
We looked out on Life, with its strange scaffolding, where all at
once harlequins dance, and men are beheaded and quartered: motley, not
unterrific was the aspect; but we looked on it like brave youths. For
myself, these were perhaps my most genial hours. Towards this young
warm-hearted, strong-headed and wrong-headed Herr Towgood I was even
near experiencing the now obsolete sentiment of Friendship. Yes, foolish
Heathen that I was, I felt that, under certain conditions, I could have
loved this man, and taken him to my bosom, and been his brother once and
always. By degrees, however, I understood the new time, and its wants.
If man's _Soul_ is indeed, as in the Finnish Language, and Utilitarian
Philosophy, a kind of _Stomach_, what else is the true meaning of
Spiritual Union but an Eating together? Thus we, instead of Friends, are
Dinner-guests; and here as elsewhere have cast away chimeras."

So ends, abruptly as is usual, and enigmatically, this little incipient
romance. What henceforth becomes of the brave Herr Towgood, or Toughgut?
He has dived under, in the Autobiographical Chaos, and swims we see not
where. Does any reader "in the interior parts of England" know of such a
man?



CHAPTER IV. GETTING UNDER WAY.

"Thus nevertheless," writes our Autobiographer, apparently as
quitting College, "was there realized Somewhat; namely, I, Diogenes
Teufelsdrockh: a visible Temporary Figure (_Zeitbild_), occupying some
cubic feet of Space, and containing within it Forces both physical and
spiritual; hopes, passions, thoughts; the whole wondrous furniture, in
more or less perfection, belonging to that mystery, a Man. Capabilities
there were in me to give battle, in some small degree, against the
great Empire of Darkness: does not the very Ditcher and Delver, with
his spade, extinguish many a thistle and puddle; and so leave a
little Order, where he found the opposite? Nay your very Day-moth has
capabilities in this kind; and ever organizes something (into its own
Body, if no otherwise), which was before Inorganic; and of mute dead air
makes living music, though only of the faintest, by humming.

"How much more, one whose capabilities are spiritual; who has learned,
or begun learning, the grand thaumaturgic art of Thought! Thaumaturgic
I name it; for hitherto all Miracles have been wrought thereby, and
henceforth innumerable will be wrought; whereof we, even in these days,
witness some. Of the Poet's and Prophet's inspired Message, and how it
makes and unmakes whole worlds, I shall forbear mention: but cannot
the dullest hear Steam-engines clanking around him? Has he not seen the
Scottish Brass-smith's IDEA (and this but a mechanical one) travelling
on fire-wings round the Cape, and across two Oceans; and stronger than
any other Enchanter's Familiar, on all hands unweariedly fetching
and carrying: at home, not only weaving Cloth; but rapidly enough
overturning the whole old system of Society; and, for Feudalism and
Preservation of the Game, preparing us, by indirect but sure methods,
Industrialism and the Government of the Wisest? Truly a Thinking Man is
the worst enemy the Prince of Darkness can have; every time such a one
announces himself, I doubt not, there runs a shudder through the
Nether Empire; and new Emissaries are trained, with new tactics, to, if
possible, entrap him, and hoodwink and handcuff him.

"With such high vocation had I too, as denizen of the Universe,
been called. Unhappy it is, however, that though born to the amplest
Sovereignty, in this way, with no less than sovereign right of Peace
and War against the Time-Prince (_Zeitfurst_), or Devil, and all his
Dominions, your coronation-ceremony costs such trouble, your sceptre is
so difficult to get at, or even to get eye on!"

By which last wire-drawn similitude does Teufelsdrockh mean no more than
that young men find obstacles in what we call "getting under way"? "Not
what I Have," continues he, "but what I Do is my Kingdom. To each is
given a certain inward Talent, a certain outward Environment of Fortune;
to each, by wisest combination of these two, a certain maximum of
Capability. But the hardest problem were ever this first: To find by
study of yourself, and of the ground you stand on, what your combined
inward and outward Capability specially is. For, alas, our young soul is
all budding with Capabilities, and we see not yet which is the main and
true one. Always too the new man is in a new time, under new conditions;
his course can be the _fac-simile_ of no prior one, but is by its
nature original. And then how seldom will the outward Capability fit
the inward: though talented wonderfully enough, we are poor, unfriended,
dyspeptical, bashful; nay what is worse than all, we are foolish. Thus,
in a whole imbroglio of Capabilities, we go stupidly groping about, to
grope which is ours, and often clutch the wrong one: in this mad work
must several years of our small term be spent, till the purblind Youth,
by practice, acquire notions of distance, and become a seeing Man. Nay,
many so spend their whole term, and in ever-new expectation, ever-new
disappointment, shift from enterprise to enterprise, and from side to
side: till at length, as exasperated striplings of threescore-and-ten,
they shift into their last enterprise, that of getting buried.

"Such, since the most of us are too ophthalmic, would be the general
fate; were it not that one thing saves us: our Hunger. For on this
ground, as the prompt nature of Hunger is well known, must a prompt
choice be made: hence have we, with wise foresight, Indentures and
Apprenticeships for our irrational young; whereby, in due season, the
vague universality of a Man shall find himself ready-moulded into a
specific Craftsman; and so thenceforth work, with much or with little
waste of Capability as it may be; yet not with the worst waste, that of
time. Nay even in matters spiritual, since the spiritual artist too is
born blind, and does not, like certain other creatures, receive sight
in nine days, but far later, sometimes never,--is it not well that there
should be what we call Professions, or Bread-studies (_Brodzwecke_),
preappointed us? Here, circling like the gin-horse, for whom partial
or total blindness is no evil, the Bread-artist can travel contentedly
round and round, still fancying that it is forward and forward; and
realize much: for himself victual; for the world an additional horse's
power in the grand corn-mill or hemp-mill of Economic Society. For
me too had such a leading-string been provided; only that it proved a
neck-halter, and had nigh throttled me, till I broke it off. Then, in
the words of Ancient Pistol, did the world generally become mine oyster,
which I, by strength or cunning, was to open, as I would and could.
Almost had I deceased (_fast war ich umgekommen_), so obstinately did it
continue shut."

We see here, significantly foreshadowed, the spirit of much that was
to befall our Autobiographer; the historical embodiment of which, as
it painfully takes shape in his Life, lies scattered, in dim disastrous
details, through this Bag _Pisces_, and those that follow. A young man
of high talent, and high though still temper, like a young mettled
colt, "breaks off his neck-halter," and bounds forth, from his peculiar
manger, into the wide world; which, alas, he finds all rigorously fenced
in. Richest clover-fields tempt his eye; but to him they are forbidden
pasture: either pining in progressive starvation, he must stand; or,
in mad exasperation, must rush to and fro, leaping against sheer
stone-walls, which he cannot leap over, which only lacerate and lame
him; till at last, after thousand attempts and endurances, he, as if by
miracle, clears his way; not indeed into luxuriant and luxurious clover,
yet into a certain bosky wilderness where existence is still possible,
and Freedom, though waited on by Scarcity, is not without sweetness.
In a word, Teufelsdrockh having thrown up his legal Profession, finds
himself without landmark of outward guidance; whereby his previous
want of decided Belief, or inward guidance, is frightfully aggravated.
Necessity urges him on; Time will not stop, neither can he, a Son
of Time; wild passions without solacement, wild faculties without
employment, ever vex and agitate him. He too must enact that stern
Monodrama, _No Object and no Rest_; must front its successive destinies,
work through to its catastrophe, and deduce therefrom what moral he can.

Yet let us be just to him, let us admit that his "neck-halter" sat
nowise easy on him; that he was in some degree forced to break it off.
If we look at the young man's civic position, in this Nameless capital,
as he emerges from its Nameless University, we can discern well that
it was far from enviable. His first Law-Examination he has come through
triumphantly; and can even boast that the _Examen Rigorosum_ need
not have frightened him: but though he is hereby "an _Auscultator_ of
respectability," what avails it? There is next to no employment to
be had. Neither, for a youth without connections, is the process of
Expectation very hopeful in itself; nor for one of his disposition
much cheered from without. "My fellow Auscultators," he says, "were
Auscultators: they dressed, and digested, and talked articulate words;
other vitality showed they almost none. Small speculation in those eyes,
that they did glare withal! Sense neither for the high nor for the
deep, nor for aught human or divine, save only for the faintest scent of
coming Preferment." In which words, indicating a total estrangement on
the part of Teufelsdrockh may there not also lurk traces of a bitterness
as from wounded vanity? Doubtless these prosaic Auscultators may have
sniffed at him, with his strange ways; and tried to hate, and what was
much more impossible, to despise him. Friendly communion, in any case,
there could not be: already has the young Teufelsdrockh left the other
young geese; and swims apart, though as yet uncertain whether he himself
is cygnet or gosling.

Perhaps, too, what little employment he had was performed ill, at best
unpleasantly. "Great practical method and expertness" he may brag of;
but is there not also great practical pride, though deep-hidden, only
the deeper-seated? So shy a man can never have been popular. We figure
to ourselves, how in those days he may have played strange freaks with
his independence, and so forth: do not his own words betoken as much?
"Like a very young person, I imagined it was with Work alone, and not
also with Folly and Sin, in myself and others, that I had been
appointed to struggle." Be this as it may, his progress from the passive
Auscultatorship, towards any active Assessorship, is evidently of the
slowest. By degrees, those same established men, once partially inclined
to patronize him, seem to withdraw their countenance, and give him up
as "a man of genius" against which procedure he, in these Papers, loudly
protests. "As if," says he, "the higher did not presuppose the lower; as
if he who can fly into heaven, could not also walk post if he resolved
on it! But the world is an old woman, and mistakes any gilt farthing
for a gold coin; whereby being often cheated, she will thenceforth trust
nothing but the common copper."

How our winged sky-messenger, unaccepted as a terrestrial runner,
contrived, in the mean while, to keep himself from flying skyward
without return, is not too clear from these Documents. Good old Gretchen
seems to have vanished from the scene, perhaps from the Earth; other
Horn of Plenty, or even of Parsimony, nowhere flows for him; so that
"the prompt nature of Hunger being well known," we are not without our
anxiety. From private Tuition, in never so many languages and sciences,
the aid derivable is small; neither, to use his own words, "does the
young Adventurer hitherto suspect in himself any literary gift; but at
best earns bread-and-water wages, by his wide faculty of Translation.
Nevertheless," continues he, "that I subsisted is clear, for you find me
even now alive." Which fact, however, except upon the principle of our
true-hearted, kind old Proverb, that "there is always life for a living
one," we must profess ourselves unable to explain.

Certain Landlords' Bills, and other economic Documents, bearing the
mark of Settlement, indicate that he was not without money; but, like an
independent Hearth-holder, if not House-holder, paid his way. Here also
occur, among many others, two little mutilated Notes, which perhaps
throw light on his condition. The first has now no date, or writer's
name, but a huge Blot; and runs to this effect: "The (_Inkblot_), tied
down by previous promise, cannot, except by best wishes, forward the
Herr Teufelsdrockh's views on the Assessorship in question; and sees
himself under the cruel necessity of forbearing, for the present, what
were otherwise his duty and joy, to assist in opening the career for a
man of genius, on whom far higher triumphs are yet waiting." The other
is on gilt paper; and interests us like a sort of epistolary mummy now
dead, yet which once lived and beneficently worked. We give it in
the original: "_Herr Teufelsdrockh wird von der Frau Grafinn, auf
Donnerstag, zum AESTHETISCHEN THEE schonstens eingeladen_."

Thus, in answer to a cry for solid pudding, whereof there is the most
urgent need, comes, epigrammatically enough, the invitation to a wash of
quite fluid _AEsthetic Tea_! How Teufelsdrockh, now at actual hand-grips
with Destiny herself, may have comported himself among these Musical and
Literary dilettanti of both sexes, like a hungry lion invited to a feast
of chickenweed, we can only conjecture. Perhaps in expressive silence,
and abstinence: otherwise if the lion, in such case, is to feast at all,
it cannot be on the chickenweed, but only on the chickens. For the rest,
as this Frau Grafinn dates from the _Zahdarm House_, she can be no
other than the Countess and mistress of the same; whose intellectual
tendencies, and good-will to Teufelsdrockh, whether on the footing of
Herr Towgood, or on his own footing, are hereby manifest. That some
sort of relation, indeed, continued, for a time, to connect our
Autobiographer, though perhaps feebly enough, with this noble House, we
have elsewhere express evidence. Doubtless, if he expected patronage, it
was in vain; enough for him if he here obtained occasional glimpses
of the great world, from which we at one time fancied him to have been
always excluded. "The Zahdarms," says he, "lived in the soft, sumptuous
garniture of Aristocracy; whereto Literature and Art, attracted and
attached from without, were to serve as the handsomest fringing. It was
to the _Gnadigen Frau_ (her Ladyship) that this latter improvement was
due: assiduously she gathered, dexterously she fitted on, what fringing
was to be had; lace or cobweb, as the place yielded." Was Teufelsdrockh
also a fringe, of lace or cobweb; or promising to be such? "With his
_Excellenz_ (the Count)," continues he, "I have more than once had the
honor to converse; chiefly on general affairs, and the aspect of the
world, which he, though now past middle life, viewed in no unfavorable
light; finding indeed, except the Outrooting of Journalism (_die
auszurottende Journalistik_), little to desiderate therein. On some
points, as his _Excellenz_ was not uncholeric, I found it more pleasant
to keep silence. Besides, his occupation being that of Owning Land,
there might be faculties enough, which, as superfluous for such use,
were little developed in him."

That to Teufelsdrockh the aspect of the world was nowise so faultless,
and many things besides "the Outrooting of Journalism" might have seemed
improvements, we can readily conjecture. With nothing but a barren
Auscultatorship from without, and so many mutinous thoughts and wishes
from within, his position was no easy one. "The Universe," he says, "was
as a mighty Sphinx-riddle, which I knew so little of, yet must rede,
or be devoured. In red streaks of unspeakable grandeur, yet also in
the blackness of darkness, was Life, to my too-unfurnished Thought,
unfolding itself. A strange contradiction lay in me; and I as yet knew
not the solution of it; knew not that spiritual music can spring only
from discords set in harmony; that but for Evil there were no Good, as
victory is only possible by battle."

"I have heard affirmed (surely in jest)," observes he elsewhere, "by
not unphilanthropic persons, that it were a real increase of human
happiness, could all young men from the age of nineteen be covered under
barrels, or rendered otherwise invisible; and there left to follow their
lawful studies and callings, till they emerged, sadder and wiser, at the
age of twenty-five. With which suggestion, at least as considered in the
light of a practical scheme, I need scarcely say that I nowise coincide.
Nevertheless it is plausibly urged that, as young ladies (_Madchen_)
are, to mankind, precisely the most delightful in those years; so young
gentlemen (_Bubchen_) do then attain their maximum of detestability.
Such gawks (_Gecken_) are they, and foolish peacocks, and yet with such
a vulturous hunger for self-indulgence; so obstinate, obstreperous,
vain-glorious; in all senses, so froward and so forward. No mortal's
endeavor or attainment will, in the smallest, content the as yet
unendeavoring, unattaining young gentleman; but he could make it all
infinitely better, were it worthy of him. Life everywhere is the most
manageable matter, simple as a question in the Rule-of-Three: multiply
your second and third term together, divide the product by the first,
and your quotient will be the answer,--which you are but an ass if you
cannot come at. The booby has not yet found out, by any trial, that,
do what one will, there is ever a cursed fraction, oftenest a decimal
repeater, and no net integer quotient so much as to be thought of."

In which passage does not there lie an implied confession that
Teufelsdrockh himself, besides his outward obstructions, had an inward,
still greater, to contend with; namely, a certain temporary, youthful,
yet still afflictive derangement of head? Alas, on the former side
alone, his case was hard enough. "It continues ever true," says
he, "that Saturn, or Chronos, or what we call TIME, devours all his
Children: only by incessant Running, by incessant Working, may you (for
some threescore-and-ten years) escape him; and you too he devours at
last. Can any Sovereign, or Holy Alliance of Sovereigns, bid Time
stand still; even in thought, shake themselves free of Time? Our whole
terrestrial being is based on Time, and built of Time; it is wholly a
Movement, a Time-impulse; Time is the author of it, the material of
it. Hence also our Whole Duty, which is to move, to work,--in the right
direction. Are not our Bodies and our Souls in continual movement,
whether we will or not; in a continual Waste, requiring a continual
Repair? Utmost satisfaction of our whole outward and inward Wants were
but satisfaction for a space of Time; thus, whatso we have done,
is done, and for us annihilated, and ever must we go and do anew. O
Time-Spirit, how hast thou environed and imprisoned us, and sunk us so
deep in thy troublous dim Time-Element, that only in lucid moments
can so much as glimpses of our upper Azure Home be revealed to us!
Me, however, as a Son of Time, unhappier than some others, was Time
threatening to eat quite prematurely; for, strive as I might, there was
no good Running, so obstructed was the path, so gyved were the feet."
That is to say, we presume, speaking in the dialect of this lower world,
that Teufelsdrockh's whole duty and necessity was, like other men's, "to
work,--in the right direction," and that no work was to be had; whereby
he became wretched enough. As was natural: with haggard Scarcity
threatening him in the distance; and so vehement a soul languishing
in restless inaction, and forced thereby, like Sir Hudibras's sword by
rust,

     "To eat into itself, for lack
     Of something else to hew and hack;"

But on the whole, that same "excellent Passivity," as it has all along
done, is here again vigorously flourishing; in which circumstance may
we not trace the beginnings of much that now characterizes our Professor
and perhaps, in faint rudiments, the origin of the Clothes-Philosophy
itself? Already the attitude he has assumed towards the World is too
defensive; not, as would have been desirable, a bold attitude of attack.
"So far hitherto," he says, "as I had mingled with mankind, I was
notable, if for anything, for a certain stillness of manner, which, as
my friends often rebukingly declared, did but ill express the keen ardor
of my feelings. I, in truth, regarded men with an excess both of love
and of fear. The mystery of a Person, indeed, is ever divine to him that
has a sense for the Godlike. Often, notwithstanding, was I blamed,
and by half-strangers hated, for my so-called Hardness (_Harte_), my
Indifferentism towards men; and the seemingly ironic tone I had adopted,
as my favorite dialect in conversation. Alas, the panoply of Sarcasm was
but as a buckram case, wherein I had striven to envelop myself; that so
my own poor Person might live safe there, and in all friendliness, being
no longer exasperated by wounds. Sarcasm I now see to be, in general,
the language of the Devil; for which reason I have long since as good
as renounced it. But how many individuals did I, in those days, provoke
into some degree of hostility thereby! An ironic man, with his sly
stillness, and ambuscading ways, more especially an ironic young man,
from whom it is least expected, may be viewed as a pest to society. Have
we not seen persons of weight and name coming forward, with gentlest
indifference, to tread such a one out of sight, as an insignificancy and
worm, start ceiling-high (_balkenhock_), and thence fall shattered and
supine, to be borne home on shutters, not without indignation, when he
proved electric and a torpedo!"

Alas, how can a man with this devilishness of temper make way for
himself in Life; where the first problem, as Teufelsdrockh too
admits, is "to unite yourself with some one, and with somewhat (_sich
anzuschliessen_)"? Division, not union, is written on most part of his
procedure. Let us add too that, in no great length of time, the only
important connection he had ever succeeded in forming, his connection
with the Zahdarm Family, seems to have been paralyzed, for all practical
uses, by the death of the "not uncholeric" old Count. This fact stands
recorded, quite incidentally, in a certain _Discourse on Epitaphs_,
huddled into the present Bag, among so much else; of which Essay the
learning and curious penetration are more to be approved of than the
spirit. His grand principle is, that lapidary inscriptions, of what sort
soever, should be Historical rather than Lyrical. "By request of that
worthy Nobleman's survivors," says he, "I undertook to compose his
Epitaph; and not unmindful of my own rules, produced the following;
which however, for an alleged defect of Latinity, a defect never yet
fully visible to myself, still remains unengraven;"--wherein, we may
predict, there is more than the Latinity that will surprise an English
reader:

     HIC JACET
     PHILIPPUS ZAEHDARM, COGNOMINE MAGNUS,
     ZAEHDARMI COMES,
     EX IMPERII CONCILIO,
     VELLERIS AUREI, PERISCELIDIS, NECNON VULTURIS NIGRI
     EQUES.
     QUI DUM SUB LUNA AGEBAT,
     QUINQUIES MILLE PERDICES
     PLUMBO CONFECIT:
     VARII CIBI
     CENTUMPONDIA MILLIES CENTENA MILLIA,
     PER SE, PERQUE SERVOS QUADRUPEDES BIPEDESVE,
     HAUD SINE TUMULT DEVOLVENS,
     IN STERCUS
     PALAM CONVERTIT.
     NUNC A LABORE REQUIESCENTEM
     OPERA SEQUUNTUR.
     SI MONUMENTUM QUAERIS,
     FIMETUM ADSPICE.
     PRIMUM IN ORBE DEJECIT [_sub dato_]; POSTREMUM [_sub dato_].



CHAPTER V. ROMANCE.

"For long years," writes Teufelsdrockh, "had the poor Hebrew, in this
Egypt of an Auscultatorship, painfully toiled, baking bricks without
stubble, before ever the question once struck him with entire force:
For what?--_Beym Himmel_! For Food and Warmth! And are Food and Warmth
nowhere else, in the whole wide Universe, discoverable?--Come of it what
might, I resolved to try."

Thus then are we to see him in a new independent capacity, though
perhaps far from an improved one. Teufelsdrockh is now a man without
Profession. Quitting the common Fleet of herring-busses and whalers,
where indeed his leeward, laggard condition was painful enough, he
desperately steers off, on a course of his own, by sextant and compass
of his own. Unhappy Teufelsdrockh! Though neither Fleet, nor Traffic,
nor Commodores pleased thee, still was it not _a Fleet_, sailing in
prescribed track, for fixed objects; above all, in combination, wherein,
by mutual guidance, by all manner of loans and borrowings, each could
manifoldly aid the other? How wilt thou sail in unknown seas; and for
thyself find that shorter Northwest Passage to thy fair Spice-country
of a Nowhere?--A solitary rover, on such a voyage, with such nautical
tactics, will meet with adventures. Nay, as we forthwith discover, a
certain Calypso-Island detains him at the very outset; and as it were
falsifies and oversets his whole reckoning.

"If in youth," writes he once, "the Universe is majestically unveiling,
and everywhere Heaven revealing itself on Earth, nowhere to the Young
Man does this Heaven on Earth so immediately reveal itself as in the
Young Maiden. Strangely enough, in this strange life of ours, it
has been so appointed. On the whole, as I have often said, a
Person (_Personlichkeit_) is ever holy to us; a certain orthodox
Anthropomorphism connects my _Me_ with all _Thees_ in bonds of Love: but
it is in this approximation of the Like and Unlike, that such heavenly
attraction, as between Negative and Positive, first burns out into a
flame. Is the pitifullest mortal Person, think you, indifferent to us?
Is it not rather our heartfelt wish to be made one with him; to unite
him to us, by gratitude, by admiration, even by fear; or failing all
these, unite ourselves to him? But how much more, in this case of the
Like-Unlike! Here is conceded us the higher mystic possibility of such
a union, the highest in our Earth; thus, in the conducting medium of
Fantasy, flames forth that fire-development of the universal Spiritual
Electricity, which, as unfolded between man and woman, we first
emphatically denominate LOVE.

"In every well-conditioned stripling, as I conjecture, there already
blooms a certain prospective Paradise, cheered by some fairest Eve; nor,
in the stately vistas, and flowerage and foliage of that Garden, is a
Tree of Knowledge, beautiful and awful in the midst thereof, wanting.
Perhaps too the whole is but the lovelier, if Cherubim and a Flaming
Sword divide it from all footsteps of men; and grant him, the
imaginative stripling, only the view, not the entrance. Happy season of
virtuous youth, when shame is still an impassable celestial barrier; and
the sacred air-cities of Hope have not shrunk into the mean clay-hamlets
of Reality; and man, by his nature, is yet infinite and free!

"As for our young Forlorn," continues Teufelsdrockh evidently meaning
himself, "in his secluded way of life, and with his glowing Fantasy, the
more fiery that it burnt under cover, as in a reverberating furnace, his
feeling towards the Queens of this Earth was, and indeed is, altogether
unspeakable. A visible Divinity dwelt in them; to our young Friend all
women were holy, were heavenly. As yet he but saw them flitting past, in
their many-colored angel-plumage; or hovering mute and inaccessible on
the outskirts of _AEsthetic Tea_: all of air they were, all Soul and
Form; so lovely, like mysterious priestesses, in whose hand was the
invisible Jacob's-ladder, whereby man might mount into very Heaven. That
he, our poor Friend, should ever win for himself one of these Gracefuls
(_Holden_)--_Ach Gott_! how could he hope it; should he not have died
under it? There was a certain delirious vertigo in the thought.

"Thus was the young man, if all-sceptical of Demons and Angels such as
the vulgar had once believed in, nevertheless not unvisited by hosts of
true Sky-born, who visibly and audibly hovered round him wheresoever he
went; and they had that religious worship in his thought, though as yet
it was by their mere earthly and trivial name that he named them. But
now, if on a soul so circumstanced, some actual Air-maiden, incorporated
into tangibility and reality, should cast any electric glance of kind
eyes, saying thereby, 'Thou too mayest love and be loved;' and so kindle
him,--good Heaven, what a volcanic, earthquake-bringing, all-consuming
fire were probably kindled!"

Such a fire, it afterwards appears, did actually burst forth, with
explosions more or less Vesuvian, in the inner man of Herr Diogenes; as
indeed how could it fail? A nature, which, in his own figurative style,
we might say, had now not a little carbonized tinder, of Irritability;
with so much nitre of latent Passion, and sulphurous Humor enough; the
whole lying in such hot neighborhood, close by "a reverberating furnace
of Fantasy:" have we not here the components of driest Gunpowder, ready,
on occasion of the smallest spark, to blaze up? Neither, in this our
Life-element, are sparks anywhere wanting. Without doubt, some Angel,
whereof so many hovered round, would one day, leaving "the outskirts
of _AEsthetic Tea_," flit higher; and, by electric Promethean glance,
kindle no despicable firework. Happy, if it indeed proved a Firework,
and flamed off rocket-wise, in successive beautiful bursts of splendor,
each growing naturally from the other, through the several stages of a
happy Youthful Love; till the whole were safely burnt out; and the young
soul relieved with little damage! Happy, if it did not rather prove a
Conflagration and mad Explosion; painfully lacerating the heart itself;
nay perhaps bursting the heart in pieces (which were Death); or at best,
bursting the thin walls of your "reverberating furnace," so that it rage
thenceforth all unchecked among the contiguous combustibles (which
were Madness): till of the so fair and manifold internal world of our
Diogenes, there remained Nothing, or only the "crater of an extinct
volcano"!

From multifarious Documents in this Bag _Capricornus_, and in the
adjacent ones on both sides thereof, it becomes manifest that our
philosopher, as stoical and cynical as he now looks, was heartily and
even frantically in Love: here therefore may our old doubts whether his
heart were of stone or of flesh give way. He loved once; not wisely
but too well. And once only: for as your Congreve needs a new case or
wrappage for every new rocket, so each human heart can properly exhibit
but one Love, if even one; the "First Love which is infinite" can be
followed by no second like unto it. In more recent years, accordingly,
the Editor of these Sheets was led to regard Teufelsdrockh as a man
not only who would never wed, but who would never even flirt; whom the
grand-climacteric itself, and _St. Martin's Summer_ of incipient Dotage,
would crown with no new myrtle-garland. To the Professor, women are
henceforth Pieces of Art; of Celestial Art, indeed, which celestial
pieces he glories to survey in galleries, but has lost thought of
purchasing.

Psychological readers are not without curiosity to see how Teufelsdrockh
in this for him unexampled predicament, demeans himself; with what
specialties of successive configuration, splendor and color, his
Firework blazes off. Small, as usual, is the satisfaction that such can
meet with here. From amid these confused masses of Eulogy and Elegy,
with their mad Petrarchan and Werterean ware lying madly scattered among
all sorts of quite extraneous matter, not so much as the fair one's name
can be deciphered. For, without doubt, the title _Blumine_, whereby she
is here designated, and which means simply Goddess of Flowers, must be
fictitious. Was her real name Flora, then? But what was her surname,
or had she none? Of what station in Life was she; of what parentage,
fortune, aspect? Specially, by what Pre-established Harmony of
occurrences did the Lover and the Loved meet one another in so wide a
world; how did they behave in such meeting? To all which questions, not
unessential in a Biographic work, mere Conjecture must for most part
return answer. "It was appointed," says our Philosopher, "that the high
celestial orbit of Blumine should intersect the low sublunary one of our
Forlorn; that he, looking in her empyrean eyes, should fancy the upper
Sphere of Light was come down into this nether sphere of Shadows; and
finding himself mistaken, make noise enough."

We seem to gather that she was young, hazel-eyed, beautiful, and some
one's Cousin; high-born, and of high spirit; but unhappily dependent and
insolvent; living, perhaps, on the not too gracious bounty of moneyed
relatives. But how came "the Wanderer" into her circle? Was it by the
humid vehicle of _AEsthetic Tea_, or by the arid one of mere Business?
Was it on the hand of Herr Towgood; or of the Gnadige Frau, who, as
an ornamental Artist, might sometimes like to promote flirtation,
especially for young cynical Nondescripts? To all appearance, it was
chiefly by Accident, and the grace of Nature.

"Thou fair Waldschloss," writes our Autobiographer, "what stranger ever
saw thee, were it even an absolved Auscultator, officially bearing in
his pocket the last _Relatio ex Actis_ he would ever write, but must
have paused to wonder! Noble Mansion! There stoodest thou, in deep
Mountain Amphitheatre, on umbrageous lawns, in thy serene solitude;
stately, massive, all of granite; glittering in the western sunbeams,
like a palace of El Dorado, overlaid with precious metal. Beautiful rose
up, in wavy curvature, the slope of thy guardian Hills; of the greenest
was their sward, embossed with its dark-brown frets of crag, or spotted
by some spreading solitary Tree and its shadow. To the unconscious
Wayfarer thou wert also as an Ammon's Temple, in the Libyan Waste;
where, for joy and woe, the tablet of his Destiny lay written. Well
might he pause and gaze; in that glance of his were prophecy and
nameless forebodings."

But now let us conjecture that the so presentient Auscultator has handed
in his _Relatio ex Actis_; been invited to a glass of Rhine-wine; and
so, instead of returning dispirited and athirst to his dusty Town-home,
is ushered into the Garden-house, where sit the choicest party of dames
and cavaliers: if not engaged in AEsthetic Tea, yet in trustful evening
conversation, and perhaps Musical Coffee, for we hear of "harps and
pure voices making the stillness live." Scarcely, it would seem, is the
Garden-house inferior in respectability to the noble Mansion itself.
"Embowered amid rich foliage, rose-clusters, and the hues and odors
of thousand flowers, here sat that brave company; in front, from the
wide-opened doors, fair outlook over blossom and bush, over grove and
velvet green, stretching, undulating onwards to the remote Mountain
peaks: so bright, so mild, and everywhere the melody of birds and happy
creatures: it was all as if man had stolen a shelter from the SUIT
in the bosom-vesture of Summer herself. How came it that the Wanderer
advanced thither with such forecasting heart (_ahndungsvoll_), by the
side of his gay host? Did he feel that to these soft influences his hard
bosom ought to be shut; that here, once more, Fate had it in view to try
him; to mock him, and see whether there were Humor in him?

"Next moment he finds himself presented to the party; and especially by
name to--Blumine! Peculiar among all dames and damosels glanced Blumine,
there in her modesty, like a star among earthly lights. Noblest maiden!
whom he bent to, in body and in soul; yet scarcely dared look at, for
the presence filled him with painful yet sweetest embarrassment.

"Blumine's was a name well known to him; far and wide was the fair one
heard of, for her gifts, her graces, her caprices: from all which vague
colorings of Rumor, from the censures no less than from the praises, had
our friend painted for himself a certain imperious Queen of Hearts, and
blooming warm Earth-angel, much more enchanting than your mere white
Heaven-angels of women, in whose placid veins circulates too little
naphtha-fire. Herself also he had seen in public places; that light yet
so stately form; those dark tresses, shading a face where smiles and
sunlight played over earnest deeps: but all this he had seen only as a
magic vision, for him inaccessible, almost without reality. Her sphere
was too far from his; how should she ever think of him; O Heaven! how
should they so much as once meet together? And now that Rose-goddess
sits in the same circle with him; the light of _her_ eyes has smiled on
him; if he speak, she will hear it! Nay, who knows, since the heavenly
Sun looks into lowest valleys, but Blumine herself might have aforetime
noted the so unnotable; perhaps, from his very gainsayers, as he had
from hers, gathered wonder, gathered favor for him? Was the attraction,
the agitation mutual, then; pole and pole trembling towards contact,
when once brought into neighborhood? Say rather, heart swelling in
presence of the Queen of Hearts; like the Sea swelling when once
near its Moon! With the Wanderer it was even so: as in heavenward
gravitation, suddenly as at the touch of a Seraph's wand, his whole soul
is roused from its deepest recesses; and all that was painful and that
was blissful there, dim images, vague feelings of a whole Past and a
whole Future, are heaving in unquiet eddies within him.

"Often, in far less agitating scenes, had our still Friend shrunk
forcibly together; and shrouded up his tremors and flutterings, of
what sort soever, in a safe cover of Silence, and perhaps of seeming
Stolidity. How was it, then, that here, when trembling to the core of
his heart, he did not sink into swoons, but rose into strength, into
fearlessness and clearness? It was his guiding Genius (_Damon_) that
inspired him; he must go forth and meet his Destiny. Show thyself now,
whispered it, or be forever hid. Thus sometimes it is even when your
anxiety becomes transcendental, that the soul first feels herself able
to transcend it; that she rises above it, in fiery victory; and borne on
new-found wings of victory, moves so calmly, even because so rapidly,
so irresistibly. Always must the Wanderer remember, with a certain
satisfaction and surprise, how in this case he sat not silent but struck
adroitly into the stream of conversation; which thenceforth, to speak
with an apparent not a real vanity, he may say that he continued to
lead. Surely, in those hours, a certain inspiration was imparted him,
such inspiration as is still possible in our late era. The self-secluded
unfolds himself in noble thoughts, in free, glowing words; his soul is
as one sea of light, the peculiar home of Truth and Intellect; wherein
also Fantasy bodies forth form after form, radiant with all prismatic
hues."

It appears, in this otherwise so happy meeting, there talked one
"Philisitine;" who even now, to the general weariness, was dominantly
pouring forth Philistinism (_Philistriositaten_.); little witting what
hero was here entering to demolish him! We omit the series of Socratic,
or rather Diogenic utterances, not unhappy in their way, whereby the
monster, "persuaded into silence," seems soon after to have withdrawn
for the night. "Of which dialectic marauder," writes our hero, "the
discomfiture was visibly felt as a benefit by most: but what were all
applauses to the glad smile, threatening every moment to become a laugh,
wherewith Blumine herself repaid the victor? He ventured to address her
she answered with attention: nay what if there were a slight tremor
in that silver voice; what if the red glow of evening were hiding a
transient blush!

"The conversation took a higher tone, one fine thought called forth
another: it was one of those rare seasons, when the soul expands with
full freedom, and man feels himself brought near to man. Gayly in light,
graceful abandonment, the friendly talk played round that circle; for
the burden was rolled from every heart; the barriers of Ceremony, which
are indeed the laws of polite living, had melted as into vapor; and the
poor claims of _Me_ and _Thee_, no longer parted by rigid fences,
now flowed softly into one another; and Life lay all harmonious,
many-tinted, like some fair royal champaign, the sovereign and owner
of which were Love only. Such music springs from kind hearts, in a kind
environment of place and time. And yet as the light grew more aerial
on the mountaintops, and the shadows fell longer over the valley, some
faint tone of sadness may have breathed through the heart; and, in
whispers more or less audible, reminded every one that as this bright
day was drawing towards its close, so likewise must the Day of Man's
Existence decline into dust and darkness; and with all its sick
toilings, and joyful and mournful noises, sink in the still Eternity.

"To our Friend the hours seemed moments; holy was he and happy: the
words from those sweetest lips came over him like dew on thirsty grass;
all better feelings in his soul seemed to whisper, It is good for us
to be here. At parting, the Blumine's hand was in his: in the balmy
twilight, with the kind stars above them, he spoke something of meeting
again, which was not contradicted; he pressed gently those small
soft fingers, and it seemed as if they were not hastily, not angrily
withdrawn."

Poor Teufelsdrockh! it is clear to demonstration thou art smit: the
Queen of Hearts would see a "man of genius" also sigh for her; and
there, by art-magic, in that preternatural hour, has she bound
and spell-bound thee. "Love is not altogether a Delirium," says he
elsewhere; "yet has it many points in common therewith. I call it rather
a discerning of the Infinite in the Finite, of the Idea made Real;
which discerning again may be either true or false, either seraphic or
demoniac, Inspiration or Insanity. But in the former case too, as in
common Madness, it is Fantasy that superadds itself to sight; on the so
petty domain of the Actual plants its Archimedes-lever, whereby to
move at will the infinite Spiritual. Fantasy I might call the true
Heaven-gate and Hell-gate of man: his sensuous life is but the small
temporary stage (_Zeitbuhne_), whereon thick-streaming influences
from both these far yet near regions meet visibly, and act tragedy and
melodrama. Sense can support herself handsomely, in most countries, for
some eighteenpence a day; but for Fantasy planets and solar-systems will
not suffice. Witness your Pyrrhus conquering the world, yet drinking no
better red wine than he had before." Alas! witness also your Diogenes,
flame-clad, scaling the upper Heaven, and verging towards Insanity, for
prize of a "high-souled Brunette," as if the Earth held but one and not
several of these!

He says that, in Town, they met again: "day after day, like his heart's
sun, the blooming Blumine shone on him. Ah! a little while ago, and he
was yet in all darkness: him what Graceful (_Holde_) would ever love?
Disbelieving all things, the poor youth had never learned to believe
in himself. Withdrawn, in proud timidity, within his own fastnesses;
solitary from men, yet baited by night-spectres enough, he saw himself,
with a sad indignation, constrained to renounce the fairest hopes of
existence. And now, O now! 'She looks on thee,' cried he: 'she the
fairest, noblest; do not her dark eyes tell thee, thou art not despised?
The Heaven's-Messenger! All Heaven's blessings be hers!' Thus did
soft melodies flow through his heart; tones of an infinite gratitude;
sweetest intimations that he also was a man, that for him also
unutterable joys had been provided.

"In free speech, earnest or gay, amid lambent glances, laughter, tears,
and often with the inarticulate mystic speech of Music: such was the
element they now lived in; in such a many-tinted, radiant Aurora, and by
this fairest of Orient Light-bringers must our Friend be blandished, and
the new Apocalypse of Nature enrolled to him. Fairest Blumine! And, even
as a Star, all Fire and humid Softness, a very Light-ray incarnate! Was
there so much as a fault, a 'caprice,' he could have dispensed with? Was
she not to him in very deed a Morning-star; did not her presence bring
with it airs from Heaven? As from AEolian Harps in the breath of
dawn, as from the Memnon's Statue struck by the rosy finger of Aurora,
unearthly music was around him, and lapped him into untried balmy Rest.
Pale Doubt fled away to the distance; Life bloomed up with happiness and
hope. The past, then, was all a haggard dream; he had been in the Garden
of Eden, then, and could not discern it! But lo now! the black walls
of his prison melt away; the captive is alive, is free. If he loved his
Disenchantress? _Ach Gott_! His whole heart and soul and life were hers,
but never had he named it Love: existence was all a Feeling, not yet
shaped into a Thought."

Nevertheless, into a Thought, nay into an Action, it must be shaped; for
neither Disenchanter nor Disenchantress, mere "Children of Time," can
abide by Feeling alone. The Professor knows not, to this day, "how in
her soft, fervid bosom the Lovely found determination, even on hest
of Necessity, to cut asunder these so blissful bonds." He even appears
surprised at the "Duenna Cousin," whoever she may have been, "in whose
meagre hunger-bitten philosophy, the religion of young hearts was, from
the first, faintly approved of." We, even at such distance, can explain
it without necromancy. Let the Philosopher answer this one question:
What figure, at that period, was a Mrs. Teufelsdrockh likely to make in
polished society? Could she have driven so much as a brass-bound Gig,
or even a simple iron-spring one? Thou foolish "absolved Auscultator,"
before whom lies no prospect of capital, will any yet known "religion
of young hearts" keep the human kitchen warm? Pshaw! thy divine Blumine,
when she "resigned herself to wed some richer," shows more philosophy,
though but "a woman of genius," than thou, a pretended man.

Our readers have witnessed the origin of this Love-mania, and with what
royal splendor it waxes, and rises. Let no one ask us to unfold the
glories of its dominant state; much less the horrors of its almost
instantaneous dissolution. How from such inorganic masses, henceforth
madder than ever, as lie in these Bags, can even fragments of a living
delineation be organized? Besides, of what profit were it? We view, with
a lively pleasure, the gay silk Montgolfier start from the ground, and
shoot upwards, cleaving the liquid deeps, till it dwindle to a luminous
star: but what is there to look longer on, when once, by natural
elasticity, or accident of fire, it has exploded? A hapless
air-navigator, plunging, amid torn parachutes, sand-bags, and confused
wreck, fast enough into the jaws of the Devil! Suffice it to know
that Teufelsdrockh rose into the highest regions of the Empyrean, by a
natural parabolic track, and returned thence in a quick perpendicular
one. For the rest, let any feeling reader, who has been unhappy enough
to do the like, paint it out for himself: considering only that if he,
for his perhaps comparatively insignificant mistress, underwent such
agonies and frenzies, what must Teufelsdrockh's have been, with a
fire-heart, and for a nonpareil Blumine! We glance merely at the final
scene:--

"One morning, he found his Morning-star all dimmed and dusky-red; the
fair creature was silent, absent, she seemed to have been weeping. Alas,
no longer a Morning-star, but a troublous skyey Portent, announcing that
the Doomsday had dawned! She said, in a tremulous voice, They were to
meet no more." The thunder-struck Air-sailor is not wanting to
himself in this dread hour: but what avails it? We omit the passionate
expostulations, entreaties, indignations, since all was vain, and not
even an explanation was conceded him; and hasten to the catastrophe.
"'Farewell, then, Madam!' said he, not without sternness, for his stung
pride helped him. She put her hand in his, she looked in his face, tears
started to her eyes; in wild audacity he clasped her to his bosom;
their lips were joined, their two souls, like two dew-drops, rushed into
one,--for the first time and for the last!" Thus was Teufelsdrockh made
immortal by a kiss. And then? Why, then--"thick curtains of Night rushed
over his soul, as rose the immeasurable Crash of Doom; and through the
ruins as of a shivered Universe was he falling, falling, towards the
Abyss."


CHAPTER VI. SORROWS OF TEUFELSDROCKH.

We have long felt that, with a man like our Professor, matters must
often be expected to take a course of their own; that in so multiplex,
intricate a nature, there might be channels, both for admitting and
emitting, such as the Psychologist had seldom noted; in short, that on
no grand occasion and convulsion, neither in the joy-storm nor in the
woe-storm could you predict his demeanor.

To our less philosophical readers, for example, it is now clear that the
so passionate Teufelsdrockh precipitated through "a shivered Universe"
in this extraordinary way, has only one of three things which he can
next do: Establish himself in Bedlam; begin writing Satanic Poetry; or
blow out his brains. In the progress towards any of which consummations,
do not such readers anticipate extravagance enough; breast-beating,
brow-beating (against walls), lion-bellowings of blasphemy and the like,
stampings, smitings, breakages of furniture, if not arson itself?

Nowise so does Teufelsdrockh deport him. He quietly lifts his
_Pilgerstab_ (Pilgrim-staff), "old business being soon wound up;" and
begins a perambulation and circumambulation of the terraqueous Globe!
Curious it is, indeed, how with such vivacity of conception, such
intensity of feeling, above all, with these unconscionable habits of
Exaggeration in speech, he combines that wonderful stillness of his,
that stoicism in external procedure. Thus, if his sudden bereavement, in
this matter of the Flower-goddess, is talked of as a real Doomsday and
Dissolution of Nature, in which light doubtless it partly appeared
to himself, his own nature is nowise dissolved thereby; but rather
is compressed closer. For once, as we might say, a Blumine by magic
appliances has unlocked that shut heart of his, and its hidden things
rush out tumultuous, boundless, like genii enfranchised from their
glass vial: but no sooner are your magic appliances withdrawn, than the
strange casket of a heart springs to again; and perhaps there is now no
key extant that will open it; for a Teufelsdrockh as we remarked,
will not love a second time. Singular Diogenes! No sooner has that
heart-rending occurrence fairly taken place, than he affects to regard
it as a thing natural, of which there is nothing more to be said. "One
highest hope, seemingly legible in the eyes of an Angel, had recalled
him as out of Death-shadows into celestial Life: but a gleam of Tophet
passed over the face of his Angel; he was rapt away in whirlwinds, and
heard the laughter of Demons. It was a Calenture," adds he, "whereby
the Youth saw green Paradise-groves in the waste Ocean-waters: a lying
vision, yet not wholly a lie, for _he_ saw it." But what things soever
passed in him, when he ceased to see it; what ragings and despairings
soever Teufelsdrockh's soul was the scene of, he has the goodness to
conceal under a quite opaque cover of Silence. We know it well; the
first mad paroxysm past, our brave Gneschen collected his dismembered
philosophies, and buttoned himself together; he was meek, silent, or
spoke of the weather and the Journals: only by a transient knitting of
those shaggy brows, by some deep flash of those eyes, glancing one knew
not whether with tear-dew or with fierce fire,--might you have guessed
what a Gehenna was within: that a whole Satanic School were spouting,
though inaudibly, there. To consume your own choler, as some chimneys
consume their own smoke; to keep a whole Satanic School spouting, if it
must spout, inaudibly, is a negative yet no slight virtue, nor one of
the commonest in these times.

Nevertheless, we will not take upon us to say, that in the strange
measure he fell upon, there was not a touch of latent Insanity; whereof
indeed the actual condition of these Documents in _Capricornus_ and
_Aquarius is_ no bad emblem. His so unlimited Wanderings, toilsome
enough, are without assigned or perhaps assignable aim; internal Unrest
seems his sole guidance; he wanders, wanders, as if that curse of
the Prophet had fallen on him, and he were "made like unto a wheel."
Doubtless, too, the chaotic nature of these Paper-bags aggravates our
obscurity. Quite without note of preparation, for example, we come upon
the following slip: "A peculiar feeling it is that will rise in the
Traveller, when turning some hill-range in his desert road, he descries
lying far below, embosomed among its groves and green natural bulwarks,
and all diminished to a toy-box, the fair Town, where so many souls, as
it were seen and yet unseen, are driving their multifarious traffic. Its
white steeple is then truly a starward-pointing finger; the canopy
of blue smoke seems like a sort of Lifebreath: for always, of its own
unity, the soul gives unity to whatsoever it looks on with love; thus
does the little Dwelling-place of men, in itself a congeries of houses
and huts, become for us an individual, almost a person. But what
thousand other thoughts unite thereto, if the place has to ourselves
been the arena of joyous or mournful experiences; if perhaps the cradle
we were rocked in still stands there, if our Loving ones still dwell
there, if our Buried ones there slumber!" Does Teufelsdrockh as the
wounded eagle is said to make for its own eyrie, and indeed military
deserters, and all hunted outcast creatures, turn as if by instinct in
the direction of their birthland,--fly first, in this extremity, towards
his native Entepfuhl; but reflecting that there no help awaits him, take
only one wistful look from the distance, and then wend elsewhither?

Little happier seems to be his next flight: into the wilds of Nature; as
if in her mother-bosom he would seek healing. So at least we incline
to interpret the following Notice, separated from the former by some
considerable space, wherein, however, is nothing noteworthy:--

"Mountains were not new to him; but rarely are Mountains seen in such
combined majesty and grace as here. The rocks are of that sort called
Primitive by the mineralogists, which always arrange themselves in
masses of a rugged, gigantic character; which ruggedness, however,
is here tempered by a singular airiness of form, and softness of
environment: in a climate favorable to vegetation, the gray cliff,
itself covered with lichens, shoots up through a garment of foliage
or verdure; and white, bright cottages, tree-shaded, cluster round
the everlasting granite. In fine vicissitude, Beauty alternates with
Grandeur: you ride through stony hollows, along strait passes, traversed
by torrents, overhung by high walls of rock; now winding amid broken
shaggy chasms, and huge fragments; now suddenly emerging into some
emerald valley, where the streamlet collects itself into a Lake, and
man has again found a fair dwelling, and it seems as if Peace had
established herself in the bosom of Strength.

"To Peace, however, in this vortex of existence, can the Son of Time
not pretend: still less if some Spectre haunt him from the Past; and the
Future is wholly a Stygian Darkness, spectre-bearing. Reasonably might
the Wanderer exclaim to himself: Are not the gates of this world's
happiness inexorably shut against thee; hast thou a hope that is not
mad? Nevertheless, one may still murmur audibly, or in the original
Greek if that suit thee better: 'Whoso can look on Death will start at
no shadows.'

"From such meditations is the Wanderer's attention called outwards; for
now the Valley closes in abruptly, intersected by a huge mountain
mass, the stony water-worn ascent of which is not to be accomplished on
horseback. Arrived aloft, he finds himself again lifted into the evening
sunset light; and cannot but pause, and gaze round him, some moments
there. An upland irregular expanse of wold, where valleys in complex
branchings are suddenly or slowly arranging their descent towards every
quarter of the sky. The mountain-ranges are beneath your feet, and
folded together: only the loftier summits look down here and there as on
a second plain; lakes also lie clear and earnest in their solitude. No
trace of man now visible; unless indeed it were he who fashioned
that little visible link of Highway, here, as would seem, scaling the
inaccessible, to unite Province with Province. But sunwards, lo you! how
it towers sheer up, a world of Mountains, the diadem and centre of the
mountain region! A hundred and a hundred savage peaks, in the last light
of Day; all glowing, of gold and amethyst, like giant spirits of the
wilderness; there in their silence, in their solitude, even as on the
night when Noah's Deluge first dried! Beautiful, nay solemn, was the
sudden aspect to our Wanderer. He gazed over those stupendous masses
with wonder, almost with longing desire; never till this hour had he
known Nature, that she was One, that she was his Mother and divine. And
as the ruddy glow was fading into clearness in the sky, and the Sun had
now departed, a murmur of Eternity and Immensity, of Death and of Life,
stole through his soul; and he felt as if Death and Life were one, as if
the Earth were not dead, as if the Spirit of the Earth had its throne in
that splendor, and his own spirit were therewith holding communion.

"The spell was broken by a sound of carriage-wheels. Emerging from the
hidden Northward, to sink soon into the hidden Southward, came a gay
Barouche-and-four: it was open; servants and postilions wore wedding
favors: that happy pair, then, had found each other, it was their
marriage evening! Few moments brought them near: _Du Himmel_! It was
Herr Towgood and--Blumine! With slight unrecognizing salutation they
passed me; plunged down amid the neighboring thickets, onwards, to
Heaven, and to England; and I, in my friend Richter's words, _I remained
alone, behind them, with the Night_."

Were it not cruel in these circumstances, here might be the place to
insert an observation, gleaned long ago from the great _Clothes-Volume_,
where it stands with quite other intent: "Some time before Small-pox
was extirpated," says the Professor, "there came a new malady of
the spiritual sort on Europe: I mean the epidemic, now endemical, of
View-hunting. Poets of old date, being privileged with Senses, had also
enjoyed external Nature; but chiefly as we enjoy the crystal cup which
holds good or bad liquor for us; that is to say, in silence, or with
slight incidental commentary: never, as I compute, till after the
_Sorrows of Werter_, was there man found who would say: Come let us make
a Description! Having drunk the liquor, come let us eat the glass! Of
which endemic the Jenner is unhappily still to seek." Too true!

We reckon it more important to remark that the Professor's Wanderings,
so far as his stoical and cynical envelopment admits us to clear
insight, here first take their permanent character, fatuous or not. That
Basilisk-glance of the Barouche-and-four seems to have withered up
what little remnant of a purpose may have still lurked in him: Life has
become wholly a dark labyrinth; wherein, through long years, our Friend,
flying from spectres, has to stumble about at random, and naturally with
more haste than progress.

Foolish were it in us to attempt following him, even from afar, in this
extraordinary world-pilgrimage of his; the simplest record of which,
were clear record possible, would fill volumes. Hopeless is the
obscurity, unspeakable the confusion. He glides from country to country,
from condition to condition; vanishing and reappearing, no man can
calculate how or where. Through all quarters of the world he wanders,
and apparently through all circles of society. If in any scene, perhaps
difficult to fix geographically, he settles for a time, and forms
connections, be sure he will snap them abruptly asunder. Let him sink
out of sight as Private Scholar (_Privatsirender_), living by the grace
of God in some European capital, you may next find him as Hadjee in the
neighborhood of Mecca. It is an inexplicable Phantasmagoria, capricious,
quick-changing; as if our Traveller, instead of limbs and highways,
had transported himself by some wishing-carpet, or Fortunatus' Hat. The
whole, too, imparted emblematically, in dim multifarious tokens (as that
collection of Street-Advertisements); with only some touch of direct
historical notice sparingly interspersed: little light-islets in the
world of haze! So that, from this point, the Professor is more of an
enigma than ever. In figurative language, we might say he becomes, not
indeed a spirit, yet spiritualized, vaporized. Fact unparalleled in
Biography: The river of his History, which we have traced from its
tiniest fountains, and hoped to see flow onward, with increasing
current, into the ocean, here dashes itself over that terrific Lover's
Leap; and, as a mad-foaming cataract, flies wholly into tumultuous
clouds of spray! Low down it indeed collects again into pools and
plashes; yet only at a great distance, and with difficulty, if at all,
into a general stream. To cast a glance into certain of those pools and
plashes, and trace whither they run, must, for a chapter or two, form
the limit of our endeavor.

For which end doubtless those direct historical Notices, where they can
be met with, are the best. Nevertheless, of this sort too there occurs
much, which, with our present light, it were questionable to emit.
Teufelsdrockh vibrating everywhere between the highest and the lowest
levels, comes into contact with public History itself. For example,
those conversations and relations with illustrious Persons, as Sultan
Mahmoud, the Emperor Napoleon, and others, are they not as yet rather
of a diplomatic character than of a biographic? The Editor, appreciating
the sacredness of crowned heads, nay perhaps suspecting the possible
trickeries of a Clothes-Philosopher, will eschew this province for the
present; a new time may bring new insight and a different duty.

If we ask now, not indeed with what ulterior Purpose, for there was
none, yet with what immediate outlooks; at all events, in what mood of
mind, the Professor undertook and prosecuted this world-pilgrimage,--the
answer is more distinct than favorable. "A nameless Unrest," says he,
"urged me forward; to which the outward motion was some momentary lying
solace. Whither should I go? My Loadstars were blotted out; in that
canopy of grim fire shone no star. Yet forward must I; the ground burnt
under me; there was no rest for the sole of my foot. I was alone, alone!
Ever too the strong inward longing shaped Phantasms for itself: towards
these, one after the other, must I fruitlessly wander. A feeling I
had, that for my fever-thirst there was and must be somewhere a healing
Fountain. To many fondly imagined Fountains, the Saints' Wells of these
days, did I pilgrim; to great Men, to great Cities, to great Events: but
found there no healing. In strange countries, as in the well-known; in
savage deserts, as in the press of corrupt civilization, it was ever
the same: how could your Wanderer escape from--_his own Shadow_?
Nevertheless still Forward! I felt as if in great haste; to do I saw not
what. From the depths of my own heart, it called to me, Forwards! The
winds and the streams, and all Nature sounded to me, Forwards! _Ach
Gott_, I was even, once for all, a Son of Time."

From which is it not clear that the internal Satanic School was still
active enough? He says elsewhere: "The _Enchiridion of Epictetus_ I had
ever with me, often as my sole rational companion; and regret to
mention that the nourishment it yielded was trifling." Thou foolish
Teufelsdrockh How could it else? Hadst thou not Greek enough to
understand thus much: _The end of Man is an Action, and not a Thought_,
though it were the noblest?

"How I lived?" writes he once: "Friend, hast thou considered the 'rugged
all-nourishing Earth,' as Sophocles well names her; how she feeds
the sparrow on the house-top, much more her darling, man? While thou
stirrest and livest, thou hast a probability of victual. My breakfast of
tea has been cooked by a Tartar woman, with water of the Amur, who wiped
her earthen kettle with a horse-tail. I have roasted wild eggs in
the sand of Sahara; I have awakened in Paris _Estrapades_ and Vienna
_Malzleins_, with no prospect of breakfast beyond elemental liquid. That
I had my Living to seek saved me from Dying,--by suicide. In our
busy Europe, is there not an everlasting demand for Intellect, in the
chemical, mechanical, political, religious, educational, commercial
departments? In Pagan countries, cannot one write Fetishes? Living!
Little knowest thou what alchemy is in an inventive Soul; how, as with
its little finger, it can create provision enough for the body (of a
Philosopher); and then, as with both hands, create quite other than
provision; namely, spectres to torment itself withal."

Poor Teufelsdrockh! Flying with Hunger always parallel to him; and a
whole Infernal Chase in his rear; so that the countenance of Hunger is
comparatively a friend's! Thus must he, in the temper of ancient Cain,
or of the modern Wandering Jew,--save only that he feels himself not
guilty and but suffering the pains of guilt,--wend to and fro with
aimless speed. Thus must he, over the whole surface of the Earth (by
footprints), write his _Sorrows of Teufelsdrockh_; even as the great
Goethe, in passionate words, had to write his _Sorrows of Werter_,
before the spirit freed herself, and he could become a Man. Vain truly
is the hope of your swiftest Runner to escape "from his own Shadow"!
Nevertheless, in these sick days, when the Born of Heaven first descries
himself (about the age of twenty) in a world such as ours, richer
than usual in two things, in Truths grown obsolete, and Trades grown
obsolete,--what can the fool think but that it is all a Den of Lies,
wherein whoso will not speak Lies and act Lies, must stand idle and
despair? Whereby it happens that, for your nobler minds, the publishing
of some such Work of Art, in one or the other dialect, becomes almost
a necessity. For what is it properly but an Altercation with the
Devil, before you begin honestly Fighting him? Your Byron publishes
his _Sorrows of Lord George_, in verse and in prose, and copiously
otherwise: your Bonaparte represents his _Sorrows of Napoleon_ Opera,
in an all-too stupendous style; with music of cannon-volleys,
and murder-shrieks of a world; his stage-lights are the fires of
Conflagration; his rhyme and recitative are the tramp of embattled
Hosts and the sound of falling Cities.--Happier is he who, like our
Clothes-Philosopher, can write such matter, since it must be written,
on the insensible Earth, with his shoe-soles only; and also survive the
writing thereof!



CHAPTER VII. THE EVERLASTING NO.

Under the strange nebulous envelopment, wherein our Professor has now
shrouded himself, no doubt but his spiritual nature is nevertheless
progressive, and growing: for how can the "Son of Time," in any case,
stand still? We behold him, through those dim years, in a state of
crisis, of transition: his mad Pilgrimings, and general solution
into aimless Discontinuity, what is all this but a mad Fermentation;
wherefrom the fiercer it is, the clearer product will one day evolve
itself?

Such transitions are ever full of pain: thus the Eagle when he moults is
sickly; and, to attain his new beak, must harshly dash off the old one
upon rocks. What Stoicism soever our Wanderer, in his individual acts
and motions, may affect, it is clear that there is a hot fever of
anarchy and misery raging within; coruscations of which flash out: as,
indeed, how could there be other? Have we not seen him disappointed,
bemocked of Destiny, through long years? All that the young heart might
desire and pray for has been denied; nay, as in the last worst instance,
offered and then snatched away. Ever an "excellent Passivity;" but of
useful, reasonable Activity, essential to the former as Food to Hunger,
nothing granted: till at length, in this wild Pilgrimage, he must
forcibly seize for himself an Activity, though useless, unreasonable.
Alas, his cup of bitterness, which had been filling drop by drop, ever
since that first "ruddy morning" in the Hinterschlag Gymnasium, was at
the very lip; and then with that poison-drop, of the Towgood-and-Blumine
business, it runs over, and even hisses over in a deluge of foam.

He himself says once, with more justness than originality: "Men is,
properly speaking, based upon Hope, he has no other possession but Hope;
this world of his is emphatically the Place of Hope." What, then, was
our Professor's possession? We see him, for the present, quite shut out
from Hope; looking not into the golden orient, but vaguely all round
into a dim copper firmament, pregnant with earthquake and tornado.

Alas, shut out from Hope, in a deeper sense than we yet dream of!
For, as he wanders wearisomely through this world, he has now lost
all tidings of another and higher. Full of religion, or at least of
religiosity, as our Friend has since exhibited himself, he hides not
that, in those days, he was wholly irreligious: "Doubt had darkened into
Unbelief," says he; "shade after shade goes grimly over your soul, till
you have the fixed, starless, Tartarean black." To such readers as have
reflected, what can be called reflecting, on man's life, and happily
discovered, in contradiction to much Profit-and-Loss Philosophy,
speculative and practical, that Soul is not synonymous with Stomach;
who understand, therefore, in our Friend's words, "that, for man's
well-being, Faith is properly the one thing needful; how, with it,
Martyrs, otherwise weak, can cheerfully endure the shame and the cross;
and without it, Worldlings puke up their sick existence, by suicide, in
the midst of luxury:" to such it will be clear that, for a pure moral
nature, the loss of his religious Belief was the loss of everything.
Unhappy young man! All wounds, the crush of long-continued Destitution,
the stab of false Friendship and of false Love, all wounds in thy so
genial heart, would have healed again, had not its life-warmth been
withdrawn. Well might he exclaim, in his wild way: "Is there no God,
then; but at best an absentee God, sitting idle, ever since the first
Sabbath, at the outside of his Universe, and _see_ing it go? Has the
word Duty no meaning; is what we call Duty no divine Messenger and
Guide, but a false earthly Phantasm, made up of Desire and Fear, of
emanations from the Gallows and from Doctor Graham's Celestial-Bed?
Happiness of an approving Conscience! Did not Paul of Tarsus, whom
admiring men have since named Saint, feel that _he_ was 'the chief of
sinners;' and Nero of Rome, jocund in spirit (_wohlgemuth_), spend much
of his time in fiddling? Foolish Wordmonger and Motive-grinder, who in
thy Logic-mill hast an earthly mechanism for the Godlike itself, and
wouldst fain grind me out Virtue from the husks of Pleasure,--I tell
thee, Nay! To the unregenerate Prometheus Vinctus of a man, it is ever
the bitterest aggravation of his wretchedness that he is conscious of
Virtue, that he feels himself the victim not of suffering only, but of
injustice. What then? Is the heroic inspiration we name Virtue but some
Passion; some bubble of the blood, bubbling in the direction others
_profit_ by? I know not: only this I know, If what thou namest Happiness
be our true aim, then are we all astray. With Stupidity and sound
Digestion man may front much. But what, in these dull unimaginative
days, are the terrors of Conscience to the diseases of the Liver! Not on
Morality, but on Cookery, let us build our stronghold: there brandishing
our frying-pan, as censer, let us offer sweet incense to the Devil, and
live at ease on the fat things he has provided for his Elect!"

Thus has the bewildered Wanderer to stand, as so many have done,
shouting question after question into the Sibyl-cave of Destiny, and
receive no Answer but an Echo. It is all a grim Desert, this once-fair
world of his; wherein is heard only the howling of wild beasts, or the
shrieks of despairing, hate-filled men; and no Pillar of Cloud by day,
and no Pillar of Fire by night, any longer guides the Pilgrim. To such
length has the spirit of Inquiry carried him. "But what boots it (_was
thut's_)?" cries he: "it is but the common lot in this era. Not having
come to spiritual majority prior to the _Siecle de Louis Quinze_, and
not being born purely a Loghead (_Dummkopf_ ), thou hadst no other
outlook. The whole world is, like thee, sold to Unbelief; their old
Temples of the Godhead, which for long have not been rain-proof, crumble
down; and men ask now: Where is the Godhead; our eyes never saw him?"

Pitiful enough were it, for all these wild utterances, to call our
Diogenes wicked. Unprofitable servants as we all are, perhaps at no era
of his life was he more decisively the Servant of Goodness, the Servant
of God, than even now when doubting God's existence. "One circumstance I
note," says he: "after all the nameless woe that Inquiry, which for
me, what it is not always, was genuine Love of Truth, had wrought me! I
nevertheless still loved Truth, and would bate no jot of my allegiance
to her. 'Truth!' I cried, 'though the Heavens crush me for following
her: no Falsehood! though a whole celestial Lubberland were the price of
Apostasy.' In conduct it was the same. Had a divine Messenger from the
clouds, or miraculous Handwriting on the wall, convincingly proclaimed
to me _This thou shalt do_, with what passionate readiness, as I often
thought, would I have done it, had it been leaping into the
infernal Fire. Thus, in spite of all Motive-grinders, and Mechanical
Profit-and-Loss Philosophies, with the sick ophthalmia and hallucination
they had brought on, was the Infinite nature of Duty still dimly present
to me: living without God in the world, of God's light I was not utterly
bereft; if my as yet sealed eyes, with their unspeakable longing,
could nowhere see Him, nevertheless in my heart He was present, and His
heaven-written Law still stood legible and sacred there."

Meanwhile, under all these tribulations, and temporal and spiritual
destitutions, what must the Wanderer, in his silent soul, have endured!
"The painfullest feeling," writes he, "is that of your own Feebleness
(_Unkraft_); ever, as the English Milton says, to be weak is the true
misery. And yet of your Strength there is and can be no clear feeling,
save by what you have prospered in, by what you have done. Between
vague wavering Capability and fixed indubitable Performance, what a
difference! A certain inarticulate Self-consciousness dwells dimly
in us; which only our Works can render articulate and decisively
discernible. Our Works are the mirror wherein the spirit first sees its
natural lineaments. Hence, too, the folly of that impossible Precept,
_Know thyself_; till it be translated into this partially possible one,
_Know what thou canst work at_.

"But for me, so strangely unprosperous had I been, the net-result of my
Workings amounted as yet simply to--Nothing. How then could I believe in
my Strength, when there was as yet no mirror to see it in? Ever did this
agitating, yet, as I now perceive, quite frivolous question, remain to
me insoluble: Hast thou a certain Faculty, a certain Worth, such even
as the most have not; or art thou the completest Dullard of these modern
times? Alas, the fearful Unbelief is unbelief in yourself; and how could
I believe? Had not my first, last Faith in myself, when even to me the
Heavens seemed laid open, and I dared to love, been all too cruelly
belied? The speculative Mystery of Life grew ever more mysterious to me:
neither in the practical Mystery had I made the slightest progress, but
been everywhere buffeted, foiled, and contemptuously cast out. A feeble
unit in the middle of a threatening Infinitude, I seemed to have nothing
given me but eyes, whereby to discern my own wretchedness. Invisible yet
impenetrable walls, as of Enchantment, divided me from all living: was
there, in the wide world, any true bosom I could press trustfully to
mine? O Heaven, No, there was none! I kept a lock upon my lips: why
should I speak much with that shifting variety of so-called Friends,
in whose withered, vain and too-hungry souls Friendship was but an
incredible tradition? In such cases, your resource is to talk little,
and that little mostly from the Newspapers. Now when I look back, it was
a strange isolation I then lived in. The men and women around me, even
speaking with me, were but Figures; I had, practically, forgotten that
they were alive, that they were not merely automatic. In the midst of
their crowded streets and assemblages, I walked solitary; and (except as
it was my own heart, not another's, that I kept devouring) savage also,
as the tiger in his jungle. Some comfort it would have been, could I,
like a Faust, have fancied myself tempted and tormented of the Devil;
for a Hell, as I imagine, without Life, though only diabolic Life, were
more frightful: but in our age of Down-pulling and Disbelief, the very
Devil has been pulled down, you cannot so much as believe in a Devil. To
me the Universe was all void of Life, of Purpose, of Volition, even of
Hostility: it was one huge, dead, immeasurable Steam-engine, rolling
on, in its dead indifference, to grind me limb from limb. Oh, the
vast, gloomy, solitary Golgotha, and Mill of Death! Why was the Living
banished thither companionless, conscious? Why, if there is no Devil;
nay, unless the Devil is your God?"

A prey incessantly to such corrosions, might not, moreover, as the
worst aggravation to them, the iron constitution even of a Teufelsdrockh
threaten to fail? We conjecture that he has known sickness; and, in
spite of his locomotive habits, perhaps sickness of the chronic sort.
Hear this, for example: "How beautiful to die of broken-heart, on Paper!
Quite another thing in practice; every window of your Feeling, even of
your Intellect, as it were, begrimed and mud-bespattered, so that no
pure ray can enter; a whole Drug-shop in your inwards; the fordone soul
drowning slowly in quagmires of Disgust!"

Putting all which external and internal miseries together, may we not
find in the following sentences, quite in our Professor's still vein,
significance enough? "From Suicide a certain after-shine (_Nachschein_)
of Christianity withheld me: perhaps also a certain indolence of
character; for, was not that a remedy I had at any time within reach?
Often, however, was there a question present to me: Should some one now,
at the turning of that corner, blow thee suddenly out of Space, into the
other World, or other No-world, by pistol-shot,--how were it? On which
ground, too, I have often, in sea-storms and sieged cities and other
death-scenes, exhibited an imperturbability, which passed, falsely
enough, for courage."

"So had it lasted," concludes the Wanderer, "so had it lasted, as in
bitter protracted Death-agony, through long years. The heart within
me, unvisited by any heavenly dew-drop, was smouldering in sulphurous,
slow-consuming fire. Almost since earliest memory I had shed no tear;
or once only when I, murmuring half-audibly, recited Faust's Death-song,
that wild _Selig der den er im Siegesglanze findet_ (Happy whom _he_
finds in Battle's splendor), and thought that of this last Friend even
I was not forsaken, that Destiny itself could not doom me not to die.
Having no hope, neither had I any definite fear, were it of Man or
of Devil: nay, I often felt as if it might be solacing, could the
Arch-Devil himself, though in Tartarean terrors, but rise to me, that I
might tell him a little of my mind. And yet, strangely enough, I lived
in a continual, indefinite, pining fear; tremulous, pusillanimous,
apprehensive of I knew not what: it seemed as if all things in the
Heavens above and the Earth beneath would hurt me; as if the Heavens
and the Earth were but boundless jaws of a devouring monster, wherein I,
palpitating, waited to be devoured.

"Full of such humor, and perhaps the miserablest man in the whole French
Capital or Suburbs, was I, one sultry Dog-day, after much perambulation,
toiling along the dirty little _Rue Saint-Thomas de l'Enfer_, among
civic rubbish enough, in a close atmosphere, and over pavements hot
as Nebuchadnezzar's Furnace; whereby doubtless my spirits were little
cheered; when, all at once, there rose a Thought in me, and I asked
myself: 'What _art_ thou afraid of? Wherefore, like a coward, dost
thou forever pip and whimper, and go cowering and trembling? Despicable
biped! what is the sum-total of the worst that lies before thee? Death?
Well, Death; and say the pangs of Tophet too, and all that the Devil and
Man may, will or can do against thee! Hast thou not a heart; canst thou
not suffer whatsoever it be; and, as a Child of Freedom, though outcast,
trample Tophet itself under thy feet, while it consumes thee? Let it
come, then; I will meet it and defy it!' And as I so thought, there
rushed like a stream of fire over my whole soul; and I shook base Fear
away from me forever. I was strong, of unknown strength; a spirit,
almost a god. Ever from that time, the temper of my misery was changed:
not Fear or whining Sorrow was it, but Indignation and grim fire-eyed
Defiance.

"Thus had the EVERLASTING NO (_das ewige Nein_) pealed authoritatively
through all the recesses of my Being, of my ME; and then was it that
my whole ME stood up, in native God-created majesty, and with emphasis
recorded its Protest. Such a Protest, the most important transaction in
Life, may that same Indignation and Defiance, in a psychological point
of view, be fitly called. The Everlasting No had said: 'Behold, thou art
fatherless, outcast, and the Universe is mine (the Devil's);' to which
my whole Me now made answer: '_I_ am not thine, but Free, and forever
hate thee!'

"It is from this hour that I incline to date my Spiritual New-birth,
or Baphometic Fire-baptism; perhaps I directly thereupon began to be a
Man."



CHAPTER VIII. CENTRE OF INDIFFERENCE.

Though, after this "Baphometic Fire-baptism" of his, our Wanderer
signifies that his Unrest was but increased; as, indeed, "Indignation
and Defiance," especially against things in general, are not the most
peaceable inmates; yet can the Psychologist surmise that it was no
longer a quite hopeless Unrest; that henceforth it had at least a fixed
centre to revolve round. For the fire-baptized soul, long so scathed
and thunder-riven, here feels its own Freedom, which feeling is its
Baphometic Baptism: the citadel of its whole kingdom it has thus
gained by assault, and will keep inexpugnable; outwards from which the
remaining dominions, not indeed without hard battling, will doubtless
by degrees be conquered and pacificated. Under another figure, we might
say, if in that great moment, in the _Rue Saint-Thomas de l'Enfer_, the
old inward Satanic School was not yet thrown out of doors, it received
peremptory judicial notice to quit;--whereby, for the rest, its
howl-chantings, Ernulphus-cursings, and rebellious gnashings of teeth,
might, in the mean while, become only the more tumultuous, and difficult
to keep secret.

Accordingly, if we scrutinize these Pilgrimings well, there is perhaps
discernible henceforth a certain incipient method in their madness. Not
wholly as a Spectre does Teufelsdrockh now storm through the world;
at worst as a spectra-fighting Man, nay who will one day be a
Spectre-queller. If pilgriming restlessly to so many "Saints' Wells,"
and ever without quenching of his thirst, he nevertheless finds little
secular wells, whereby from time to time some alleviation is ministered.
In a word, he is now, if not ceasing, yet intermitting to "eat his own
heart;" and clutches round him outwardly on the NOT-ME for wholesomer
food. Does not the following glimpse exhibit him in a much more natural
state?

"Towns also and Cities, especially the ancient, I failed not to look
upon with interest. How beautiful to see thereby, as through a long
vista, into the remote Time; to have, as it were, an actual section of
almost the earliest Past brought safe into the Present, and set before
your eyes! There, in that old City, was a live ember of Culinary Fire
put down, say only two thousand years ago; and there, burning more or
less triumphantly, with such fuel as the region yielded, it has burnt,
and still burns, and thou thyself seest the very smoke thereof. Ah! and
the far more mysterious live ember of Vital Fire was then also put down
there; and still miraculously burns and spreads; and the smoke and
ashes thereof (in these Judgment-Halls and Churchyards), and its
bellows-engines (in these Churches), thou still seest; and its flame,
looking out from every kind countenance, and every hateful one, still
warms thee or scorches thee.

"Of Man's Activity and Attainment the chief results are aeriform,
mystic, and preserved in Tradition only: such are his Forms of
Government, with the Authority they rest on; his Customs, or Fashions
both of Cloth-habits and of Soul-habits; much more his collective
stock of Handicrafts, the whole Faculty he has acquired of manipulating
Nature: all these things, as indispensable and priceless as they
are, cannot in any way be fixed under lock and key, but must flit,
spirit-like, on impalpable vehicles, from Father to Son; if you demand
sight of them, they are nowhere to be met with. Visible Ploughmen and
Hammermen there have been, ever from Cain and Tubal-cain downwards:
but where does your accumulated Agricultural, Metallurgic, and
other Manufacturing SKILL lie warehoused? It transmits itself on the
atmospheric air, on the sun's rays (by Hearing and by Vision); it is a
thing aeriform, impalpable, of quite spiritual sort. In like manner, ask
me not, Where are the LAWS; where is the GOVERNMENT? In vain wilt thou
go to Schonbrunn, to Downing Street, to the Palais Bourbon; thou findest
nothing there but brick or stone houses, and some bundles of Papers
tied with tape. Where, then, is that same cunningly devised almighty
GOVERNMENT of theirs to be laid hands on? Everywhere, yet nowhere: seen
only in its works, this too is a thing aeriform, invisible; or if you
will, mystic and miraculous. So spiritual (_geistig_) is our whole daily
Life: all that we do springs out of Mystery, Spirit, invisible Force;
only like a little Cloud-image, or Armida's Palace, air-built, does the
Actual body itself forth from the great mystic Deep.

"Visible and tangible products of the Past, again, I reckon up to the
extent of three: Cities, with their Cabinets and Arsenals; then tilled
Fields, to either or to both of which divisions Roads with their Bridges
may belong; and thirdly--Books. In which third truly, the last invented,
lies a worth far surpassing that of the two others. Wondrous indeed
is the virtue of a true Book. Not like a dead city of stones, yearly
crumbling, yearly needing repair; more like a tilled field, but then
a spiritual field: like a spiritual tree, let me rather say, it stands
from year to year, and from age to age (we have Books that already
number some hundred and fifty human ages); and yearly comes its new
produce of leaves (Commentaries, Deductions, Philosophical, Political
Systems; or were it only Sermons, Pamphlets, Journalistic Essays), every
one of which is talismanic and thaumaturgic, for it can persuade men.
O thou who art able to write a Book, which once in the two centuries
or oftener there is a man gifted to do, envy not him whom they name
City-builder, and inexpressibly pity him whom they name Conqueror or
City-burner! Thou too art a Conqueror and Victor; but of the true sort,
namely over the Devil: thou too hast built what will outlast all marble
and metal, and be a wonder-bringing City of the Mind, a Temple and
Seminary and Prophetic Mount, whereto all kindreds of the Earth will
pilgrim.--Fool! why journeyest thou wearisomely, in thy antiquarian
fervor, to gaze on the stone pyramids of Geeza, or the clay ones of
Sacchara? These stand there, as I can tell thee, idle and inert, looking
over the Desert, foolishly enough, for the last three thousand years:
but canst thou not open thy Hebrew BIBLE, then, or even Luther's Version
thereof?"

No less satisfactory is his sudden appearance not in Battle, yet on some
Battle-field; which, we soon gather, must be that of Wagram; so that
here, for once, is a certain approximation to distinctness of date.
Omitting much, let us impart what follows:--

"Horrible enough! A whole Marchfeld strewed with shell-splinters,
cannon-shot, ruined tumbrils, and dead men and horses; stragglers still
remaining not so much as buried. And those red mould heaps; ay, there
lie the Shells of Men, out of which all the Life and Virtue has been
blown; and now are they swept together, and crammed down out of sight,
like blown Egg-shells!--Did Nature, when she bade the Donau bring down
his mould-cargoes from the Carinthian and Carpathian Heights, and
spread them out here into the softest, richest level,--intend thee, O
Marchfeld, for a corn-bearing Nursery, whereon her children might be
nursed; or for a Cockpit, wherein they might the more commodiously be
throttled and tattered? Were thy three broad Highways, meeting here from
the ends of Europe, made for Ammunition-wagons, then? Were thy Wagrams
and Stillfrieds but so many ready-built Casemates, wherein the house of
Hapsburg might batter with artillery, and with artillery be battered?
Konig Ottokar, amid yonder hillocks, dies under Rodolf's truncheon;
here Kaiser Franz falls a-swoon under Napoleon's: within which five
centuries, to omit the others, how has thy breast, fair Plain, been
defaced and defiled! The greensward is torn up and trampled down; man's
fond care of it, his fruit-trees, hedge-rows, and pleasant dwellings,
blown away with gunpowder; and the kind seedfield lies a desolate,
hideous Place of Skulls.--Nevertheless, Nature is at work; neither shall
these Powder-Devilkins with their utmost devilry gainsay her: but all
that gore and carnage will be shrouded in, absorbed into manure; and
next year the Marchfeld will be green, nay greener. Thrifty unwearied
Nature, ever out of our great waste educing some little profit of thy
own,--how dost thou, from the very carcass of the Killer, bring Life for
the Living!

"What, speaking in quite unofficial language, is the net purport and
upshot of war? To my own knowledge, for example, there dwell and toil,
in the British village of Dumdrudge, usually some five hundred souls.
From these, by certain 'Natural Enemies' of the French, there are
successively selected, during the French war, say thirty able-bodied
men; Dumdrudge, at her own expense, has suckled and nursed them: she
has, not without difficulty and sorrow, fed them up to manhood, and even
trained them to crafts, so that one can weave, another build, another
hammer, and the weakest can stand under thirty stone avoirdupois.
Nevertheless, amid much weeping and swearing, they are selected; all
dressed in red; and shipped away, at the public charges, some two
thousand miles, or say only to the south of Spain; and fed there till
wanted. And now to that same spot, in the south of Spain, are thirty
similar French artisans, from a French Dumdrudge, in like manner
wending: till at length, after infinite effort, the two parties come
into actual juxtaposition; and Thirty stands fronting Thirty, each with
a gun in his hand. Straightaway the word 'Fire!' is given; and they
blow the souls out of one another; and in place of sixty brisk useful
craftsmen, the world has sixty dead carcasses, which it must bury, and
anew shed tears for. Had these men any quarrel? Busy as the Devil
is, not the smallest! They lived far enough apart; were the entirest
strangers; nay, in so wide a Universe, there was even, unconsciously,
by Commerce, some mutual helpfulness between them. How then? Simpleton!
their Governors had fallen out; and instead of shooting one another,
had the cunning to make these poor blockheads shoot.--Alas, so is it
in Deutschland, and hitherto in all other lands; still as of old,
'what devilry soever Kings do, the Greeks must pay the piper!'--In that
fiction of the English Smollett, it is true, the final Cessation of War
is perhaps prophetically shadowed forth; where the two Natural Enemies,
in person, take each a Tobacco-pipe, filled with Brimstone; light the
same, and smoke in one another's faces, till the weaker gives in:
but from such predicted Peace-Era, what blood-filled trenches, and
contentious centuries, may still divide us!"

Thus can the Professor, at least in lucid intervals, look away from his
own sorrows, over the many-colored world, and pertinently enough note
what is passing there. We may remark, indeed, that for the matter of
spiritual culture, if for nothing else, perhaps few periods of his
life were richer than this. Internally, there is the most momentous
instructive Course of Practical Philosophy, with Experiments, going
on; towards the right comprehension of which his Peripatetic habits,
favorable to Meditation, might help him rather than hinder. Externally,
again, as he wanders to and fro, there are, if for the longing heart
little substance, yet for the seeing eye sights enough in these so
boundless Travels of his, granting that the Satanic School was even
partially kept down, what an incredible knowledge of our Planet, and
its Inhabitants and their Works, that is to say, of all knowable things,
might not Teufelsdrockh acquire!

"I have read in most Public Libraries," says he, "including those of
Constantinople and Samarcand: in most Colleges, except the Chinese
Mandarin ones, I have studied, or seen that there was no studying.
Unknown Languages have I oftenest gathered from their natural repertory,
the Air, by my organ of Hearing; Statistics, Geographics, Topographics
came, through the Eye, almost of their own accord. The ways of Man, how
he seeks food, and warmth, and protection for himself, in most regions,
are ocularly known to me. Like the great Hadrian, I meted out much of
the terraqueous Globe with a pair of Compasses that belonged to myself
only.

"Of great Scenes why speak? Three summer days, I lingered reflecting,
and even composing (_dichtete_), by the Pine-chasms of Vaucluse; and in
that clear Lakelet moistened my bread. I have sat under the Palm-trees
of Tadmor; smoked a pipe among the ruins of Babylon. The great Wall of
China I have seen; and can testify that it is of gray brick, coped and
covered with granite, and shows only second-rate masonry.--Great Events,
also, have not I witnessed? Kings sweated down (_ausgemergelt_) into
Berlin-and-Milan Customhouse-Officers; the World well won, and the World
well lost; oftener than once a hundred thousand individuals shot (by
each other) in one day. All kindreds and peoples and nations dashed
together, and shifted and shovelled into heaps, that they might ferment
there, and in time unite. The birth-pangs of Democracy, wherewith
convulsed Europe was groaning in cries that reached Heaven, could not
escape me.

"For great Men I have ever had the warmest predilection; and can perhaps
boast that few such in this era have wholly escaped me. Great Men
are the inspired (speaking and acting) Texts of that divine BOOK OF
REVELATIONS, whereof a Chapter is completed from epoch to epoch, and by
some named HISTORY; to which inspired Texts your numerous talented men,
and your innumerable untalented men, are the better or worse exegetic
Commentaries, and wagon-load of too-stupid, heretical or orthodox,
weekly Sermons. For my study, the inspired Texts themselves! Thus did
not I, in very early days, having disguised me as tavern-waiter, stand
behind the field-chairs, under that shady Tree at Treisnitz by the Jena
Highway; waiting upon the great Schiller and greater Goethe; and hearing
what I have not forgotten. For--"

--But at this point the Editor recalls his principle of caution, some
time ago laid down, and must suppress much. Let not the sacredness of
Laurelled, still more, of Crowned Heads, be tampered with. Should we,
at a future day, find circumstances altered, and the time come for
Publication, then may these glimpses into the privacy of the Illustrious
be conceded; which for the present were little better than treacherous,
perhaps traitorous Eavesdroppings. Of Lord Byron, therefore, of Pope
Pius, Emperor Tarakwang, and the "White Water-roses" (Chinese Carbonari)
with their mysteries, no notice here! Of Napoleon himself we shall only,
glancing from afar, remark that Teufelsdrockh's relation to him seems to
have been of very varied character. At first we find our poor
Professor on the point of being shot as a spy; then taken into private
conversation, even pinched on the ear, yet presented with no money;
at last indignantly dismissed, almost thrown out of doors, as an
"Ideologist." "He himself," says the Professor, "was among the
completest Ideologists, at least Ideopraxists: in the Idea (_in der
Idee_) he lived, moved and fought. The man was a Divine Missionary,
though unconscious of it; and preached, through the cannon's throat,
that great doctrine, _La carriere ouverte aux talens_ (The Tools to him
that can handle them), which is our ultimate Political Evangel,
wherein alone can liberty lie. Madly enough he preached, it is true, as
Enthusiasts and first Missionaries are wont, with imperfect utterance,
amid much frothy rant; yet as articulately perhaps as the case admitted.
Or call him, if you will, an American Backwoodsman, who had to fell
unpenetrated forests, and battle with innumerable wolves, and did
not entirely forbear strong liquor, rioting, and even theft; whom,
notwithstanding, the peaceful Sower will follow, and, as he cuts the
boundless harvest, bless."

More legitimate and decisively authentic is Teufelsdrockh's appearance
and emergence (we know not well whence) in the solitude of the North
Cape, on that June Midnight. He has a "light-blue Spanish cloak"
hanging round him, as his "most commodious, principal, indeed sole
upper-garment;" and stands there, on the World-promontory, looking
over the infinite Brine, like a little blue Belfry (as we figure), now
motionless indeed, yet ready, if stirred, to ring quaintest changes.

"Silence as of death," writes he; "for Midnight, even in the
Arctic latitudes, has its character: nothing but the granite cliffs
ruddy-tinged, the peaceable gurgle of that slow-heaving Polar Ocean,
over which in the utmost North the great Sun hangs low and lazy, as if
he too were slumbering. Yet is his cloud-couch wrought of crimson and
cloth-of-gold; yet does his light stream over the mirror of waters,
like a tremulous fire-pillar, shooting downwards to the abyss, and hide
itself under my feet. In such moments, Solitude also is invaluable; for
who would speak, or be looked on, when behind him lies all Europe and
Africa, fast asleep, except the watchmen; and before him the silent
Immensity, and Palace of the Eternal, whereof our Sun is but a
porch-lamp?

"Nevertheless, in this solemn moment comes a man, or monster, scrambling
from among the rock-hollows; and, shaggy, huge as the Hyperborean
Bear, hails me in Russian speech: most probably, therefore, a Russian
Smuggler. With courteous brevity, I signify my indifference to
contraband trade, my humane intentions, yet strong wish to be private.
In vain: the monster, counting doubtless on his superior stature,
and minded to make sport for himself, or perhaps profit, were it with
murder, continues to advance; ever assailing me with his importunate
train-oil breath; and now has advanced, till we stand both on the verge
of the rock, the deep Sea rippling greedily down below. What argument
will avail? On the thick Hyperborean, cherubic reasoning, seraphic
eloquence were lost. Prepared for such extremity, I, deftly enough,
whisk aside one step; draw out, from my interior reservoirs, a
sufficient Birmingham Horse-pistol, and say, 'Be so obliging as retire,
Friend (_Er ziehe sich zuruck, Freund_), and with promptitude!' This
logic even the Hyperborean understands: fast enough, with apologetic,
petitionary growl, he sidles off; and, except for suicidal as well as
homicidal purposes, need not return.

"Such I hold to be the genuine use of Gunpowder: that it makes all men
alike tall. Nay, if thou be cooler, cleverer than I, if thou have more
_Mind_, though all but no _Body_ whatever, then canst thou kill me
first, and art the taller. Hereby, at last, is the Goliath powerless,
and the David resistless; savage Animalism is nothing, inventive
Spiritualism is all.

"With respect to Duels, indeed, I have my own ideas. Few things, in this
so surprising world, strike me with more surprise. Two little visual
Spectra of men, hovering with insecure enough cohesion in the midst of
the UNFATHOMABLE, and to dissolve therein, at any rate, very soon,--make
pause at the distance of twelve paces asunder; whirl round; and,
simultaneously by the cunningest mechanism, explode one another into
Dissolution; and off-hand become Air, and Non-extant! Deuce on it
(_verdammt_), the little spitfires!--Nay, I think with old Hugo von
Trimberg: 'God must needs laugh outright, could such a thing be, to see
his wondrous Manikins here below.'"

But amid these specialties, let us not forget the great generality,
which is our chief quest here: How prospered the inner man of
Teufelsdrockh, under so much outward shifting! Does Legion still lurk
in him, though repressed; or has he exorcised that Devil's Brood? We
can answer that the symptoms continue promising. Experience is the
grand spiritual Doctor; and with him Teufelsdrockh has now been long a
patient, swallowing many a bitter bolus. Unless our poor Friend belong
to the numerous class of Incurables, which seems not likely, some cure
will doubtless be effected. We should rather say that Legion, or the
Satanic School, was now pretty well extirpated and cast out, but next
to nothing introduced in its room; whereby the heart remains, for the
while, in a quiet but no comfortable state.

"At length, after so much roasting," thus writes our Autobiographer, "I
was what you might name calcined. Pray only that it be not rather, as is
the more frequent issue, reduced to a _caput-mortuum_! But in any
case, by mere dint of practice, I had grown familiar with many things.
Wretchedness was still wretched; but I could now partly see through it,
and despise it. Which highest mortal, in this inane Existence, had I not
found a Shadow-hunter, or Shadow-hunted; and, when I looked through his
brave garnitures, miserable enough? Thy wishes have all been sniffed
aside, thought I: but what, had they even been all granted! Did not the
Boy Alexander weep because he had not two Planets to conquer; or a whole
Solar System; or after that, a whole Universe? _Ach Gott_, when I gazed
into these Stars, have they not looked down on me as if with pity, from
their serene spaces; like Eyes glistening with heavenly tears over the
little lot of man! Thousands of human generations, all as noisy as our
own, have been swallowed up of Time, and there remains no wreck of them
any more; and Arcturus and Orion and Sirius and the Pleiades are still
shining in their courses, clear and young, as when the Shepherd first
noted them in the plain of Shinar. Pshaw! what is this paltry little
Dog-cage of an Earth; what art thou that sittest whining there? Thou art
still Nothing, Nobody: true; but who, then, is Something, Somebody? For
thee the Family of Man has no use; it rejects thee; thou art wholly as a
dissevered limb: so be it; perhaps it is better so!"

Too-heavy-laden Teufelsdrockh! Yet surely his bands are loosening; one
day he will hurl the burden far from him, and bound forth free and with
a second youth.

"This," says our Professor, "was the CENTRE OF INDIFFERENCE I had now
reached; through which whoso travels from the Negative Pole to the
Positive must necessarily pass."



CHAPTER IX. THE EVERLASTING YEA.

"Temptations in the Wilderness!" exclaims Teufelsdrockh, "Have we not
all to be tried with such? Not so easily can the old Adam, lodged in us
by birth, be dispossessed. Our Life is compassed round with Necessity;
yet is the meaning of Life itself no other than Freedom, than Voluntary
Force: thus have we a warfare; in the beginning, especially,
a hard-fought battle. For the God-given mandate, _Work thou in
Well-doing_, lies mysteriously written, in Promethean Prophetic
Characters, in our hearts; and leaves us no rest, night or day, till it
be deciphered and obeyed; till it burn forth, in our conduct, a visible,
acted Gospel of Freedom. And as the clay-given mandate, _Eat thou and
be filled_, at the same time persuasively proclaims itself through every
nerve,--must not there be a confusion, a contest, before the better
Influence can become the upper?

"To me nothing seems more natural than that the Son of Man, when such
God-given mandate first prophetically stirs within him, and the Clay
must now be vanquished or vanquish,--should be carried of the spirit
into grim Solitudes, and there fronting the Tempter do grimmest battle
with him; defiantly setting him at naught till he yield and fly. Name
it as we choose: with or without visible Devil, whether in the
natural Desert of rocks and sands, or in the populous moral Desert of
selfishness and baseness,--to such Temptation are we all called. Unhappy
if we are not! Unhappy if we are but Half-men, in whom that divine
handwriting has never blazed forth, all-subduing, in true sun-splendor;
but quivers dubiously amid meaner lights: or smoulders, in dull pain, in
darkness, under earthly vapors!--Our Wilderness is the wide World in
an Atheistic Century; our Forty Days are long years of suffering and
fasting: nevertheless, to these also comes an end. Yes, to me also was
given, if not Victory, yet the consciousness of Battle, and the
resolve to persevere therein while life or faculty is left. To me also,
entangled in the enchanted forests, demon-peopled, doleful of sight and
of sound, it was given, after weariest wanderings, to work out my way
into the higher sunlit slopes--of that Mountain which has no summit, or
whose summit is in Heaven only!"

He says elsewhere, under a less ambitious figure; as figures are, once
for all, natural to him: "Has not thy Life been that of most sufficient
men (_tuchtigen Manner_) thou hast known in this generation? An outflush
of foolish young Enthusiasm, like the first fallow-crop, wherein are as
many weeds as valuable herbs: this all parched away, under the Droughts
of practical and spiritual Unbelief, as Disappointment, in thought and
act, often-repeated gave rise to Doubt, and Doubt gradually settled
into Denial! If I have had a second-crop, and now see the perennial
greensward, and sit under umbrageous cedars, which defy all Drought (and
Doubt); herein too, be the Heavens praised, I am not without examples,
and even exemplars."

So that, for Teufelsdrockh, also, there has been a "glorious
revolution:" these mad shadow-hunting and shadow-hunted Pilgrimings of
his were but some purifying "Temptation in the Wilderness," before his
apostolic work (such as it was) could begin; which Temptation is now
happily over, and the Devil once more worsted! Was "that high moment in
the _Rue de l'Enfer_," then, properly the turning-point of the battle;
when the Fiend said, _Worship me, or be torn in shreds_; and was
answered valiantly with an _Apage Satana_?--Singular Teufelsdrockh,
would thou hadst told thy singular story in plain words! But it is
fruitless to look there, in those Paper-bags, for such. Nothing but
innuendoes, figurative crotchets: a typical Shadow, fitfully wavering,
prophetico-satiric; no clear logical Picture. "How paint to the sensual
eye," asks he once, "what passes in the Holy-of-Holies of Man's Soul;
in what words, known to these profane times, speak even afar-off of the
unspeakable?" We ask in turn: Why perplex these times, profane as
they are, with needless obscurity, by omission and by commission? Not
mystical only is our Professor, but whimsical; and involves himself, now
more than ever, in eye-bewildering _chiaroscuro_. Successive glimpses,
here faithfully imparted, our more gifted readers must endeavor to
combine for their own behoof.

He says: "The hot Harmattan wind had raged itself out; its howl went
silent within me; and the long-deafened soul could now hear. I paused in
my wild wanderings; and sat me down to wait, and consider; for it was
as if the hour of change drew nigh. I seemed to surrender, to renounce
utterly, and say: Fly, then, false shadows of Hope; I will chase you no
more, I will believe you no more. And ye too, haggard spectres of Fear,
I care not for you; ye too are all shadows and a lie. Let me rest here:
for I am way-weary and life-weary; I will rest here, were it but to
die: to die or to live is alike to me; alike insignificant."--And again:
"Here, then, as I lay in that CENTRE OF INDIFFERENCE; cast, doubtless by
benignant upper Influence, into a healing sleep, the heavy dreams rolled
gradually away, and I awoke to a new Heaven and a new Earth. The first
preliminary moral Act, Annihilation of Self (_Selbst-todtung_), had
been happily accomplished; and my mind's eyes were now unsealed, and its
hands ungyved."

Might we not also conjecture that the following passage refers to his
Locality, during this same "healing sleep;" that his Pilgrim-staff lies
cast aside here, on "the high table-land;" and indeed that the repose is
already taking wholesome effect on him? If it were not that the tone,
in some parts, has more of riancy, even of levity, than we could have
expected! However, in Teufelsdrockh, there is always the strangest
Dualism: light dancing, with guitar-music, will be going on in the
fore-court, while by fits from within comes the faint whimpering of woe
and wail. We transcribe the piece entire.

"Beautiful it was to sit there, as in my skyey Tent, musing and
meditating; on the high table-land, in front of the Mountains; over me,
as roof, the azure Dome, and around me, for walls, four azure-flowing
curtains,--namely, of the Four azure Winds, on whose bottom-fringes
also I have seen gilding. And then to fancy the fair Castles that stood
sheltered in these Mountain hollows; with their green flower-lawns,
and white dames and damosels, lovely enough: or better still, the
straw-roofed Cottages, wherein stood many a Mother baking bread, with
her children round her:--all hidden and protectingly folded up in the
valley-folds; yet there and alive, as sure as if I beheld them. Or to
see, as well as fancy, the nine Towns and Villages, that lay round my
mountain-seat, which, in still weather, were wont to speak to me (by
their steeple-bells) with metal tongue; and, in almost all weather,
proclaimed their vitality by repeated Smoke-clouds; whereon, as on a
culinary horologe, I might read the hour of the day. For it was the
smoke of cookery, as kind housewives at morning, midday, eventide, were
boiling their husbands' kettles; and ever a blue pillar rose up into the
air, successively or simultaneously, from each of the nine, saying, as
plainly as smoke could say: Such and such a meal is getting ready
here. Not uninteresting! For you have the whole Borough, with all its
love-makings and scandal-mongeries, contentions and contentments, as
in miniature, and could cover it all with your hat.--If, in my wide
Way-farings, I had learned to look into the business of the World in
its details, here perhaps was the place for combining it into general
propositions, and deducing inferences therefrom.

"Often also could I see the black Tempest marching in anger through the
Distance: round some Schreckhorn, as yet grim-blue, would the eddying
vapor gather, and there tumultuously eddy, and flow down like a mad
witch's hair; till, after a space, it vanished, and, in the clear
sunbeam, your Schreckhorn stood smiling grim-white, for the vapor
had held snow. How thou fermentest and elaboratest, in thy great
fermenting-vat and laboratory of an Atmosphere, of a World, O
Nature!--Or what is Nature? Ha! why do I not name thee GOD? Art not thou
the 'Living Garment of God'? O Heavens, is it, in very deed, HE, then,
that ever speaks through thee; that lives and loves in thee, that lives
and loves in me?

"Fore-shadows, call them rather fore-splendors, of that Truth, and
Beginning of Truths, fell mysteriously over my soul. Sweeter than
Dayspring to the Shipwrecked in Nova Zembla; ah, like the mother's voice
to her little child that strays bewildered, weeping, in unknown tumults;
like soft streamings of celestial music to my too-exasperated
heart, came that Evangel. The Universe is not dead and demoniacal, a
charnel-house with spectres; but godlike, and my Father's!

"With other eyes, too, could I now look upon my fellowman: with an
infinite Love, an infinite Pity. Poor, wandering, wayward man! Art thou
not tried, and beaten with stripes, even as I am? Ever, whether thou
bear the royal mantle or the beggar's gabardine, art thou not so weary,
so heavy-laden; and thy Bed of Rest is but a Grave. O my Brother, my
Brother, why cannot I shelter thee in my bosom, and wipe away all tears
from thy eyes!--Truly, the din of many-voiced Life, which, in this
solitude, with the mind's organ, I could hear, was no longer a maddening
discord, but a melting one; like inarticulate cries, and sobbings of a
dumb creature, which in the ear of Heaven are prayers. The poor Earth,
with her poor joys, was now my needy Mother, not my cruel Stepdame; Man,
with his so mad Wants and so mean Endeavors, had become the dearer to
me; and even for his sufferings and his sins, I now first named him
Brother. Thus was I standing in the porch of that '_Sanctuary of
Sorrow_;' by strange, steep ways had I too been guided thither; and ere
long its sacred gates would open, and the '_Divine Depth of Sorrow_' lie
disclosed to me."

The Professor says, he here first got eye on the Knot that had been
strangling him, and straightway could unfasten it, and was free. "A
vain interminable controversy," writes he, "touching what is at present
called Origin of Evil, or some such thing, arises in every soul, since
the beginning of the world; and in every soul, that would pass from
idle Suffering into actual Endeavoring, must first be put an end to. The
most, in our time, have to go content with a simple, incomplete enough
Suppression of this controversy; to a few some Solution of it is
indispensable. In every new era, too, such Solution comes out in
different terms; and ever the Solution of the last era has become
obsolete, and is found unserviceable. For it is man's nature to change
his Dialect from century to century; he cannot help it though he would.
The authentic _Church-Catechism_ of our present century has not yet
fallen into my hands: meanwhile, for my own private behoof I attempt to
elucidate the matter so. Man's Unhappiness, as I construe, comes of his
Greatness; it is because there is an Infinite in him, which with all his
cunning he cannot quite bury under the Finite. Will the whole Finance
Ministers and Upholsterers and Confectioners of modern Europe undertake,
in joint-stock company, to make one Shoeblack HAPPY? They cannot
accomplish it, above an hour or two: for the Shoeblack also has a Soul
quite other than his Stomach; and would require, if you consider it,
for his permanent satisfaction and saturation, simply this allotment,
no more, and no less: _God's infinite Universe altogether to himself_,
therein to enjoy infinitely, and fill every wish as fast as it rose.
Oceans of Hochheimer, a Throat like that of Ophiuchus: speak not of
them; to the infinite Shoeblack they are as nothing. No sooner is
your ocean filled, than he grumbles that it might have been of better
vintage. Try him with half of a Universe, of an Omnipotence, he sets to
quarrelling with the proprietor of the other half, and declares himself
the most maltreated of men.--Always there is a black spot in our
sunshine: it is even, as I said, the _Shadow of Ourselves_.

"But the whim we have of Happiness is somewhat thus. By certain
valuations, and averages, of our own striking, we come upon some sort of
average terrestrial lot; this we fancy belongs to us by nature, and of
indefeasible right. It is simple payment of our wages, of our deserts;
requires neither thanks nor complaint; only such _overplus_ as there may
be do we account Happiness; any _deficit_ again is Misery. Now consider
that we have the valuation of our own deserts ourselves, and what a fund
of Self-conceit there is in each of us,--do you wonder that the balance
should so often dip the wrong way, and many a Blockhead cry: See
there, what a payment; was ever worthy gentleman so used!--I tell thee,
Blockhead, it all comes of thy Vanity; of what thou _fanciest_ those
same deserts of thine to be. Fancy that thou deservest to be hanged (as
is most likely), thou wilt feel it happiness to be only shot: fancy that
thou deservest to be hanged in a hair-halter, it will be a luxury to die
in hemp.

"So true is it, what I then said, that _the Fraction of Life can be
increased in value not so much by increasing your Numerator as by
lessening your Denominator_. Nay, unless my Algebra deceive me, _Unity_
itself divided by _Zero_ will give _Infinity_. Make thy claim of wages
a zero, then; thou hast the world under thy feet. Well did the Wisest
of our time write: 'It is only with Renunciation (_Entsagen_) that Life,
properly speaking, can be said to begin.'

"I asked myself: What is this that, ever since earliest years, thou hast
been fretting and fuming, and lamenting and self-tormenting, on account
of? Say it in a word: is it not because thou art not HAPPY? Because
the THOU (sweet gentleman) is not sufficiently honored, nourished,
soft-bedded, and lovingly cared for? Foolish soul! What Act of
Legislature was there that _thou_ shouldst be Happy? A little while
ago thou hadst no right to _be_ at all. What if thou wert born and
predestined not to be Happy, but to be Unhappy! Art thou nothing other
than a Vulture, then, that fliest through the Universe seeking after
somewhat to _eat_; and shrieking dolefully because carrion enough is not
given thee? Close thy _Byron_; open thy _Goethe_."

"_Es leuchtet mir ein_, I see a glimpse of it!" cries he elsewhere:
"there is in man a HIGHER than Love of Happiness: he can do without
Happiness, and instead thereof find Blessedness! Was it not to preach
forth this same HIGHER that sages and martyrs, the Poet and the Priest,
in all times, have spoken and suffered; bearing testimony, through life
and through death, of the Godlike that is in Man, and how in the Godlike
only has he Strength and Freedom? Which God-inspiredd Doctrine art thou
also honored to be taught; O Heavens! and broken with manifold merciful
Afflictions, even till thou become contrite and learn it! Oh, thank thy
Destiny for these; thankfully bear what yet remain: thou hadst need
of them; the Self in thee needed to be annihilated. By benignant
fever-paroxysms is Life rooting out the deep-seated chronic Disease,
and triumphs over Death. On the roaring billows of Time, thou art not
engulfed, but borne aloft into the azure of Eternity. Love not Pleasure;
love God. This is the EVERLASTING YEA, wherein all contradiction is
solved: wherein whoso walks and works, it is well with him."

And again: "Small is it that thou canst trample the Earth with its
injuries under thy feet, as old Greek Zeno trained thee: thou canst love
the Earth while it injures thee, and even because it injures thee; for
this a Greater than Zeno was needed, and he too was sent. Knowest thou
that '_Worship of Sorrow_'? The Temple thereof, founded some eighteen
centuries ago, now lies in ruins, overgrown with jungle, the habitation
of doleful creatures: nevertheless, venture forward; in a low crypt,
arched out of falling fragments, thou findest the Altar still there, and
its sacred Lamp perennially burning."

Without pretending to comment on which strange utterances, the Editor
will only remark, that there lies beside them much of a still more
questionable character; unsuited to the general apprehension; nay
wherein he himself does not see his way. Nebulous disquisitions
on Religion, yet not without bursts of splendor; on the "perennial
continuance of Inspiration;" on Prophecy; that there are "true Priests,
as well as Baal-Priests, in our own day:" with more of the like sort. We
select some fractions, by way of finish to this farrago.

"Cease, my much-respected Herr von Voltaire," thus apostrophizes the
Professor: "shut thy sweet voice; for the task appointed thee seems
finished. Sufficiently hast thou demonstrated this proposition,
considerable or otherwise: That the Mythus of the Christian Religion
looks not in the eighteenth century as it did in the eighth. Alas,
were thy six-and-thirty quartos, and the six-and-thirty thousand other
quartos and folios, and flying sheets or reams, printed before and since
on the same subject, all needed to convince us of so little! But what
next? Wilt thou help us to embody the divine Spirit of that Religion in
a new Mythus, in a new vehicle and vesture, that our Souls, otherwise
too like perishing, may live? What! thou hast no faculty in that kind?
Only a torch for burning, no hammer for building? Take our thanks, then,
and--thyself away.

"Meanwhile what are antiquated Mythuses to me? Or is the God present,
felt in my own heart, a thing which Herr von Voltaire will dispute out
of me; or dispute into me? To the '_Worship of Sorrow_' ascribe what
origin and genesis thou pleasest, _has_ not that Worship originated,
and been generated; is it not _here_? Feel it in thy heart, and then say
whether it is of God! This is Belief; all else is Opinion,--for which
latter whoso will, let him worry and be worried."

"Neither," observes he elsewhere, "shall ye tear out one another's eyes,
struggling over 'Plenary Inspiration,' and such like: try rather to get
a little even Partial Inspiration, each of you for himself. One BIBLE I
know, of whose Plenary Inspiration doubt is not so much as possible;
nay with my own eyes I saw the God's-Hand writing it: thereof all other
Bibles are but Leaves,--say, in Picture-Writing to assist the weaker
faculty."

Or, to give the wearied reader relief, and bring it to an end, let him
take the following perhaps more intelligible passage:--

"To me, in this our life," says the Professor, "which is an internecine
warfare with the Time-spirit, other warfare seems questionable. Hast
thou in any way a contention with thy brother, I advise thee, think
well what the meaning thereof is. If thou gauge it to the bottom, it
is simply this: 'Fellow, see! thou art taking more than thy share of
Happiness in the world, something from my share: which, by the Heavens,
thou shalt not; nay I will fight thee rather.'--Alas, and the whole lot
to be divided is such a beggarly matter, truly a 'feast of shells,' for
the substance has been spilled out: not enough to quench one Appetite;
and the collective human species clutching at them!--Can we not, in all
such cases, rather say: 'Take it, thou too-ravenous individual; take
that pitiful additional fraction of a share, which I reckoned mine, but
which thou so wantest; take it with a blessing: would to Heaven I had
enough for thee!'--If Fichte's _Wissenschaftslehre_ be, 'to a certain
extent, Applied Christianity,' surely to a still greater extent, so is
this. We have here not a Whole Duty of Man, yet a Half Duty, namely the
Passive half: could we but do it, as we can demonstrate it!

"But indeed Conviction, were it never so excellent, is worthless till
it convert itself into Conduct. Nay properly Conviction is not possible
till then; inasmuch as all Speculation is by nature endless, formless, a
vortex amid vortices, only by a felt indubitable certainty of Experience
does it find any centre to revolve round, and so fashion itself into a
system. Most true is it, as a wise man teaches us, that 'Doubt of any
sort cannot be removed except by Action.' On which ground, too, let
him who gropes painfully in darkness or uncertain light, and prays
vehemently that the dawn may ripen into day, lay this other precept well
to heart, which to me was of invaluable service: '_Do the Duty which
lies nearest thee_,' which thou knowest to be a Duty! Thy second Duty
will already have become clearer.

"May we not say, however, that the hour of Spiritual Enfranchisement is
even this: When your Ideal World, wherein the whole man has been dimly
struggling and inexpressibly languishing to work, becomes revealed, and
thrown open; and you discover, with amazement enough, like the Lothario
in _Wilhelm Meister_, that your 'America is here or nowhere'? The
Situation that has not its Duty, its Ideal, was never yet occupied by
man. Yes here, in this poor, miserable, hampered, despicable Actual,
wherein thou even now standest, here or nowhere is thy Ideal: work it
out therefrom; and working, believe, live, be free. Fool! the Ideal is
in thyself, the impediment too is in thyself: thy Condition is but the
stuff thou art to shape that same Ideal out of: what matters whether
such stuff be of this sort or that, so the Form thou give it be heroic,
be poetic? O thou that pinest in the imprisonment of the Actual, and
criest bitterly to the gods for a kingdom wherein to rule and create,
know this of a truth: the thing thou seekest is already with thee, 'here
or nowhere,' couldst thou only see!

"But it is with man's Soul as it was with Nature: the beginning of
Creation is--Light. Till the eye have vision, the whole members are in
bonds. Divine moment, when over the tempest-tost Soul, as once over
the wild-weltering Chaos, it is spoken: Let there be Light! Ever to
the greatest that has felt such moment, is it not miraculous and
God-announcing; even as, under simpler figures, to the simplest
and least. The mad primeval Discord is hushed; the rudely jumbled
conflicting elements bind themselves into separate Firmaments: deep
silent rock-foundations are built beneath; and the skyey vault with its
everlasting Luminaries above: instead of a dark wasteful Chaos, we have
a blooming, fertile, heaven-encompassed World.

"I too could now say to myself: Be no longer a Chaos, but a World,
or even Worldkin. Produce! Produce! Were it but the pitifullest
infinitesimal fraction of a Product, produce it, in God's name! 'Tis the
utmost thou hast in thee: out with it, then. Up, up! Whatsoever thy
hand findeth to do, do it with thy whole might. Work while it is called
To-day; for the Night cometh, wherein no man can work."



CHAPTER X. PAUSE.

Thus have we, as closely and perhaps satisfactorily as, in such
circumstances, might be, followed Teufelsdrockh, through the various
successive states and stages of Growth, Entanglement, Unbelief, and
almost Reprobation, into a certain clearer state of what he himself
seems to consider as Conversion. "Blame not the word," says he; "rejoice
rather that such a word, signifying such a thing, has come to light in
our modern Era, though hidden from the wisest Ancients. The Old World
knew nothing of Conversion; instead of an _Ecce Homo_, they had only
some _Choice of Hercules_. It was a new-attained progress in the Moral
Development of man: hereby has the Highest come home to the bosoms of
the most Limited; what to Plato was but a hallucination, and to Socrates
a chimera, is now clear and certain to your Zinzendorfs, your Wesleys,
and the poorest of their Pietists and Methodists."

It is here, then, that the spiritual majority of Teufelsdrockh
commences: we are henceforth to see him "work in well-doing," with
the spirit and clear aims of a Man. He has discovered that the Ideal
Workshop he so panted for is even this same Actual ill-furnished
Workshop he has so long been stumbling in. He can say to himself:
"Tools? Thou hast no Tools? Why, there is not a Man, or a Thing, now
alive but has tools. The basest of created animalcules, the Spider
itself, has a spinning-jenny, and warping-mill, and power-loom within
its head: the stupidest of Oysters has a Papin's-Digester, with
stone-and-lime house to hold it in: every being that can live can do
something: this let him _do_.--Tools? Hast thou not a Brain, furnished,
furnishable with some glimmerings of Light; and three fingers to hold a
Pen withal? Never since Aaron's Rod went out of practice, or even before
it, was there such a wonder-working Tool: greater than all recorded
miracles have been performed by Pens. For strangely in this so
solid-seeming World, which nevertheless is in continual restless flux,
it is appointed that _Sound_, to appearance the most fleeting, should
be the most continuing of all things. The WORD is well said to be
omnipotent in this world; man, thereby divine, can create as by a
_Fiat_. Awake, arise! Speak forth what is in thee; what God has given
thee, what the Devil shall not take away. Higher task than that of
Priesthood was allotted to no man: wert thou but the meanest in that
sacred Hierarchy, is it not honor enough therein to spend and be spent?

"By this Art, which whoso will may sacrilegiously degrade into a
handicraft," adds Teufelsdrockh, "have I thenceforth abidden. Writings
of mine, not indeed known as mine (for what am I?), have fallen, perhaps
not altogether void, into the mighty seedfield of Opinion; fruits of my
unseen sowing gratifyingly meet me here and there. I thank the Heavens
that I have now found my Calling; wherein, with or without perceptible
result, I am minded diligently to persevere.

"Nay how knowest thou," cries he, "but this and the other pregnant
Device, now grown to be a world-renowned far-working Institution; like
a grain of right mustard-seed once cast into the right soil, and now
stretching out strong boughs to the four winds, for the birds of the
air to lodge in,--may have been properly my doing? Some one's doing, it
without doubt was; from some Idea, in some single Head, it did first of
all take beginning: why not from some Idea in mine?" Does Teufelsdrockh,
here glance at that "SOCIETY FOR THE CONSERVATION OF PROPERTY
(_Eigenthums-conservirende Gesellschaft_)," of which so many ambiguous
notices glide spectra-like through these inexpressible Paper-bags? "An
Institution," hints he, "not unsuitable to the wants of the time; as
indeed such sudden extension proves: for already can the Society number,
among its office-bearers or corresponding members, the highest Names, if
not the highest Persons, in Germany, England, France; and contributions,
both of money and of meditation pour in from all quarters; to, if
possible, enlist the remaining Integrity of the world, and, defensively
and with forethought, marshal it round this Palladium." Does
Teufelsdrockh mean, then, to give himself out as the originator of
that so notable _Eigenthums-conservirende_ ("Owndom-conserving")
_Gesellschaft_; and if so, what, in the Devil's name, is it? He again
hints: "At a time when the divine Commandment, _Thou shalt not steal_,
wherein truly, if well understood, is comprised the whole Hebrew
Decalogue, with Solon's and Lycurgrus's Constitutions, Justinian's
Pandects, the Code Napoleon, and all Codes, Catechisms, Divinities,
Moralities whatsoever, that man has hitherto devised (and enforced with
Altar-fire and Gallows-ropes) for his social guidance: at a time, I say,
when this divine Commandment has all but faded away from the general
remembrance; and, with little disguise, a new opposite Commandment,
_Thou shalt steal_, is everywhere promulgated,--it perhaps behooved, in
this universal dotage and deliration, the sound portion of mankind to
bestir themselves and rally. When the widest and wildest violations
of that divine right of Property, the only divine right now extant or
conceivable, are sanctioned and recommended by a vicious Press, and the
world has lived to hear it asserted that _we have no Property in our
very Bodies, but only an accidental Possession and Life-rent_, what
is the issue to be looked for? Hangmen and Catchpoles may, by their
noose-gins and baited fall-traps, keep down the smaller sort of vermin;
but what, except perhaps some such Universal Association, can protect
us against whole meat-devouring and man-devouring hosts of
Boa-constrictors. If, therefore, the more sequestered Thinker have
wondered, in his privacy, from what hand that perhaps not ill-written
_Program_ in the Public Journals, with its high _Prize-Questions_ and so
liberal _Prizes_, could have proceeded,--let him now cease such
wonder; and, with undivided faculty, betake himself to the _Concurrenz_
(Competition)."

We ask: Has this same "perhaps not ill-written _Program_," or any other
authentic Transaction of that Property-conserving Society, fallen under
the eye of the British Reader, in any Journal foreign or domestic? If
so, what are those _Prize-Questions_; what are the terms of Competition,
and when and where? No printed Newspaper-leaf, no farther light of any
sort, to be met with in these Paper-bags! Or is the whole business one
other of those whimsicalities and perverse inexplicabilities, whereby
Herr Teufelsdrockh, meaning much or nothing, is pleased so often to play
fast-and-loose with us?


Here, indeed, at length, must the Editor give utterance to a painful
suspicion, which, through late Chapters, has begun to haunt him;
paralyzing any little enthusiasm that might still have rendered his
thorny Biographical task a labor of love. It is a suspicion grounded
perhaps on trifles, yet confirmed almost into certainty by the more and
more discernible humoristico-satirical tendency of Teufelsdrockh, in
whom underground humors and intricate sardonic rogueries, wheel
within wheel, defy all reckoning: a suspicion, in one word, that these
Autobiographical Documents are partly a mystification! What if many
a so-called Fact were little better than a Fiction; if here we had no
direct Camera-obscura Picture of the Professor's History; but only some
more or less fantastic Adumbration, symbolically, perhaps significantly
enough, shadowing forth the same! Our theory begins to be that, in
receiving as literally authentic what was but hieroglyphically so,
Hofrath Heuschrecke, whom in that case we scruple not to name Hofrath
Nose-of-Wax, was made a fool of, and set adrift to make fools of others.
Could it be expected, indeed, that a man so known for impenetrable
reticence as Teufelsdrockh would all at once frankly unlock his private
citadel to an English Editor and a German Hofrath; and not rather
deceptively _in_lock both Editor and Hofrath in the labyrinthic
tortuosities and covered-ways of said citadel (having enticed them
thither), to see, in his half-devilish way, how the fools would look?

Of one fool, however, the Herr Professor will perhaps find himself
short. On a small slip, formerly thrown aside as blank, the ink being
all but invisible, we lately noticed, and with effort decipher,
the following: "What are your historical Facts; still more your
biographical? Wilt thou know a Man, above all a Mankind, by stringing
together bead-rolls of what thou namest Facts? The Man is the spirit
he worked in; not what he did, but what he became. Facts are engraved
Hierograms, for which the fewest have the key. And then how your
Blockhead (_Dummkopf_) studies not their Meaning; but simply whether
they are well or ill cut, what he calls Moral or Immoral! Still worse
is it with your Bungler (_Pfuscher_): such I have seen reading some
Rousseau, with pretences of interpretation; and mistaking the ill-cut
Serpent-of-Eternity for a common poisonous reptile." Was the Professor
apprehensive lest an Editor, selected as the present boasts himself,
might mistake the Teufelsdrockh Serpent-of-Eternity in like manner? For
which reason it was to be altered, not without underhand satire, into
a plainer Symbol? Or is this merely one of his half-sophisms,
half-truisms, which if he can but set on the back of a Figure, he cares
not whither it gallop? We say not with certainty; and indeed, so strange
is the Professor, can never say. If our suspicion be wholly unfounded,
let his own questionable ways, not our necessary circumspectness bear
the blame.

But be this as it will, the somewhat exasperated and indeed exhausted
Editor determines here to shut these Paper-bags for the present. Let it
suffice that we know of Teufelsdrockh, so far, if "not what he did, yet
what he became:" the rather, as his character has now taken its ultimate
bent, and no new revolution, of importance, is to be looked for. The
imprisoned Chrysalis is now a winged Psyche: and such, wheresoever
be its flight, it will continue. To trace by what complex gyrations
(flights or involuntary waftings) through the mere external
Life-element, Teufelsdrockh, reaches his University Professorship, and
the Psyche clothes herself in civic Titles, without altering her now
fixed nature,--would be comparatively an unproductive task, were we even
unsuspicious of its being, for us at least, a false and impossible one.
His outward Biography, therefore, which, at the Blumine Lover's-Leap, we
saw churned utterly into spray-vapor, may hover in that condition, for
aught that concerns us here. Enough that by survey of certain "pools and
plashes," we have ascertained its general direction; do we not already
know that, by one way and other, it _has_ long since rained down again
into a stream; and even now, at Weissnichtwo, flows deep and still,
fraught with the _Philosophy of Clothes_, and visible to whoso will
cast eye thereon? Over much invaluable matter, that lies scattered,
like jewels among quarry-rubbish, in those Paper-catacombs, we may have
occasion to glance back, and somewhat will demand insertion at the right
place: meanwhile be our tiresome diggings therein suspended.

If now, before reopening the great _Clothes-Volume_, we ask what our
degree of progress, during these Ten Chapters, has been, towards right
understanding of the _Clothes-Philosophy_, let not our discouragement
become total. To speak in that old figure of the Hell-gate Bridge over
Chaos, a few flying pontoons have perhaps been added, though as yet they
drift straggling on the Flood; how far they will reach, when once the
chains are straightened and fastened, can, at present, only be matter of
conjecture.

So much we already calculate: Through many a little loophole, we have
had glimpses into the internal world of Teufelsdrockh; his strange
mystic, almost magic Diagram of the Universe, and how it was gradually
drawn, is not henceforth altogether dark to us. Those mysterious ideas
on TIME, which merit consideration, and are not wholly unintelligible
with such, may by and by prove significant. Still more may his somewhat
peculiar view of Nature, the decisive Oneness he ascribes to Nature. How
all Nature and Life are but one _Garment_, a "Living Garment," woven and
ever a-weaving in the "Loom of Time;" is not here, indeed, the outline
of a whole _Clothes-Philosophy_; at least the arena it is to work in?
Remark, too, that the Character of the Man, nowise without meaning
in such a matter, becomes less enigmatic: amid so much tumultuous
obscurity, almost like diluted madness, do not a certain indomitable
Defiance and yet a boundless Reverence seem to loom forth, as the two
mountain-summits, on whose rock-strata all the rest were based and
built?

Nay further, may we not say that Teufelsdrockh's Biography, allowing it
even, as suspected, only a hieroglyphical truth, exhibits a man, as it
were preappointed for Clothes-Philosophy? To look through the Shows of
things into Things themselves he is led and compelled. The "Passivity"
given him by birth is fostered by all turns of his fortune. Everywhere
cast out, like oil out of water, from mingling in any Employment, in
any public Communion, he has no portion but Solitude, and a life of
Meditation. The whole energy of his existence is directed, through long
years, on one task: that of enduring pain, if he cannot cure it. Thus
everywhere do the Shows of things oppress him, withstand him, threaten
him with fearfullest destruction: only by victoriously penetrating into
Things themselves can he find peace and a stronghold. But is not this
same looking through the Shows, or Vestures, into the Things, even the
first preliminary to a _Philosophy of Clothes_? Do we not, in all
this, discern some beckonings towards the true higher purport of such
a Philosophy; and what shape it must assume with such a man, in such an
era?

Perhaps in entering on Book Third, the courteous Reader is not utterly
without guess whither he is bound: nor, let us hope, for all the
fantastic Dream-Grottos through which, as is our lot with Teufelsdrockh,
he must wander, will there be wanting between whiles some twinkling of a
steady Polar Star.




BOOK III.


CHAPTER I. INCIDENT IN MODERN HISTORY.

As a wonder-loving and wonder-seeking man, Teufelsdrockh, from an
early part of this Clothes-Volume, has more and more exhibited himself.
Striking it was, amid all his perverse cloudiness, with what force
of vision and of heart he pierced into the mystery of the World;
recognizing in the highest sensible phenomena, so far as Sense went,
only fresh or faded Raiment; yet ever, under this, a celestial Essence
thereby rendered visible: and while, on the one hand, he trod the old
rags of Matter, with their tinsels, into the mire, he on the other
everywhere exalted Spirit above all earthly principalities and powers,
and worshipped it, though under the meanest shapes, with a true
Platonic mysticism. What the man ultimately purposed by thus casting his
Greek-fire into the general Wardrobe of the Universe; what such, more
or less complete, rending and burning of Garments throughout the whole
compass of Civilized Life and Speculation, should lead to; the rather as
he was no Adamite, in any sense, and could not, like Rousseau, recommend
either bodily or intellectual Nudity, and a return to the savage
state: all this our readers are now bent to discover; this is, in fact,
properly the gist and purport of Professor Teufelsdrockh's Philosophy of
Clothes.

Be it remembered, however, that such purport is here not so much
evolved, as detected to lie ready for evolving. We are to guide our
British Friends into the new Gold-country, and show them the mines;
nowise to dig out and exhaust its wealth, which indeed remains for all
time inexhaustible. Once there, let each dig for his own behoof, and
enrich himself.

Neither, in so capricious inexpressible a Work as this of the
Professor's, can our course now more than formerly be straightforward,
step by step, but at best leap by leap. Significant Indications stand
out here and there; which for the critical eye, that looks both widely
and narrowly, shape themselves into some ground-scheme of a Whole: to
select these with judgment, so that a leap from one to the other be
possible, and (in our old figure) by chaining them together, a passable
Bridge be effected: this, as heretofore, continues our only method.
Among such light-spots, the following, floating in much wild matter
about _Perfectibility_, has seemed worth clutching at:--

"Perhaps the most remarkable incident in Modern History," says
Teufelsdrockh, "is not the Diet of Worms, still less the Battle of
Austerlitz, Waterloo, Peterloo, or any other Battle; but an incident
passed carelessly over by most Historians, and treated with some degree
of ridicule by others: namely, George Fox's making to himself a suit of
Leather. This man, the first of the Quakers, and by trade a Shoemaker,
was one of those, to whom, under ruder or purer form, the Divine Idea of
the Universe is pleased to manifest itself; and, across all the hulls
of Ignorance and earthly Degradation, shine through, in unspeakable
Awfulness, unspeakable Beauty, on their souls: who therefore are rightly
accounted Prophets, God-possessed; or even Gods, as in some periods
it has chanced. Sitting in his stall; working on tanned hides, amid
pincers, paste-horns, rosin, swine-bristles, and a nameless flood of
rubbish, this youth had, nevertheless, a Living Spirit belonging to him;
also an antique Inspired Volume, through which, as through a window, it
could look upwards, and discern its celestial Home. The task of a daily
pair of shoes, coupled even with some prospect of victuals, and
an honorable Mastership in Cordwainery, and perhaps the post of
Thirdborough in his hundred, as the crown of long faithful sewing,--was
nowise satisfaction enough to such a mind: but ever amid the boring and
hammering came tones from that far country, came Splendors and Terrors;
for this poor Cordwainer, as we said, was a Man; and the Temple of
Immensity, wherein as Man he had been sent to minister, was full of holy
mystery to him.

"The Clergy of the neighborhood, the ordained Watchers and Interpreters
of that same holy mystery, listened with un-affected tedium to his
consultations, and advised him, as the solution of such doubts, to
'drink beer, and dance with the girls.' Blind leaders of the blind!
For what end were their tithes levied and eaten; for what were their
shovel-hats scooped out, and their surplices and cassock-aprons girt
on; and such a church-repairing, and chaffering, and organing, and other
racketing, held over that spot of God's Earth,--if Man were but a Patent
Digester, and the Belly with its adjuncts the grand Reality? Fox turned
from them, with tears and a sacred scorn, back to his Leather-parings
and his Bible. Mountains of encumbrance, higher than AEtna, had been
heaped over that Spirit: but it was a Spirit, and would not lie buried
there. Through long days and nights of silent agony, it struggled and
wrestled, with a man's force, to be free: how its prison-mountains
heaved and swayed tumultuously, as the giant spirit shook them to this
hand and that, and emerged into the light of Heaven! That Leicester
shoe-shop, had men known it, was a holier place than any Vatican or
Loretto-shrine.--'So bandaged, and hampered, and hemmed in,' groaned he,
'with thousand requisitions, obligations, straps, tatters, and tagrags,
I can neither see nor move: not my own am I, but the World's; and Time
flies fast, and Heaven is high, and Hell is deep: Man! bethink thee,
if thou hast power of Thought! Why not; what binds me here? Want,
want!--Ha, of what? Will all the shoe-wages under the Moon ferry me
across into that far Land of Light? Only Meditation can, and devout
Prayer to God. I will to the woods: the hollow of a tree will lodge
me, wild berries feed me; and for Clothes, cannot I stitch myself one
perennial suit of Leather!'

"Historical Oil-painting," continues Teufelsdrockh, "is one of the Arts
I never practiced; therefore shall I not decide whether this subject
were easy of execution on the canvas. Yet often has it seemed to me as
if such first outflashing of man's Freewill, to lighten, more and
more into Day, the Chaotic Night that threatened to engulf him in its
hindrances and its horrors, were properly the only grandeur there is
in History. Let some living Angelo or Rosa, with seeing eye and
understanding heart, picture George Fox on that morning, when he spreads
out his cutting-board for the last time, and cuts cowhides by unwonted
patterns, and stitches them together into one continuous all-including
Case, the farewell service of his awl! Stitch away, thou noble Fox:
every prick of that little instrument is pricking into the heart of
Slavery, and World-worship, and the Mammon-god. Thy elbows jerk, as
in strong swimmer-strokes, and every stroke is bearing thee across the
Prison-ditch, within which Vanity holds her Workhouse and Ragfair, into
lands of true Liberty; were the work done, there is in broad Europe one
Free Man, and thou art he!

"Thus from the lowest depth there is a path to the loftiest height; and
for the Poor also a Gospel has been published. Surely if, as D'Alembert
asserts, my illustrious namesake, Diogenes, was the greatest man of
Antiquity, only that he wanted Decency, then by stronger reason is
George Fox the greatest of the Moderns, and greater than Diogenes
himself: for he too stands on the adamantine basis of his Manhood,
casting aside all props and shoars; yet not, in half-savage Pride,
undervaluing the Earth; valuing it rather, as a place to yield him
warmth and food, he looks Heavenward from his Earth, and dwells in an
element of Mercy and Worship, with a still Strength, such as the Cynic's
Tub did nowise witness. Great, truly, was that Tub; a temple from which
man's dignity and divinity was scornfully preached abroad: but greater
is the Leather Hull, for the same sermon was preached there, and not in
Scorn but in Love."


George Fox's "perennial suit," with all that it held, has been worn
quite into ashes for nigh two centuries: why, in a discussion on
the _Perfectibility of Society_, reproduce it now? Not out of blind
sectarian partisanship: Teufelsdrockh, himself is no Quaker; with all
his pacific tendencies, did not we see him, in that scene at the North
Cape, with the Archangel Smuggler, exhibit fire-arms?

For us, aware of his deep Sansculottism, there is more meant in this
passage than meets the ear. At the same time, who can avoid smiling
at the earnestness and Boeotian simplicity (if indeed there be not an
underhand satire in it), with which that "Incident" is here brought
forward; and, in the Professor's ambiguous way, as clearly perhaps as
he durst in Weissnichtwo, recommended to imitation! Does Teufelsdrockh
anticipate that, in this age of refinement, any considerable class
of the community, by way of testifying against the "Mammon-god," and
escaping from what he calls "Vanity's Workhouse and Ragfair,"
where doubtless some of them are toiled and whipped and hoodwinked
sufficiently,--will sheathe themselves in close-fitting cases of
Leather? The idea is ridiculous in the extreme. Will Majesty lay aside
its robes of state, and Beauty its frills and train-gowns, for a second
skin of tanned hide? By which change Huddersfield and Manchester, and
Coventry and Paisley, and the Fancy-Bazaar, were reduced to hungry
solitudes; and only Day and Martin could profit. For neither would
Teufelsdrockh's mad daydream, here as we presume covertly intended, of
levelling Society (_levelling_ it indeed with a vengeance, into one
huge drowned marsh!), and so attaining the political effects of Nudity
without its frigorific or other consequences,--be thereby realized.
Would not the rich man purchase a waterproof suit of Russia Leather;
and the high-born Belle step forth in red or azure morocco, lined with
shamoy: the black cowhide being left to the Drudges and Gibeonites of
the world; and so all the old Distinctions be re-established?

Or has the Professor his own deeper intention; and laughs in his sleeve
at our strictures and glosses, which indeed are but a part thereof?



CHAPTER II. CHURCH-CLOTHES.

Not less questionable is his Chapter on _Church-Clothes_, which has
the farther distinction of being the shortest in the Volume. We here
translate it entire:--

"By Church-Clothes, it need not be premised that I mean infinitely more
than Cassocks and Surplices; and do not at all mean the mere haberdasher
Sunday Clothes that men go to Church in. Far from it! Church-Clothes
are, in our vocabulary, the Forms, the _Vestures_, under which men have
at various periods embodied and represented for themselves the Religious
Principle; that is to say, invested the Divine Idea of the World with a
sensible and practically active Body, so that it might dwell among them
as a living and life-giving WORD.

"These are unspeakably the most important of all the vestures and
garnitures of Human Existence. They are first spun and woven, I may say,
by that wonder of wonders, SOCIETY; for it is still only when 'two or
three are gathered together,' that Religion, spiritually existent,
and indeed indestructible, however latent, in each, first outwardly
manifests itself (as with 'cloven tongues of fire'), and seeks to be
embodied in a visible Communion and Church Militant. Mystical, more than
magical, is that Communing of Soul with Soul, both looking heavenward:
here properly Soul first speaks with Soul; for only in looking
heavenward, take it in what sense you may, not in looking earthward,
does what we can call Union, mutual Love, Society, begin to be possible.
How true is that of Novalis: 'It is certain, my Belief gains quite
_infinitely_ the moment I can convince another mind thereof'! Gaze thou
in the face of thy Brother, in those eyes where plays the lambent fire
of Kindness, or in those where rages the lurid conflagration of Anger;
feel how thy own so quiet Soul is straightway involuntarily kindled with
the like, and ye blaze and reverberate on each other, till it is all
one limitless confluent flame (of embracing Love, or of deadly-grappling
Hate); and then say what miraculous virtue goes out of man into man. But
if so, through all the thick-plied hulls of our Earthly Life; how much
more when it is of the Divine Life we speak, and inmost ME is, as it
were, brought into contact with inmost ME!

"Thus was it that I said, the Church Clothes are first spun and woven
by Society; outward Religion originates by Society, Society becomes
possible by Religion. Nay, perhaps, every conceivable Society, past and
present, may well be figured as properly and wholly a Church, in one or
other of these three predicaments: an audibly preaching and prophesying
Church, which is the best; second, a Church that struggles to preach
and prophesy, but cannot as yet, till its Pentecost come; and third and
worst, a Church gone dumb with old age, or which only mumbles delirium
prior to dissolution. Whoso fancies that by Church is here meant
Chapter-houses and Cathedrals, or by preaching and prophesying, mere
speech and chanting, let him," says the oracular Professor, "read on,
light of heart (_getrosten Muthes_).

"But with regard to your Church proper, and the Church-Clothes specially
recognized as Church-Clothes, I remark, fearlessly enough, that without
such Vestures and sacred Tissues Society has not existed, and will not
exist. For if Government is, so to speak, the outward SKIN of the Body
Politic, holding the whole together and protecting it; and all your
Craft-Guilds, and Associations for Industry, of hand or of head, are the
Fleshly Clothes, the muscular and osseous Tissues (lying _under_ such
SKIN), whereby Society stands and works;--then is Religion the
inmost Pericardial and Nervous Tissue, which ministers Life and warm
Circulation to the whole. Without which Pericardial Tissue the Bones
and Muscles (of Industry) were inert, or animated only by a Galvanic
vitality; the SKIN would become a shrivelled pelt, or fast-rotting
rawhide; and Society itself a dead carcass,--deserving to be buried. Men
were no longer Social, but Gregarious; which latter state also could not
continue, but must gradually issue in universal selfish discord, hatred,
savage isolation, and dispersion;--whereby, as we might continue to say,
the very dust and dead body of Society would have evaporated and
become abolished. Such, and so all-important, all-sustaining, are the
Church-Clothes to civilized or even to rational men.

"Meanwhile, in our era of the World, those same Church-Clothes have gone
sorrowfully out-at-elbows; nay, far worse, many of them have become
mere hollow Shapes, or Masks, under which no living Figure or Spirit
any longer dwells; but only spiders and unclean beetles, in horrid
accumulation, drive their trade; and the mask still glares on you
with its glass eyes, in ghastly affectation of Life,--some
generation-and-half after Religion has quite withdrawn from it, and
in unnoticed nooks is weaving for herself new Vestures, wherewith
to reappear, and bless us, or our sons or grandsons. As a Priest, or
Interpreter of the Holy, is the noblest and highest of all men, so is
a Sham-priest (_Schein-priester_) the falsest and basest; neither is it
doubtful that his Canonicals, were they Popes' Tiaras, will one day be
torn from him, to make bandages for the wounds of mankind; or even to
burn into tinder, for general scientific or culinary purposes.

"All which, as out of place here, falls to be handled in my Second
Volume, _On the Palingenesia, or Newbirth of Society_; which volume,
as treating practically of the Wear, Destruction, and Retexture
of Spiritual Tissues, or Garments, forms, properly speaking, the
Transcendental or ultimate Portion of this my work on _Clothes_, and is
already in a state of forwardness."

And herewith, no farther exposition, note, or commentary being added,
does Teufelsdrockh, and must his Editor now, terminate the singular
chapter on Church-Clothes!



CHAPTER III. SYMBOLS.

Probably it will elucidate the drift of these foregoing obscure
utterances, if we here insert somewhat of our Professor's speculations
on _Symbols_. To state his whole doctrine, indeed, were beyond our
compass: nowhere is he more mysterious, impalpable, than in this of
"Fantasy being the organ of the Godlike;" and how "Man thereby, though
based, to all seeming, on the small Visible, does nevertheless extend
down into the infinite deeps of the Invisible, of which Invisible,
indeed, his Life is properly the bodying forth." Let us, omitting these
high transcendental aspects of the matter, study to glean (whether from
the Paper-bags or the Printed Volume) what little seems logical and
practical, and cunningly arrange it into such degree of coherence as
it will assume. By way of proem, take the following not injudicious
remarks:--

"The benignant efficacies of Concealment," cries our Professor, "who
shall speak or sing? SILENCE and SECRECY! Altars might still be raised
to them (were this an altar-building time) for universal worship.
Silence is the element in which great things fashion themselves
together; that at length they may emerge, full-formed and majestic, into
the daylight of Life, which they are thenceforth to rule. Not William
the Silent only, but all the considerable men I have known, and the most
undiplomatic and unstrategic of these, forbore to babble of what they
were creating and projecting. Nay, in thy own mean perplexities, do
thou thyself but _hold thy tongue for one day_: on the morrow, how much
clearer are thy purposes and duties; what wreck and rubbish have those
mute workmen within thee swept away, when intrusive noises were shut
out! Speech is too often not, as the Frenchman defined it, the art of
concealing Thought; but of quite stifling and suspending Thought,
so that there is none to conceal. Speech too is great, but not the
greatest. As the Swiss Inscription says: _Sprechen ist silbern,
Schweigen ist golden_ (Speech is silvern, Silence is golden); or as I
might rather express it: Speech is of Time, Silence is of Eternity.

"Bees will not work except in darkness; Thought will not work except in
Silence: neither will Virtue work except in Secrecy. Let not thy left
hand know what thy right hand doeth! Neither shalt thou prate even to
thy own heart of 'those secrets known to all.' Is not Shame (_Schaam_)
the soil of all Virtue, of all good manners and good morals? Like other
plants, Virtue will not grow unless its root be hidden, buried from the
eye of the sun. Let the sun shine on it, nay do but look at it privily
thyself, the root withers, and no flower will glad thee. O my Friends,
when we view the fair clustering flowers that overwreathe, for example,
the Marriage-bower, and encircle man's life with the fragrance and hues
of Heaven, what hand will not smite the foul plunderer that grubs them
up by the roots, and, with grinning, grunting satisfaction, shows us
the dung they flourish in! Men speak much of the Printing Press with
its Newspapers: _du Himmel_! what are these to Clothes and the Tailor's
Goose?

"Of kin to the so incalculable influences of Concealment, and connected
with still greater things, is the wondrous agency of _Symbols_. In
a Symbol there is concealment and yet revelation; here therefore, by
Silence and by Speech acting together, comes a double significance. And
if both the Speech be itself high, and the Silence fit and noble, how
expressive will their union be! Thus in many a painted Device, or simple
Seal-emblem, the commonest Truth stands out to us proclaimed with quite
new emphasis.

"For it is here that Fantasy with her mystic wonderland plays into the
small prose domain of Sense, and becomes incorporated therewith. In the
Symbol proper, what we can call a Symbol, there is ever, more or less
distinctly and directly, some embodiment and revelation of the Infinite;
the Infinite is made to blend itself with the Finite, to stand visible,
and as it were, attainable there. By Symbols, accordingly, is man guided
and commanded, made happy, made wretched: He everywhere finds himself
encompassed with Symbols, recognized as such or not recognized: the
Universe is but one vast Symbol of God; nay if thou wilt have it, what
is man himself but a Symbol of God; is not all that he does symbolical;
a revelation to Sense of the mystic god-given force that is in him; a
'Gospel of Freedom,' which he, the 'Messias of Nature,' preaches, as he
can, by act and word? Not a Hut he builds but is the visible embodiment
of a Thought; but bears visible record of invisible things; but is, in
the transcendental sense, symbolical as well as real."

"Man," says the Professor elsewhere, in quite antipodal contrast with
these high-soaring delineations, which we have here cut short on the
verge of the inane, "Man is by birth somewhat of an owl. Perhaps, too,
of all the owleries that ever possessed him, the most owlish, if we
consider it, is that of your actually existing Motive-Millwrights.
Fantastic tricks enough man has played, in his time; has fancied himself
to be most things, down even to an animated heap of Glass: but to fancy
himself a dead Iron-Balance for weighing Pains and Pleasures on, was
reserved for this his latter era. There stands he, his Universe one huge
Manger, filled with hay and thistles to be weighed against each other;
and looks long-eared enough. Alas, poor devil! spectres are appointed to
haunt him: one age he is hag-ridden, bewitched; the next, priest-ridden,
befooled; in all ages, bedevilled. And now the Genius of Mechanism
smothers him worse than any Nightmare did; till the Soul is nigh choked
out of him, and only a kind of Digestive, Mechanic life remains. In
Earth and in Heaven he can see nothing but Mechanism; has fear for
nothing else, hope in nothing else: the world would indeed grind him
to pieces; but cannot he fathom the Doctrine of Motives, and cunningly
compute these, and mechanize them to grind the other way?

"Were he not, as has been said, purblinded by enchantment, you had but
to bid him open his eyes and look. In which country, in which time, was
it hitherto that man's history, or the history of any man, went on by
calculated or calculable 'Motives'? What make ye of your Christianities,
and Chivalries, and Reformations, and Marseillaise Hymns, and Reigns of
Terror? Nay, has not perhaps the Motive-grinder himself been in _Love_?
Did he never stand so much as a contested Election? Leave him to Time,
and the medicating virtue of Nature."

"Yes, Friends," elsewhere observes the Professor, "not our Logical,
Mensurative faculty, but our Imaginative one is King over us; I might
say, Priest and Prophet to lead us heavenward; or Magician and Wizard to
lead us hellward. Nay, even for the basest Sensualist, what is Sense
but the implement of Fantasy; the vessel it drinks out of? Ever in the
dullest existence there is a sheen either of Inspiration or of Madness
(thou partly hast it in thy choice, which of the two), that gleams in
from the circumambient Eternity, and colors with its own hues our little
islet of Time. The Understanding is indeed thy window, too clear thou
canst not make it; but Fantasy is thy eye, with its color-giving
retina, healthy or diseased. Have not I myself known five hundred living
soldiers sabred into crows'-meat for a piece of glazed cotton, which
they called their Flag; which, had you sold it at any market-cross,
would not have brought above three groschen? Did not the whole Hungarian
Nation rise, like some tumultuous moon-stirred Atlantic, when Kaiser
Joseph pocketed their Iron Crown; an implement, as was sagaciously
observed, in size and commercial value little differing from a
horse-shoe? It is in and through _Symbols_ that man, consciously or
unconsciously, lives, works, and has his being: those ages, moreover,
are accounted the noblest which can the best recognize symbolical worth,
and prize it the highest. For is not a Symbol ever, to him who has eyes
for it, some dimmer or clearer revelation of the Godlike?

"Of Symbols, however, I remark farther, that they have both an extrinsic
and intrinsic value; oftenest the former only. What, for instance, was
in that clouted Shoe, which the Peasants bore aloft with them as ensign
in their _Bauernkrieg_ (Peasants' War)? Or in the Wallet-and-staff round
which the Netherland _Gueux_, glorying in that nickname of Beggars,
heroically rallied and prevailed, though against King Philip himself?
Intrinsic significance these had none: only extrinsic; as the accidental
Standards of multitudes more or less sacredly uniting together; in
which union itself, as above noted, there is ever something mystical and
borrowing of the Godlike. Under a like category, too, stand, or stood,
the stupidest heraldic Coats-of-arms; military Banners everywhere; and
generally all national or other sectarian Costumes and Customs: they
have no intrinsic, necessary divineness, or even worth; but have
acquired an extrinsic one. Nevertheless through all these there glimmers
something of a Divine Idea; as through military Banners themselves, the
Divine Idea of Duty, of heroic Daring; in some instances of Freedom, of
Right. Nay the highest ensign that men ever met and embraced under, the
Cross itself, had no meaning save an accidental extrinsic one.

"Another matter it is, however, when your Symbol has intrinsic meaning,
and is of itself _fit_ that men should unite round it. Let but the
Godlike manifest itself to Sense, let but Eternity look, more or less
visibly, through the Time-Figure (_Zeitbild_)! Then is it fit that men
unite there; and worship together before such Symbol; and so from day to
day, and from age to age, superadd to it new divineness.

"Of this latter sort are all true Works of Art: in them (if thou know a
Work of Art from a Daub of Artifice) wilt thou discern Eternity looking
through Time; the Godlike rendered visible. Here too may an extrinsic
value gradually superadd itself: thus certain _Iliads_, and the like,
have, in three thousand years, attained quite new significance. But
nobler than all in this kind are the Lives of heroic god-inspired Men;
for what other Work of Art is so divine? In Death too, in the Death of
the Just, as the last perfection of a Work of Art, may we not discern
symbolic meaning? In that divinely transfigured Sleep, as of Victory,
resting over the beloved face which now knows thee no more, read (if
thou canst for tears) the confluence of Time with Eternity, and some
gleam of the latter peering through.

"Highest of all Symbols are those wherein the Artist or Poet has risen
into Prophet, and all men can recognize a present God, and worship the
Same: I mean religious Symbols. Various enough have been such religious
Symbols, what we call _Religions_; as men stood in this stage of culture
or the other, and could worse or better body forth the Godlike: some
Symbols with a transient intrinsic worth; many with only an extrinsic.
If thou ask to what height man has carried it in this manner, look
on our divinest Symbol: on Jesus of Nazareth, and his Life, and his
Biography, and what followed therefrom. Higher has the human Thought
not yet reached: this is Christianity and Christendom; a Symbol of quite
perennial, infinite character; whose significance will ever demand to be
anew inquired into, and anew made manifest.

"But, on the whole, as Time adds much to the sacredness of Symbols, so
likewise in his progress he at length defaces, or even desecrates them;
and Symbols, like all terrestrial Garments, wax old. Homer's Epos has
not ceased to be true; yet it is no longer our Epos, but shines in the
distance, if clearer and clearer, yet also smaller and smaller, like
a receding Star. It needs a scientific telescope, it needs to be
reinterpreted and artificially brought near us, before we can so much as
know that it _was_ a Sun. So likewise a day comes when the Runic
Thor, with his Eddas, must withdraw into dimness; and many an African
Mumbo-Jumbo and Indian Pawaw be utterly abolished. For all things, even
Celestial Luminaries, much more atmospheric meteors, have their rise,
their culmination, their decline.

"Small is this which thou tellest me, that the Royal Sceptre is but
a piece of gilt wood; that the Pyx has become a most foolish box, and
truly, as Ancient Pistol thought, 'of little price.' A right Conjurer
might I name thee, couldst thou conjure back into these wooden tools the
divine virtue they once held.

"Of this thing, however, be certain: wouldst thou plant for Eternity,
then plant into the deep infinite faculties of man, his Fantasy and
Heart; wouldst thou plant for Year and Day, then plant into his shallow
superficial faculties, his Self-love and Arithmetical Understanding,
what will grow there. A Hierarch, therefore, and Pontiff of the World
will we call him, the Poet and inspired Maker; who, Prometheus-like, can
shape new Symbols, and bring new Fire from Heaven to fix it there. Such
too will not always be wanting; neither perhaps now are. Meanwhile, as
the average of matters goes, we account him Legislator and wise who can
so much as tell when a Symbol has grown old, and gently remove it.

"When, as the last English Coronation [*] I was preparing," concludes this
wonderful Professor, "I read in their Newspapers that the 'Champion of
England,' he who has to offer battle to the Universe for his new King,
had brought it so far that he could now 'mount his horse with little
assistance,' I said to myself: Here also we have a Symbol well-nigh
superannuated. Alas, move whithersoever you may, are not the tatters
and rags of superannuated worn-out Symbols (in this Ragfair of a World)
dropping off everywhere, to hoodwink, to halter, to tether you; nay, if
you shake them not aside, threatening to accumulate, and perhaps produce
suffocation?"

     * That of George IV.--ED.



CHAPTER IV. HELOTAGE.

At this point we determine on adverting shortly, or rather reverting,
to a certain Tract of Hofrath Heuschrecke's, entitled _Institute for the
Repression of Population_; which lies, dishonorably enough (with torn
leaves, and a perceptible smell of aloetic drugs), stuffed into the Bag
_Pisces_. Not indeed for the sake of the tract itself, which we admire
little; but of the marginal Notes, evidently in Teufelsdrockh's hand,
which rather copiously fringe it. A few of these may be in their right
place here.

Into the Hofrath's _Institute_, with its extraordinary schemes, and
machinery of Corresponding Boards and the like, we shall not so much as
glance. Enough for us to understand that Heuschrecke is a disciple of
Malthus; and so zealous for the doctrine, that his zeal almost literally
eats him up. A deadly fear of Population possesses the Hofrath;
something like a fixed idea; undoubtedly akin to the more diluted forms
of Madness. Nowhere, in that quarter of his intellectual world, is there
light; nothing but a grim shadow of Hunger; open mouths opening wider
and wider; a world to terminate by the frightfullest consummation: by
its too dense inhabitants, famished into delirium, universally eating
one another. To make air for himself in which strangulation, choking
enough to a benevolent heart, the Hofrath founds, or proposes to found,
this _Institute_ of his, as the best he can do. It is only with our
Professor's comments thereon that we concern ourselves.

First, then, remark that Teufelsdrockh, as a speculative Radical,
has his own notions about human dignity; that the Zahdarm palaces and
courtesies have not made him forgetful of the Futteral cottages. On the
blank cover of Heuschrecke's Tract we find the following indistinctly
engrossed:--

"Two men I honor, and no third. First, the toilworn Craftsman that
with earth-made Implement laboriously conquers the Earth, and makes
her man's. Venerable to me is the hard Hand; crooked, coarse; wherein
notwithstanding lies a cunning virtue, indefeasibly royal, as of
the Sceptre of this Planet. Venerable too is the rugged face, all
weather-tanned, besoiled, with its rude intelligence; for it is the face
of a Man living manlike. Oh, but the more venerable for thy rudeness,
and even because we must pity as well as love thee! Hardly-entreated
Brother! For us was thy back so bent, for us were thy straight limbs and
fingers so deformed: thou wert our Conscript, on whom the lot fell, and
fighting our battles wert so marred. For in thee too lay a god-created
Form, but it was not to be unfolded; encrusted must it stand with the
thick adhesions and defacements of Labor: and thy body, like thy soul,
was not to know freedom. Yet toil on, toil on: _thou_ art in thy duty,
be out of it who may; thou toilest for the altogether indispensable, for
daily bread.

"A second man I honor, and still more highly: Him who is seen toiling
for the spiritually indispensable; not daily bread, but the bread of
Life. Is not he too in his duty; endeavoring towards inward Harmony;
revealing this, by act or by word, through all his outward endeavors,
be they high or low? Highest of all, when his outward and his inward
endeavor are one: when we can name him Artist; not earthly Craftsman
only, but inspired Thinker, who with heaven-made Implement conquers
Heaven for us! If the poor and humble toil that we have Food, must not
the high and glorious toil for him in return, that he have Light, have
Guidance, Freedom, Immortality?--These two, in all their degrees, I
honor: all else is chaff and dust, which let the wind blow whither it
listeth.

"Unspeakably touching is it, however, when I find both dignities united;
and he that must toil outwardly for the lowest of man's wants, is also
toiling inwardly for the highest. Sublimer in this world know I nothing
than a Peasant Saint, could such now anywhere be met with. Such a one
will take thee back to Nazareth itself; thou wilt see the splendor of
Heaven spring forth from the humblest depths of Earth, like a light
shining in great darkness."

And again: "It is not because of his toils that I lament for the poor:
we must all toil, or steal (howsoever we name our stealing), which is
worse; no faithful workman finds his task a pastime. The poor is hungry
and athirst; but for him also there is food and drink: he is heavy-laden
and weary; but for him also the Heavens send Sleep, and of the deepest;
in his smoky cribs, a clear dewy heaven of Rest envelops him; and fitful
glitterings of cloud-skirted Dreams. But what I do mourn over is, that
the lamp of his soul should go out; that no ray of heavenly, or even of
earthly knowledge, should visit him; but only, in the haggard darkness,
like two spectres, Fear and Indignation bear him company. Alas, while
the Body stands so broad and brawny, must the Soul lie blinded, dwarfed,
stupefied, almost annihilated! Alas, was this too a Breath of God;
bestowed in Heaven, but on earth never to be unfolded!--That there
should one Man die ignorant who had capacity for Knowledge, this I call
a tragedy, were it to happen more than twenty times in the minute, as by
some computations it does. The miserable fraction of Science which our
united Mankind, in a wide Universe of Nescience, has acquired, why is
not this, with all diligence, imparted to all?"

Quite in an opposite strain is the following: "The old Spartans had a
wiser method; and went out and hunted down their Helots, and speared and
spitted them, when they grew too numerous. With our improved fashions
of hunting, Herr Hofrath, now after the invention of fire-arms, and
standing armies, how much easier were such a hunt! Perhaps in the most
thickly peopled country, some three days annually might suffice to shoot
all the able-bodied Paupers that had accumulated within the year. Let
Governments think of this. The expense were trifling: nay the very
carcasses would pay it. Have them salted and barrelled; could not you
victual therewith, if not Army and Navy, yet richly such infirm Paupers,
in workhouses and elsewhere, as enlightened Charity, dreading no evil of
them, might see good to keep alive?"

"And yet," writes he farther on, "there must be something wrong. A
full-formed Horse will, in any market, bring from twenty to as high
as two hundred Friedrichs d'or: such is his worth to the world. A
full-formed Man is not only worth nothing to the world, but the world
could afford him a round sum would he simply engage to go and hang
himself. Nevertheless, which of the two was the more cunningly devised
article, even as an Engine? Good Heavens! A white European Man, standing
on his two Legs, with his two five-fingered Hands at his shackle-bones,
and miraculous Head on his shoulders, is worth, I should say, from fifty
to a hundred Horses!"

"True, thou Gold-Hofrath," cries the Professor elsewhere: "too crowded
indeed! Meanwhile, what portion of this inconsiderable terraqueous Globe
have ye actually tilled and delved, till it will grow no more? How thick
stands your Population in the Pampas and Savannas of America; round
ancient Carthage, and in the interior of Africa; on both slopes of the
Altaic chain, in the central Platform of Asia; in Spain, Greece, Turkey,
Crim Tartary, the Curragh of Kildare? One man, in one year, as I have
understood it, if you lend him Earth, will feed himself and nine others.
Alas, where now are the Hengsts and Alarics of our still-glowing,
still-expanding Europe; who, when their home is grown too narrow, will
enlist, and, like Fire-pillars, guide onwards those superfluous masses
of indomitable living Valor; equipped, not now with the battle-axe
and war-chariot, but with the steam engine and ploughshare? Where are
they?--Preserving their Game!"



CHAPTER V. THE PHOENIX.

Putting which four singular Chapters together, and alongside of them
numerous hints, and even direct utterances, scattered over these
Writings of his, we come upon the startling yet not quite unlooked-for
conclusion, that Teufelsdrockh is one of those who consider Society,
properly so called, to be as good as extinct; and that only the
gregarious feelings, and old inherited habitudes, at this juncture, hold
us from Dispersion, and universal national, civil, domestic and personal
war! He says expressly: "For the last three centuries, above all for the
last three quarters of a century, that same Pericardial Nervous Tissue
(as we named it) of Religion, where lies the Life-essence of Society,
has been smote at and perforated, needfully and needlessly; till now
it is quite rent into shreds; and Society, long pining, diabetic,
consumptive, can be regarded as defunct; for those spasmodic, galvanic
sprawlings are not life; neither indeed will they endure, galvanize as
you may, beyond two days."

"Call ye that a Society," cries he again, "where there is no longer any
Social Idea extant; not so much as the Idea of a common Home, but only
of a common over-crowded Lodging-house? Where each, isolated, regardless
of his neighbor, turned against his neighbor, clutches what he can get,
and cries 'Mine!' and calls it Peace, because, in the cut-purse and
cut-throat Scramble, no steel knives, but only a far cunninger sort,
can be employed? Where Friendship, Communion, has become an incredible
tradition; and your holiest Sacramental Supper is a smoking Tavern
Dinner, with Cook for Evangelist? Where your Priest has no tongue but
for plate-licking: and your high Guides and Governors cannot guide; but
on all hands hear it passionately proclaimed: _Laissez faire_; Leave us
alone of _your_ guidance, such light is darker than darkness; eat you
your wages, and sleep!

"Thus, too," continues he, "does an observant eye discern everywhere
that saddest spectacle: The Poor perishing, like neglected, foundered
Draught-Cattle, of Hunger and Overwork; the Rich, still more wretchedly,
of Idleness, Satiety, and Overgrowth. The Highest in rank, at length,
without honor from the Lowest; scarcely, with a little mouth-honor,
as from tavern-waiters who expect to put it in the bill. Once-sacred
Symbols fluttering as empty Pageants, whereof men grudge even the
expense; a World becoming dismantled: in one word, the STATE fallen
speechless, from obesity and apoplexy; the STATE shrunken into a
Police-Office, straitened to get its pay!"

We might ask, are there many "observant eyes," belonging to practical
men in England or elsewhere, which have descried these phenomena; or
is it only from the mystic elevation of a German _Wahngasse_ that
such wonders are visible? Teufelsdrockh contends that the aspect of a
"deceased or expiring Society" fronts us everywhere, so that whoso runs
may read. "What, for example," says he, "is the universally arrogated
Virtue, almost the sole remaining Catholic Virtue, of these days?
For some half-century, it has been the thing you name 'Independence.'
Suspicion of 'Servility,' of reverence for Superiors, the very dog-leech
is anxious to disavow. Fools! Were your Superiors worthy to govern,
and you worthy to obey, reverence for them were even your only possible
freedom. Independence, in all kinds, is rebellion; if unjust rebellion,
why parade it, and everywhere prescribe it?"

But what then? Are we returning, as Rousseau prayed, to the state of
Nature? "The Soul Politic having departed," says Teufelsdrockh, "what
can follow but that the Body Politic be decently interred, to avoid
putrescence? Liberals, Economists, Utilitarians enough I see marching
with its bier, and chanting loud paeans, towards the funeral pile,
where, amid wailings from some, and saturnalian revelries from the most,
the venerable Corpse is to be burnt. Or, in plain words, that these men,
Liberals, Utilitarians, or whatsoever they are called, will ultimately
carry their point, and dissever and destroy most existing Institutions
of Society, seems a thing which has some time ago ceased to be doubtful.

"Do we not see a little subdivision of the grand Utilitarian Armament
come to light even in insulated England? A living nucleus, that will
attract and grow, does at length appear there also; and under curious
phasis; properly as the inconsiderable fag-end, and so far in the rear
of the others as to fancy itself the van. Our European Mechanizers are a
sect of boundless diffusion, activity, and co-operative spirit: has
not Utilitarianism flourished in high places of Thought, here among
ourselves, and in every European country, at some time or other, within
the last fifty years? If now in all countries, except perhaps England,
it has ceased to flourish, or indeed to exist, among Thinkers, and sunk
to Journalists and the popular mass,--who sees not that, as hereby it no
longer preaches, so the reason is, it now needs no Preaching, but is
in full universal Action, the doctrine everywhere known, and
enthusiastically laid to heart? The fit pabulum, in these times, for
a certain rugged workshop intellect and heart, nowise without their
corresponding workshop strength and ferocity, it requires but to be
stated in such scenes to make proselytes enough.--Admirably calculated
for destroying, only not for rebuilding! It spreads like a sort of
Dog-madness; till the whole World-kennel will be rabid: then woe to
the Huntsmen, with or without their whips! They should have given the
quadrupeds water," adds he; "the water, namely, of Knowledge and of
Life, while it was yet time."

Thus, if Professor Teufelsdrockh can be relied on, we are at this hour
in a most critical condition; beleaguered by that boundless "Armament of
Mechanizers" and Unbelievers, threatening to strip us bare! "The World,"
says he, "as it needs must, is under a process of devastation and
waste, which, whether by silent assiduous corrosion, or open quicker
combustion, as the case chances, will effectually enough annihilate the
past Forms of Society; replace them with what it may. For the present,
it is contemplated that when man's whole Spiritual Interests are once
_divested_, these innumerable stript-off Garments shall mostly be burnt;
but the sounder Rags among them be quilted together into one huge Irish
watch-coat for the defence of the Body only!"--This, we think, is but
Job's-news to the humane reader.

"Nevertheless," cries Teufelsdrockh, "who can hinder it; who is there
that can clutch into the wheelspokes of Destiny, and say to the Spirit
of the Time: Turn back, I command thee?--Wiser were it that we yielded
to the Inevitable and Inexorable, and accounted even this the best."

Nay, might not an attentive Editor, drawing his own inferences from what
stands written, conjecture that Teufelsdrockh, individually had yielded
to this same "Inevitable and Inexorable" heartily enough; and now sat
waiting the issue, with his natural diabolico-angelical Indifference,
if not even Placidity? Did we not hear him complain that the World was
a "huge Ragfair," and the "rags and tatters of old Symbols" were raining
down everywhere, like to drift him in, and suffocate him? What with
those "unhunted Helots" of his; and the uneven _sic vos non vobis_
pressure and hard-crashing collision he is pleased to discern in
existing things; what with the so hateful "empty Masks," full of beetles
and spiders, yet glaring out on him, from their glass eyes, "with a
ghastly affectation of life,"--we feel entitled to conclude him even
willing that much should be thrown to the Devil, so it were but done
gently! Safe himself in that "Pinnacle of Weissnichtwo," he would
consent, with a tragic solemnity, that the monster UTILITARIA, held
back, indeed, and moderated by nose-rings, halters, foot-shackles,
and every conceivable modification of rope, should go forth to do her
work;--to tread down old ruinous Palaces and Temples with her broad
hoof, till the whole were trodden down, that new and better might be
built! Remarkable in this point of view are the following sentences.

"Society," says he, "is not dead: that Carcass, which you call dead
Society, is but her mortal coil which she has shuffled off, to assume
a nobler; she herself, through perpetual metamorphoses, in fairer
and fairer development, has to live till Time also merge in Eternity.
Wheresoever two or three Living Men are gathered together, there is
Society; or there it will be, with its cunning mechanisms and stupendous
structures, overspreading this little Globe, and reaching upwards to
Heaven and downwards to Gehenna: for always, under one or the other
figure, it has two authentic Revelations, of a God and of a Devil; the
Pulpit, namely, and the Gallows."

Indeed, we already heard him speak of "Religion, in unnoticed nooks,
weaving for herself new Vestures;"--Teufelsdrockh himself being one
of the loom-treadles? Elsewhere he quotes without censure that strange
aphorism of Saint Simon's, concerning which and whom so much were to be
said: "_L'age d'or, qu'une aveugle tradition a place jusqu'ici dans le
passe, est devant nous_; The golden age, which a blind tradition has
hitherto placed in the Past, is Before us."--But listen again:--

"When the Phoenix is fanning her funeral pyre, will there not be sparks
flying! Alas, some millions of men, and among them such as a Napoleon,
have already been licked into that high-eddying Flame, and like moths
consumed there. Still also have we to fear that incautious beards will
get singed.

"For the rest, in what year of grace such Phoenix-cremation will be
completed, you need not ask. The law of Perseverance is among the
deepest in man: by nature he hates change; seldom will he quit his
old house till it has actually fallen about his ears. Thus have I seen
Solemnities linger as Ceremonies, sacred Symbols as idle Pageants, to
the extent of three hundred years and more after all life and sacredness
had evaporated out of them. And then, finally, what time the
Phoenix Death-Birth itself will require, depends on unseen
contingencies.--Meanwhile, would Destiny offer Mankind, that after, say
two centuries of convulsion and conflagration, more or less vivid, the
fire-creation should be accomplished, and we to find ourselves again
in a Living Society, and no longer fighting but working,--were it not
perhaps prudent in Mankind to strike the bargain?"

Thus is Teufelsdrockh, content that old sick Society should be
deliberately burnt (alas, with quite other fuel than spice-wood); in the
faith that she is a Phoenix; and that a new heaven-born young one
will rise out of her ashes! We ourselves, restricted to the duty of
Indicator, shall forbear commentary. Meanwhile, will not the judicious
reader shake his head, and reproachfully, yet more in sorrow than in
anger, say or think: From a _Doctor utriusque Juris_, titular Professor
in a University, and man to whom hitherto, for his services, Society,
bad as she is, has given not only food and raiment (of a kind),
but books, tobacco and gukguk, we expected more gratitude to his
benefactress; and less of a blind trust in the future which resembles
that rather of a philosophical Fatalist and Enthusiast, than of a solid
householder paying scot-and-lot in a Christian country.



CHAPTER VI. OLD CLOTHES.

As mentioned above, Teufelsdrockh, though a Sansculottist, is in
practice probably the politest man extant: his whole heart and life are
penetrated and informed with the spirit of politeness; a noble natural
Courtesy shines through him, beautifying his vagaries; like sunlight,
making a rosyfingered, rainbow-dyed Aurora out of mere aqueous clouds;
nay brightening London-smoke itself into gold vapor, as from the
crucible of an alchemist. Hear in what earnest though fantastic wise he
expresses himself on this head:--

"Shall Courtesy be done only to the rich, and only by the rich? In
Good-breeding, which differs, if at all, from High-breeding, only as
it gracefully remembers the rights of others, rather than gracefully
insists on its own rights, I discern no special connection with wealth
or birth: but rather that it lies in human nature itself, and is due
from all men towards all men. Of a truth, were your Schoolmaster at his
post, and worth anything when there, this, with so much else, would be
reformed. Nay, each man were then also his neighbor's schoolmaster; till
at length a rude-visaged, unmannered Peasant could no more be met with,
than a Peasant unacquainted with botanical Physiology, or who felt not
that the clod he broke was created in Heaven.

"For whether thou bear a sceptre or a sledge-hammer, art not thou ALIVE;
is not this thy brother ALIVE? 'There is but one temple in the world,'
says Novalis, 'and that temple is the Body of Man. Nothing is holier
than this high Form. Bending before men is a reverence done to this
Revelation in the Flesh. We touch Heaven, when we lay our hands on a
human Body.'

"On which ground, I would fain carry it farther than most do; and
whereas the English Johnson only bowed to every Clergyman, or man with
a shovel-hat, I would bow to every Man with any sort of hat, or with no
hat whatever. Is not he a Temple, then; the visible Manifestation and
Impersonation of the Divinity? And yet, alas, such indiscriminate bowing
serves not. For there is a Devil dwells in man, as well as a Divinity;
and too often the bow is but pocketed by the _former_. It would go to
the pocket of Vanity (which is your clearest phasis of the Devil, in
these times); therefore must we withhold it.

"The gladder am I, on the other hand, to do reverence to those Shells
and outer Husks of the Body, wherein no devilish passion any longer
lodges, but only the pure emblem and effigies of Man: I mean, to Empty,
or even to Cast Clothes. Nay, is it not to Clothes that most men do
reverence: to the fine frogged broadcloth, nowise to the 'straddling
animal with bandy legs' which it holds, and makes a Dignitary of? Who
ever saw any Lord my-lorded in tattered blanket fastened with wooden
skewer? Nevertheless, I say, there is in such worship a shade
of hypocrisy, a practical deception: for how often does the Body
appropriate what was meant for the Cloth only! Whoso would avoid
falsehood, which is the essence of all Sin, will perhaps see good
to take a different course. That reverence which cannot act without
obstruction and perversion when the Clothes are full, may have free
course when they are empty. Even as, for Hindoo Worshippers, the Pagoda
is not less sacred than the God; so do I too worship the hollow cloth
Garment with equal fervor, as when it contained the Man: nay, with more,
for I now fear no deception, of myself or of others.

"Did not King _Toomtabard_, or, in other words, John Baliol, reign long
over Scotland; the man John Baliol being quite gone, and only the 'Toom
Tabard' (Empty Gown) remaining? What still dignity dwells in a suit
of Cast Clothes! How meekly it bears its honors! No haughty looks,
no scornful gesture: silent and serene, it fronts the world; neither
demanding worship, nor afraid to miss it. The Hat still carries
the physiognomy of its Head: but the vanity and the stupidity, and
goose-speech which was the sign of these two, are gone. The Coat-arm is
stretched out, but not to strike; the Breeches, in modest simplicity,
depend at ease, and now at last have a graceful flow; the Waistcoat
hides no evil passion, no riotous desire; hunger or thirst now dwells
not in it. Thus all is purged from the grossness of sense, from the
carking cares and foul vices of the World; and rides there, on its
Clothes-horse; as, on a Pegasus, might some skyey Messenger, or purified
Apparition, visiting our low Earth.

"Often, while I sojourned in that monstrous tuberosity of Civilized
Life, the Capital of England; and meditated, and questioned Destiny,
under that ink-sea of vapor, black, thick, and multifarious as Spartan
broth; and was one lone soul amid those grinding millions;--often have I
turned into their Old-Clothes Market to worship. With awe-struck heart
I walk through that Monmouth Street, with its empty Suits, as through a
Sanhedrim of stainless Ghosts. Silent are they, but expressive in their
silence: the past witnesses and instruments of Woe and Joy, of Passions,
Virtues, Crimes, and all the fathomless tumult of Good and Evil in 'the
Prison men call Life.' Friends! trust not the heart of that man for whom
Old Clothes are not venerable. Watch, too, with reverence, that bearded
Jewish High-priest, who with hoarse voice, like some Angel of Doom,
summons them from the four winds! On his head, like the Pope, he has
three Hats,--a real triple tiara; on either hand are the similitude of
wings, whereon the summoned Garments come to alight; and ever, as
he slowly cleaves the air, sounds forth his deep fateful note, as
if through a trumpet he were proclaiming: 'Ghosts of Life, come to
Judgment!' Reck not, ye fluttering Ghosts: he will purify you in his
Purgatory, with fire and with water; and, one day, new-created ye shall
reappear. Oh, let him in whom the flame of Devotion is ready to go
out, who has never worshipped, and knows not what to worship, pace and
repace, with austerest thought, the pavement of Monmouth Street, and say
whether his heart and his eyes still continue dry. If Field Lane, with
its long fluttering rows of yellow handkerchiefs, be a Dionysius' Ear,
where, in stifled jarring hubbub, we hear the Indictment which Poverty
and Vice bring against lazy Wealth, that it has left them there cast
out and trodden under foot of Want, Darkness and the Devil,--then is
Monmouth Street a Mirza's Hill, where, in motley vision, the whole
Pageant of Existence passes awfully before us; with its wail and
jubilee, mad loves and mad hatreds, church-bells and gallows-ropes,
farce-tragedy, beast-godhood,--the Bedlam of Creation!"


To most men, as it does to ourselves, all this will seem overcharged.
We too have walked through Monmouth Street; but with little feeling of
"Devotion:" probably in part because the contemplative process is so
fatally broken in upon by the brood of money-changers who nestle in
that Church, and importune the worshipper with merely secular proposals.
Whereas Teufelsdrockh, might be in that happy middle state, which leaves
to the Clothes-broker no hope either of sale or of purchase, and so be
allowed to linger there without molestation.--Something we would have
given to see the little philosophical figure, with its steeple-hat and
loose flowing skirts, and eyes in a fine frenzy, "pacing and repacing in
austerest thought" that foolish Street; which to him was a true Delphic
avenue, and supernatural Whispering-gallery, where the "Ghosts of Life"
rounded strange secrets in his ear. O thou philosophic Teufelsdrockh,
that listenest while others only gabble, and with thy quick tympanum
hearest the grass grow!

At the same time, is it not strange that, in Paper-bag Documents
destined for an English work, there exists nothing like an authentic
diary of this his sojourn in London; and of his Meditations among
the Clothes-shops only the obscurest emblematic shadows? Neither, in
conversation (for, indeed, he was not a man to pester you with his
Travels), have we heard him more than allude to the subject.

For the rest, however, it cannot be uninteresting that we here find how
early the significance of Clothes had dawned on the now so distinguished
Clothes-Professor. Might we but fancy it to have been even in Monmouth
Street, at the bottom of our own English "ink-sea," that this remarkable
Volume first took being, and shot forth its salient point in his
soul,--as in Chaos did the Egg of Eros, one day to be hatched into a
Universe!



CHAPTER VII. ORGANIC FILAMENTS.

For us, who happen to live while the World-Phoenix is burning herself,
and burning so slowly that, as Teufelsdrockh calculates, it were a
handsome bargain would she engage to have done "within two centuries,"
there seems to lie but an ashy prospect. Not altogether so, however,
does the Professor figure it. "In the living subject," says he, "change
is wont to be gradual: thus, while the serpent sheds its old skin, the
new is already formed beneath. Little knowest thou of the burning of a
World-Phoenix, who fanciest that she must first burn out, and lie as a
dead cinereous heap; and therefrom the young one start up by miracle,
and fly heavenward. Far otherwise! In that Fire-whirlwind, Creation and
Destruction proceed together; ever as the ashes of the Old are blown
about, do organic filaments of the New mysteriously spin themselves: and
amid the rushing and the waving of the Whirlwind element come tones of
a melodious Death-song, which end not but in tones of a more melodious
Birth-song. Nay, look into the Fire-whirlwind with thy own eyes, and
thou wilt see." Let us actually look, then: to poor individuals, who
cannot expect to live two centuries, those same organic filaments,
mysteriously spinning themselves, will be the best part of the
spectacle. First, therefore, this of Mankind in general:--

"In vain thou deniest it," says the Professor; "thou art my Brother. Thy
very Hatred, thy very Envy, those foolish Lies thou tellest of me in
thy splenetic humor: what is all this but an inverted Sympathy? Were I
a Steam-engine, wouldst thou take the trouble to tell lies of me? Not
thou! I should grind all unheeded, whether badly or well.

"Wondrous truly are the bonds that unite us one and all; whether by the
soft binding of Love, or the iron chaining of Necessity, as we like
to choose it. More than once have I said to myself, of some perhaps
whimsically strutting Figure, such as provokes whimsical thoughts:
'Wert thou, my little Brotherkin, suddenly covered up within the largest
imaginable Glass bell,--what a thing it were, not for thyself only, but
for the world! Post Letters, more or fewer, from all the four winds,
impinge against thy Glass walls, but have to drop unread: neither from
within comes there question or response into any Post-bag; thy Thoughts
fall into no friendly ear or heart, thy Manufacture into no purchasing
hand: thou art no longer a circulating venous-arterial Heart, that,
taking and giving, circulatest through all Space and all Time: there
has a Hole fallen out in the immeasurable, universal World-tissue, which
must be darned up again!'

"Such venous-arterial circulation, of Letters, verbal Messages,
paper and other Packages, going out from him and coming in, are
a blood-circulation, visible to the eye: but the finer nervous
circulation, by which all things, the minutest that he does, minutely
influence all men, and the very look of his face blesses or curses
whomso it lights on, and so generates ever new blessing or new cursing:
all this you cannot see, but only imagine. I say, there is not a red
Indian, hunting by Lake Winnipeg, can quarrel with his squaw, but the
whole world must smart for it: will not the price of beaver rise? It is
a mathematical fact that the casting of this pebble from my hand alters
the centre of gravity of the Universe.

"If now an existing generation of men stand so woven together, not less
indissolubly does generation with generation. Hast thou ever meditated
on that word, Tradition: how we inherit not Life only, but all the
garniture and form of Life; and work, and speak, and even think and
feel, as our Fathers, and primeval grandfathers, from the beginning,
have given it us?--Who printed thee, for example, this unpretending
Volume on the Philosophy of Clothes? Not the Herren Stillschweigen and
Company; but Cadmus of Thebes, Faust of Mentz, and innumerable others
whom thou knowest not. Had there been no Moesogothic Ulfila, there
had been no English Shakspeare, or a different one. Simpleton! It was
Tubal-cain that made thy very Tailor's needle, and sewed that court-suit
of thine.

"Yes, truly, if Nature is one, and a living indivisible whole, much more
is Mankind, the Image that reflects and creates Nature, without which
Nature were not. As palpable lifestreams in that wondrous Individual
Mankind, among so many life-streams that are not palpable, flow on those
main currents of what we call Opinion; as preserved in Institutions,
Polities, Churches, above all in Books. Beautiful it is to understand
and know that a Thought did never yet die; that as thou, the originator
thereof, hast gathered it and created it from the whole Past, so thou
wilt transmit it to the whole Future. It is thus that the heroic heart,
the seeing eye of the first times, still feels and sees in us of the
latest; that the Wise Man stands ever encompassed, and spiritually
embraced, by a cloud of witnesses and brothers; and there is a living,
literal _Communion of Saints_, wide as the World itself, and as the
History of the World.

"Noteworthy also, and serviceable for the progress of this same
Individual, wilt thou find his subdivision into Generations. Generations
are as the Days of toilsome Mankind: Death and Birth are the vesper and
the matin bells, that summon Mankind to sleep, and to rise refreshed for
new advancement. What the Father has made, the Son can make and enjoy;
but has also work of his own appointed him. Thus all things wax, and
roll onwards; Arts, Establishments, Opinions, nothing is completed, but
ever completing. Newton has learned to see what Kepler saw; but there
is also a fresh heaven-derived force in Newton; he must mount to still
higher points of vision. So too the Hebrew Lawgiver is, in due time,
followed by an Apostle of the Gentiles. In the business of Destruction,
as this also is from time to time a necessary work, thou findest a like
sequence and perseverance: for Luther it was as yet hot enough to stand
by that burning of the Pope's Bull; Voltaire could not warm himself at
the glimmering ashes, but required quite other fuel. Thus likewise, I
note, the English Whig has, in the second generation, become an English
Radical; who, in the third again, it is to be hoped, will become an
English Rebuilder. Find Mankind where thou wilt, thou findest it in
living movement, in progress faster or slower: the Phoenix soars aloft,
hovers with outstretched wings, filling Earth with her music; or, as
now, she sinks, and with spheral swan-song immolates herself in flame,
that she may soar the higher and sing the clearer."

Let the friends of social order, in such a disastrous period, lay this
to heart, and derive from it any little comfort they can. We subjoin
another passage, concerning Titles:--

"Remark, not without surprise," says Teufelsdrockh, "how all high Titles
of Honor come hitherto from Fighting. Your _Herzog_ (Duke, _Dux_) is
Leader of Armies; your Earl (_Jarl_) is Strong Man; your Marshal cavalry
Horse-shoer. A Millennium, or reign of Peace and Wisdom, having from of
old been prophesied, and becoming now daily more and more indubitable,
may it not be apprehended that such Fighting titles will cease to be
palatable, and new and higher need to be devised?

"The only Title wherein I, with confidence, trace eternity is that of
King. _Konig_ (King), anciently _Konning_, means Ken-ning (Cunning), or
which is the same thing, Can-ning. Ever must the Sovereign of Mankind be
fitly entitled King."

"Well, also," says he elsewhere, "was it written by Theologians: a King
rules by divine right. He carries in him an authority from God, or man
will never give it him. Can I choose my own King? I can choose my own
King Popinjay, and play what farce or tragedy I may with him: but he who
is to be my Ruler, whose will is to be higher than my will, was chosen
for me in Heaven. Neither except in such Obedience to the Heaven-chosen
is Freedom so much as conceivable."


The Editor will here admit that, among all the wondrous provinces of
Teufelsdrockh's spiritual world, there is none he walks in with such
astonishment, hesitation, and even pain, as in the Political. How, with
our English love of Ministry and Opposition, and that generous conflict
of Parties, mind warming itself against mind in their mutual wrestle
for the Public Good, by which wrestle, indeed, is our invaluable
Constitution kept warm and alive; how shall we domesticate ourselves
in this spectral Necropolis, or rather City both of the Dead and of the
Unborn, where the Present seems little other than an inconsiderable Film
dividing the Past and the Future? In those dim long-drawn expanses, all
is so immeasurable; much so disastrous, ghastly; your very radiances and
straggling light-beams have a supernatural character. And then with
such an indifference, such a prophetic peacefulness (accounting the
inevitably coming as already here, to him all one whether it be distant
by centuries or only by days), does he sit;--and live, you would say,
rather in any other age than in his own! It is our painful duty to
announce, or repeat, that, looking into this man, we discern a deep,
silent, slow-burning, inextinguishable Radicalism, such as fills us with
shuddering admiration.

Thus, for example, he appears to make little even of the Elective
Franchise; at least so we interpret the following: "Satisfy yourselves,"
he says, "by universal, indubitable experiment, even as ye are now doing
or will do, whether FREEDOM, heaven-born and leading heavenward, and
so vitally essential for us all, cannot peradventure be mechanically
hatched and brought to light in that same Ballot-Box of yours; or
at worst, in some other discoverable or devisable Box, Edifice, or
Steam-mechanism. It were a mighty convenience; and beyond all feats of
manufacture witnessed hitherto." Is Teufelsdrockh acquainted with the
British constitution, even slightly?--He says, under another figure:
"But after all, were the problem, as indeed it now everywhere is, To
rebuild your old House from the top downwards (since you must live in
it the while), what better, what other, than the Representative Machine
will serve your turn? Meanwhile, however, mock me not with the name
of Free, 'when you have but knit up my chains into ornamental
festoons.'"--Or what will any member of the Peace Society make of such
an assertion as this: "The lower people everywhere desire War. Not so
unwisely; there is then a demand for lower people--to be shot!"

Gladly, therefore, do we emerge from those soul-confusing labyrinths
of speculative Radicalism, into somewhat clearer regions. Here, looking
round, as was our hest, for "organic filaments," we ask, may not this,
touching "Hero-worship," be of the number? It seems of a cheerful
character; yet so quaint, so mystical, one knows not what, or how
little, may lie under it. Our readers shall look with their own eyes:--

"True is it that, in these days, man can do almost all things, only not
obey. True likewise that whoso cannot obey cannot be free, still less
bear rule; he that is the inferior of nothing, can be the superior of
nothing, the equal of nothing. Nevertheless, believe not that man has
lost his faculty of Reverence; that if it slumber in him, it has gone
dead. Painful for man is that same rebellious Independence, when it has
become inevitable; only in loving companionship with his fellows does he
feel safe; only in reverently bowing down before the Higher does he feel
himself exalted.

"Or what if the character of our so troublous Era lay even in this: that
man had forever cast away Fear, which is the lower; but not yet risen
into perennial Reverence, which is the higher and highest?

"Meanwhile, observe with joy, so cunningly has Nature ordered it, that
whatsoever man ought to obey, he cannot but obey. Before no faintest
revelation of the Godlike did he ever stand irreverent; least of all,
when the Godlike showed itself revealed in his fellow-man. Thus is there
a true religious Loyalty forever rooted in his heart; nay in all
ages, even in ours, it manifests itself as a more or less orthodox
_Hero-worship_. In which fact, that Hero-worship exists, has existed,
and will forever exist, universally among Mankind, mayest thou discern
the corner-stone of living rock, whereon all Polities for the remotest
time may stand secure."

Do our readers discern any such corner-stone, or even so much as what
Teufelsdrockh, is looking at? He exclaims, "Or hast thou forgotten Paris
and Voltaire? How the aged, withered man, though but a Sceptic, Mocker,
and millinery Court-poet, yet because even he seemed the Wisest, Best,
could drag mankind at his chariot-wheels, so that princes coveted a
smile from him, and the loveliest of France would have laid their hair
beneath his feet! All Paris was one vast Temple of Hero-worship; though
their Divinity, moreover, was of feature too apish.

"But if such things," continues he, "were done in the dry tree, what
will be done in the green? If, in the most parched season of Man's
History, in the most parched spot of Europe, when Parisian life was
at best but a scientific _Hortus Siccus_, bedizened with some Italian
Gumflowers, such virtue could come out of it; what is to be looked for
when Life again waves leafy and bloomy, and your Hero-Divinity shall
have nothing apelike, but be wholly human? Know that there is in man a
quite indestructible Reverence for whatsoever holds of Heaven, or even
plausibly counterfeits such holding. Show the dullest clodpoll, show
the haughtiest featherhead, that a soul higher than himself is actually
here; were his knees stiffened into brass, he must down and worship."

Organic filaments, of a more authentic sort, mysteriously spinning
themselves, some will perhaps discover in the following passage:--

"There is no Church, sayest thou? The voice of Prophecy has gone dumb?
This is even what I dispute: but in any case, hast thou not still
Preaching enough? A Preaching Friar settles himself in every village;
and builds a pulpit, which he calls Newspaper. Therefrom he preaches
what most momentous doctrine is in him, for man's salvation; and dost
not thou listen, and believe? Look well, thou seest everywhere a
new Clergy of the Mendicant Orders, some barefooted, some almost
bare-backed, fashion itself into shape, and teach and preach, zealously
enough, for copper alms and the love of God. These break in pieces
the ancient idols; and, though themselves too often reprobate, as
idol-breakers are wont to be, mark out the sites of new Churches,
where the true God-ordained, that are to follow, may find audience, and
minister. Said I not, Before the old skin was shed, the new had formed
itself beneath it?"

Perhaps also in the following; wherewith we now hasten to knit up this
ravelled sleeve:--

"But there is no Religion?" reiterates the Professor. "Fool! I tell
thee, there is. Hast thou well considered all that lies in this
immeasurable froth-ocean we name LITERATURE? Fragments of a genuine
Church-_Homiletic_ lie scattered there, which Time will assort: nay
fractions even of a _Liturgy_ could I point out. And knowest thou no
Prophet, even in the vesture, environment, and dialect of this age? None
to whom the Godlike had revealed itself, through all meanest and highest
forms of the Common; and by him been again prophetically revealed: in
whose inspired melody, even in these rag-gathering and rag-burning days,
Man's Life again begins, were it but afar off, to be divine? Knowest
thou none such? I know him, and name him--Goethe.

"But thou as yet standest in no Temple; joinest in no Psalm-worship;
feelest well that, where there is no ministering Priest, the people
perish? Be of comfort! Thou art not alone, if thou have Faith. Spake we
not of a Communion of Saints, unseen, yet not unreal, accompanying and
brother-like embracing thee, so thou be worthy? Their heroic Sufferings
rise up melodiously together to Heaven, out of all lands, and out of all
times, as a sacred _Miserere_; their heroic Actions also, as a boundless
everlasting Psalm of Triumph. Neither say that thou hast now no Symbol
of the Godlike. Is not God's Universe a Symbol of the Godlike; is not
Immensity a Temple; is not Man's History, and Men's History, a perpetual
Evangel? Listen, and for organ-music thou wilt ever, as of old, hear the
Morning Stars sing together."



CHAPTER VIII. NATURAL SUPERNATURALISM.

It is in his stupendous Section, headed _Natural Supernaturalism_, that
the Professor first becomes a Seer; and, after long effort, such as
we have witnessed, finally subdues under his feet this refractory
Clothes-Philosophy, and takes victorious possession thereof. Phantasms
enough he has had to struggle with; "Cloth-webs and Cob-webs," of
Imperial Mantles, Superannuated Symbols, and what not: yet still did he
courageously pierce through. Nay, worst of all, two quite mysterious,
world-embracing Phantasms, TIME and SPACE, have ever hovered round
him, perplexing and bewildering: but with these also he now resolutely
grapples, these also he victoriously rends asunder. In a word, he has
looked fixedly on Existence, till, one after the other, its earthly
hulls and garnitures have all melted away; and now, to his rapt vision,
the interior celestial Holy-of-Holies lies disclosed.

Here, therefore, properly it is that the Philosophy of Clothes attains
to Transcendentalism; this last leap, can we but clear it, takes us
safe into the promised land, where _Palingenesia_, in all senses, may be
considered as beginning. "Courage, then!" may our Diogenes exclaim, with
better right than Diogenes the First once did. This stupendous Section
we, after long painful meditation, have found not to be unintelligible;
but, on the contrary, to grow clear, nay radiant, and all-illuminating.
Let the reader, turning on it what utmost force of speculative intellect
is in him, do his part; as we, by judicious selection and adjustment,
shall study to do ours:--

"Deep has been, and is, the significance of Miracles," thus quietly
begins the Professor; "far deeper perhaps than we imagine. Meanwhile,
the question of questions were: What specially is a Miracle? To that
Dutch King of Siam, an icicle had been a miracle; whoso had carried
with him an air-pump, and vial of vitriolic ether, might have worked a
miracle. To my Horse, again, who unhappily is still more unscientific,
do not I work a miracle, and magical '_Open sesame_!_'_ every time I
please to pay twopence, and open for him an impassable _Schlagbaum_, or
shut Turnpike?

"'But is not a real Miracle simply a violation of the Laws of Nature?'
ask several. Whom I answer by this new question: What are the Laws of
Nature? To me perhaps the rising of one from the dead were no violation
of these Laws, but a confirmation; were some far deeper Law, now first
penetrated into, and by Spiritual Force, even as the rest have all been,
brought to bear on us with its Material Force.

"Here too may some inquire, not without astonishment: On what ground
shall one, that can make Iron swim, come and declare that therefore
he can teach Religion? To us, truly, of the Nineteenth Century, such
declaration were inept enough; which nevertheless to our fathers, of the
First Century, was full of meaning.

"'But is it not the deepest Law of Nature that she be constant?' cries
an illuminated class: 'Is not the Machine of the Universe fixed to move
by unalterable rules?' Probable enough, good friends: nay I, too, must
believe that the God, whom ancient inspired men assert to be 'without
variableness or shadow of turning,' does indeed never change; that
Nature, that the Universe, which no one whom it so pleases can be
prevented from calling a Machine, does move by the most unalterable
rules. And now of you, too, I make the old inquiry: What those same
unalterable rules, forming the complete Statute-Book of Nature, may
possibly be?

"They stand written in our Works of Science, say you; in the accumulated
records of Man's Experience?--Was Man with his Experience present at the
Creation, then, to see how it all went on? Have any deepest scientific
individuals yet dived down to the foundations of the Universe, and
gauged everything there? Did the Maker take them into His counsel; that
they read His ground-plan of the incomprehensible All; and can say,
This stands marked therein, and no more than this? Alas, not in anywise!
These scientific individuals have been nowhere but where we also are;
have seen some hand breadths deeper than we see into the Deep that is
infinite, without bottom as without shore.

"Laplace's Book on the Stars, wherein he exhibits that certain Planets,
with their Satellites, gyrate round our worthy Sun, at a rate and in
a course, which, by greatest good fortune, he and the like of him have
succeeded in detecting,--is to me as precious as to another. But is this
what thou namest 'Mechanism of the Heavens,' and 'System of the World;'
this, wherein Sirius and the Pleiades, and all Herschel's Fifteen
thousand Suns per minute, being left out, some paltry handful of Moons,
and inert Balls, had been--looked at, nick-named, and marked in the
Zodiacal Way-bill; so that we can now prate of their Whereabout; their
How, their Why, their What, being hid from us, as in the signless Inane?

"System of Nature! To the wisest man, wide as is his vision, Nature
remains of quite _infinite_ depth, of quite infinite expansion; and
all Experience thereof limits itself to some few computed centuries and
measured square-miles. The course of Nature's phases, on this our little
fraction of a Planet, is partially known to us: but who knows what
deeper courses these depend on; what infinitely larger Cycle (of causes)
our little Epicycle revolves on? To the Minnow every cranny and pebble,
and quality and accident, of its little native Creek may have become
familiar: but does the Minnow understand the Ocean Tides and periodic
Currents, the Trade-winds, and Monsoons, and Moon's Eclipses; by all
which the condition of its little Creek is regulated, and may, from time
to time (unmiraculously enough), be quite overset and reversed? Such a
minnow is Man; his Creek this Planet Earth; his Ocean the immeasurable
All; his Monsoons and periodic Currents the mysterious Course of
Providence through AEons of AEons.

"We speak of the Volume of Nature: and truly a Volume it is,--whose
Author and Writer is God. To read it! Dost thou, does man, so much as
well know the Alphabet thereof? With its Words, Sentences, and grand
descriptive Pages, poetical and philosophical, spread out through Solar
Systems, and Thousands of Years, we shall not try thee. It is a Volume
written in celestial hieroglyphs, in the true Sacred-writing; of which
even Prophets are happy that they can read here a line and there a line.
As for your Institutes, and Academies of Science, they strive bravely;
and, from amid the thick-crowded, inextricably intertwisted hieroglyphic
writing, pick out, by dexterous combination, some Letters in the vulgar
Character, and therefrom put together this and the other economic
Recipe, of high avail in Practice. That Nature is more than some
boundless Volume of such Recipes, or huge, well-nigh inexhaustible
Domestic-Cookery Book, of which the whole secret will in this manner one
day evolve itself, the fewest dream.

"Custom," continues the Professor, "doth make dotards of us all.
Consider well, thou wilt find that Custom is the greatest of Weavers;
and weaves air-raiment for all the Spirits of the Universe; whereby
indeed these dwell with us visibly, as ministering servants, in our
houses and workshops; but their spiritual nature becomes, to the most,
forever hidden. Philosophy complains that Custom has hoodwinked us, from
the first; that we do everything by Custom, even Believe by it; that
our very Axioms, let us boast of Free-thinking as we may, are oftenest
simply such Beliefs as we have never heard questioned. Nay, what
is Philosophy throughout but a continual battle against Custom; an
ever-renewed effort to _transcend_ the sphere of blind Custom, and so
become Transcendental?

"Innumerable are the illusions and legerdemain-tricks of Custom: but of
all these, perhaps the cleverest is her knack of persuading us that the
Miraculous, by simple repetition, ceases to be Miraculous. True, it is
by this means we live; for man must work as well as wonder: and herein
is Custom so far a kind nurse, guiding him to his true benefit. But she
is a fond foolish nurse, or rather we are false foolish nurslings, when,
in our resting and reflecting hours, we prolong the same deception. Am I
to view the Stupendous with stupid indifference, because I have seen
it twice, or two hundred, or two million times? There is no reason in
Nature or in Art why I should: unless, indeed, I am a mere Work-Machine,
for whom the divine gift of Thought were no other than the terrestrial
gift of Steam is to the Steam-engine; a power whereby cotton might be
spun, and money and money's worth realized.

"Notable enough too, here as elsewhere, wilt thou find the potency of
Names; which indeed are but one kind of such custom-woven, wonder-hiding
Garments. Witchcraft, and all manner of Spectre-work, and Demonology,
we have now named Madness, and Diseases of the Nerves. Seldom reflecting
that still the new question comes upon us: What is Madness, what are
Nerves? Ever, as before, does Madness remain a mysterious-terrific,
altogether _infernal_ boiling-up of the Nether Chaotic Deep, through
this fair-painted Vision of Creation, which swims thereon, which we name
the Real. Was Luther's Picture of the Devil less a Reality, whether it
were formed within the bodily eye, or without it? In every the wisest
Soul lies a whole world of internal Madness, an authentic Demon-Empire;
out of which, indeed, his world of Wisdom has been creatively built
together, and now rests there, as on its dark foundations does a
habitable flowery Earth rind.

"But deepest of all illusory Appearances, for hiding Wonder, as for many
other ends, are your two grand fundamental world-enveloping Appearances,
SPACE and TIME. These, as spun and woven for us from before Birth
itself, to clothe our celestial ME for dwelling here, and yet to blind
it,--lie all-embracing, as the universal canvas, or warp and woof,
whereby all minor Illusions, in this Phantasm Existence, weave and paint
themselves. In vain, while here on Earth, shall you endeavor to strip
them off; you can, at best, but rend them asunder for moments, and look
through.

"Fortunatus had a wishing Hat, which when he put on, and wished himself
Anywhere, behold he was There. By this means had Fortunatus triumphed
over Space, he had annihilated Space; for him there was no Where, but
all was Here. Were a Hatter to establish himself, in the Wahngasse of
Weissnichtwo, and make felts of this sort for all mankind, what a world
we should have of it! Still stranger, should, on the opposite side
of the street, another Hatter establish himself; and, as his
fellow-craftsman made Space-annihilating Hats, make Time-annihilating!
Of both would I purchase, were it with my last groschen; but chiefly of
this latter. To clap on your felt, and, simply by wishing that you were
Anywhere, straightway to be _There_! Next to clap on your other felt,
and, simply by wishing that you were _Anywhen_, straightway to be
_Then_! This were indeed the grander: shooting at will from the
Fire-Creation of the World to its Fire-Consummation; here historically
present in the First Century, conversing face to face with Paul and
Seneca; there prophetically in the Thirty-first, conversing also face to
face with other Pauls and Senecas, who as yet stand hidden in the depth
of that late Time!

"Or thinkest thou it were impossible, unimaginable? Is the Past
annihilated, then, or only past; is the Future non-extant, or only
future? Those mystic faculties of thine, Memory and Hope, already
answer: already through those mystic avenues, thou the Earth-blinded
summonest both Past and Future, and communest with them, though as yet
darkly, and with mute beckonings. The curtains of Yesterday drop down,
the curtains of To-morrow roll up; but Yesterday and To-morrow both
_are_. Pierce through the Time-element, glance into the Eternal. Believe
what thou findest written in the sanctuaries of Man's Soul, even as all
Thinkers, in all ages, have devoutly read it there: that Time and Space
are not God, but creations of God; that with God as it is a universal
HERE, so is it an everlasting Now.

"And seest thou therein any glimpse of IMMORTALITY?--O Heaven! Is the
white Tomb of our Loved One, who died from our arms, and had to be left
behind us there, which rises in the distance, like a pale, mournfully
receding Milestone, to tell how many toilsome uncheered miles we have
journeyed on alone,--but a pale spectral Illusion! Is the lost Friend
still mysteriously Here, even as we are Here mysteriously, with
God!--know of a truth that only the Time-shadows have perished, or are
perishable; that the real Being of whatever was, and whatever is, and
whatever will be, is even now and forever. This, should it unhappily
seem new, thou mayest ponder at thy leisure; for the next twenty years,
or the next twenty centuries: believe it thou must; understand it thou
canst not.

"That the Thought-forms, Space and Time, wherein, once for all, we are
sent into this Earth to live, should condition and determine our whole
Practical reasonings, conceptions, and imagings or imaginings,
seems altogether fit, just, and unavoidable. But that they should,
furthermore, usurp such sway over pure spiritual Meditation, and blind
us to the wonder everywhere lying close on us, seems nowise so. Admit
Space and Time to their due rank as Forms of Thought; nay even, if thou
wilt, to their quite undue rank of Realities: and consider, then,
with thyself how their thin disguises hide from us the brightest
God-effulgences! Thus, were it not miraculous, could I stretch forth my
hand and clutch the Sun? Yet thou seest me daily stretch forth my hand
and therewith clutch many a thing, and swing it hither and thither.
Art thou a grown baby, then, to fancy that the Miracle lies in miles of
distance, or in pounds avoirdupois of weight; and not to see that the
true inexplicable God-revealing Miracle lies in this, that I can stretch
forth my hand at all; that I have free Force to clutch aught therewith?
Innumerable other of this sort are the deceptions, and wonder-hiding
stupefactions, which Space practices on us.

"Still worse is it with regard to Time. Your grand anti-magician,
and universal wonder-hider, is this same lying Time. Had we but the
Time-annihilating Hat, to put on for once only, we should see ourselves
in a World of Miracles, wherein all fabled or authentic Thaumaturgy, and
feats of Magic, were outdone. But unhappily we have not such a Hat; and
man, poor fool that he is, can seldom and scantily help himself without
one.

"Were it not wonderful, for instance, had Orpheus, or Amphion, built the
walls of Thebes by the mere sound of his Lyre? Yet tell me, Who built
these walls of Weissnichtwo; summoning out all the sandstone rocks, to
dance along from the _Steinbruch_ (now a huge Troglodyte Chasm, with
frightful green-mantled pools); and shape themselves into Doric and
Ionic pillars, squared ashlar houses and noble streets? Was it not
the still higher Orpheus, or Orpheuses, who, in past centuries, by the
divine Music of Wisdom, succeeded in civilizing Man? Our highest Orpheus
walked in Judea, eighteen hundred years ago: his sphere-melody, flowing
in wild native tones, took captive the ravished souls of men; and,
being of a truth sphere-melody, still flows and sounds, though now
with thousand-fold accompaniments, and rich symphonies, through all our
hearts; and modulates, and divinely leads them. Is that a wonder, which
happens in two hours; and does it cease to be wonderful if happening in
two million? Not only was Thebes built by the music of an Orpheus; but
without the music of some inspired Orpheus was no city ever built, no
work that man glories in ever done.

"Sweep away the Illusion of Time; glance, if thou have eyes, from
the near moving-cause to its far distant Mover: The stroke that came
transmitted through a whole galaxy of elastic balls, was it less a
stroke than if the last ball only had been struck, and sent flying? Oh,
could I (with the Time-annihilating Hat) transport thee direct from
the Beginnings, to the Endings, how were thy eyesight unsealed, and thy
heart set flaming in the Light-sea of celestial wonder! Then sawest thou
that this fair Universe, were it in the meanest province thereof, is in
very deed the star-domed City of God; that through every star, through
every grass-blade, and most through every Living Soul, the glory of a
present God still beams. But Nature, which is the Time-vesture of God,
and reveals Him to the wise, hides Him from the foolish.

"Again, could anything be more miraculous than an actual authentic
Ghost? The English Johnson longed, all his life, to see one; but could
not, though he went to Cock Lane, and thence to the church-vaults, and
tapped on coffins. Foolish Doctor! Did he never, with the mind's eye
as well as with the body's, look round him into that full tide of human
Life he so loved; did he never so much as look into Himself? The
good Doctor was a Ghost, as actual and authentic as heart could wish;
well-nigh a million of Ghosts were travelling the streets by his
side. Once more I say, sweep away the illusion of Time; compress the
threescore years into three minutes: what else was he, what else are we?
Are we not Spirits, that are shaped into a body, into an Appearance; and
that fade away again into air and Invisibility? This is no metaphor, it
is a simple scientific _fact_: we start out of Nothingness, take
figure, and are Apparitions; round us, as round the veriest spectre, is
Eternity; and to Eternity minutes are as years and aeons. Come there not
tones of Love and Faith, as from celestial harp-strings, like the Song
of beatified Souls? And again, do not we squeak and gibber (in our
discordant, screech-owlish debatings and recriminatings); and glide
bodeful, and feeble, and fearful; or uproar (_poltern_), and revel in
our mad Dance of the Dead,--till the scent of the morning air summons us
to our still Home; and dreamy Night becomes awake and Day? Where now
is Alexander of Macedon: does the steel Host, that yelled in fierce
battle-shouts at Issus and Arbela, remain behind him; or have they all
vanished utterly, even as perturbed Goblins must? Napoleon too, and
his Moscow Retreats and Austerlitz Campaigns! Was it all other than the
veriest Spectre-hunt; which has now, with its howling tumult that made
Night hideous, flitted away?--Ghosts! There are nigh a thousand million
walking the Earth openly at noontide; some half-hundred have vanished
from it, some half-hundred have arisen in it, ere thy watch ticks once.

"O Heaven, it is mysterious, it is awful to consider that we not only
carry each a future Ghost within him; but are, in very deed, Ghosts!
These Limbs, whence had we them; this stormy Force; this life-blood with
its burning Passion? They are dust and shadow; a Shadow-system gathered
round our ME: wherein, through some moments or years, the Divine Essence
is to be revealed in the Flesh. That warrior on his strong war-horse,
fire flashes through his eyes; force dwells in his arm and heart: but
warrior and war-horse are a vision; a revealed Force, nothing more.
Stately they tread the Earth, as if it were a firm substance: fool! the
Earth is but a film; it cracks in twain, and warrior and war-horse sink
beyond plummet's sounding. Plummet's? Fantasy herself will not follow
them. A little while ago, they were not; a little while, and they are
not, their very ashes are not.

"So has it been from the beginning, so will it be to the end. Generation
after generation takes to itself the Form of a Body; and forth issuing
from Cimmerian Night, on Heaven's mission APPEARS. What Force and
Fire is in each he expends: one grinding in the mill of Industry; one
hunter-like climbing the giddy Alpine heights of Science; one madly
dashed in pieces on the rocks of Strife, in war with his fellow:--and
then the Heaven-sent is recalled; his earthly Vesture falls away,
and soon even to Sense becomes a vanished Shadow. Thus, like some
wild-flaming, wild-thundering train of Heaven's Artillery, does this
mysterious MANKIND thunder and flame, in long-drawn, quick-succeeding
grandeur, through the unknown Deep. Thus, like a God-created,
fire-breathing Spirit-host, we emerge from the Inane; haste stormfully
across the astonished Earth; then plunge again into the Inane. Earth's
mountains are levelled, and her seas filled up, in our passage: can the
Earth, which is but dead and a vision, resist Spirits which have reality
and are alive? On the hardest adamant some footprint of us is stamped
in; the last Rear of the host will read traces of the earliest Van. But
whence?--O Heaven whither? Sense knows not; Faith knows not; only that
it is through Mystery to Mystery, from God and to God.

                        'We _are such stuff_
     As Dreams are made of, and our little Life
     Is rounded with a sleep!'"



CHAPTER IX. CIRCUMSPECTIVE.

Here, then, arises the so momentous question: Have many British Readers
actually arrived with us at the new promised country; is the Philosophy
of Clothes now at last opening around them? Long and adventurous has the
journey been: from those outmost vulgar, palpable Woollen Hulls of Man;
through his wondrous Flesh-Garments, and his wondrous Social Garnitures;
inwards to the Garments of his very Soul's Soul, to Time and Space
themselves! And now does the spiritual, eternal Essence of Man, and of
Mankind, bared of such wrappages, begin in any measure to reveal itself?
Can many readers discern, as through a glass darkly, in huge wavering
outlines, some primeval rudiments of Man's Being, what is changeable
divided from what is unchangeable? Does that Earth-Spirit's speech in
_Faust_,--

     "'Tis thus at the roaring Loom of Time I ply,
     And weave for God the Garment thou seest Him by; "

or that other thousand-times repeated speech of the Magician,
Shakespeare,--

     "And like the baseless fabric of this vision,
     The cloud-capt Towers, the gorgeous Palaces,
     The solemn Temples, the great Globe itself,
     And all which it inherit, shall dissolve;
     And like this unsubstantial pageant faded,
     Leave not a wrack behind;"

begin to have some meaning for us? In a word, do we at length stand
safe in the far region of Poetic Creation and Palingenesia, where that
Phoenix Death-Birth of Human Society, and of all Human Things, appears
possible, is seen to be inevitable?

Along this most insufficient, unheard-of Bridge, which the Editor,
by Heaven's blessing, has now seen himself enabled to conclude if not
complete, it cannot be his sober calculation, but only his fond hope,
that many have travelled without accident. No firm arch, overspanning
the Impassable with paved highway, could the Editor construct; only,
as was said, some zigzag series of rafts floating tumultuously thereon.
Alas, and the leaps from raft to raft were too often of a breakneck
character; the darkness, the nature of the element, all was against us!

Nevertheless, may not here and there one of a thousand, provided with a
discursiveness of intellect rare in our day, have cleared the passage,
in spite of all? Happy few! little band of Friends! be welcome, be of
courage. By degrees, the eye grows accustomed to its new Whereabout;
the hand can stretch itself forth to work there: it is in this grand and
indeed highest work of Palingenesia that ye shall labor, each according
to ability. New laborers will arrive; new Bridges will be built;
nay, may not our own poor rope-and-raft Bridge, in your passings and
repassings, be mended in many a point, till it grow quite firm, passable
even for the halt?

Meanwhile, of the innumerable multitude that started with us, joyous
and full of hope, where now is the innumerable remainder, whom we see no
longer by our side? The most have recoiled, and stand gazing afar
off, in unsympathetic astonishment, at our career: not a few, pressing
forward with more courage, have missed footing, or leaped short; and now
swim weltering in the Chaos-flood, some towards this shore, some towards
that. To these also a helping hand should be held out; at least some
word of encouragement be said.

Or, to speak without metaphor, with which mode of utterance
Teufelsdrockh unhappily has somewhat infected us,--can it be hidden from
the Editor that many a British Reader sits reading quite bewildered in
head, and afflicted rather than instructed by the present Work?
Yes, long ago has many a British Reader been, as now, demanding with
something like a snarl: Whereto does all this lead; or what use is in
it?

In the way of replenishing thy purse, or otherwise aiding thy digestive
faculty, O British Reader, it leads to nothing, and there is no use in
it; but rather the reverse, for it costs thee somewhat. Nevertheless,
if through this unpromising Horn-gate, Teufelsdrockh, and we by means
of him, have led thee into the true Land of Dreams; and through the
Clothes-Screen, as through a magical _Pierre-Pertuis_, thou lookest,
even for moments, into the region of the Wonderful, and seest and
feelest that thy daily life is girt with Wonder, and based on Wonder,
and thy very blankets and breeches are Miracles,--then art thou profited
beyond money's worth; and hast a thankfulness towards our Professor;
nay, perhaps in many a literary Tea-circle wilt open thy kind lips, and
audibly express that same.

Nay farther, art not thou too perhaps by this time made aware that all
Symbols are properly Clothes; that all Forms whereby Spirit manifests
itself to sense, whether outwardly or in the imagination, are Clothes;
and thus not only the parchment Magna Charta, which a Tailor was nigh
cutting into measures, but the Pomp and Authority of Law, the sacredness
of Majesty, and all inferior Worships (Worth-ships) are properly
a Vesture and Raiment; and the Thirty-nine Articles themselves are
articles of wearing-apparel (for the Religious Idea)? In which case,
must it not also be admitted that this Science of Clothes is a high one,
and may with infinitely deeper study on thy part yield richer fruit:
that it takes scientific rank beside Codification, and Political
Economy, and the Theory of the British Constitution; nay rather,
from its prophetic height looks down on all these, as on so many
weaving-shops and spinning-mills, where the Vestures which _it_ has
to fashion, and consecrate, and distribute, are, too often by haggard
hungry operatives who see no farther than their nose, mechanically woven
and spun?

But omitting all this, much more all that concerns Natural
Supernaturalism, and indeed whatever has reference to the Ulterior or
Transcendental portion of the Science, or bears never so remotely on
that promised Volume of the _Palingenesie der menschlichen Gesellschaft_
(Newbirth of Society),--we humbly suggest that no province of
Clothes-Philosophy, even the lowest, is without its direct value,
but that innumerable inferences of a practical nature may be drawn
therefrom. To say nothing of those pregnant considerations, ethical,
political, symbolical, which crowd on the Clothes-Philosopher from the
very threshold of his Science; nothing even of those "architectural
ideas," which, as we have seen, lurk at the bottom of all Modes,
and will one day, better unfolding themselves, lead to important
revolutions,--let us glance for a moment, and with the faintest light
of Clothes-Philosophy, on what may be called the Habilatory Class of our
fellow-men. Here too overlooking, where so much were to be looked on,
the million spinners, weavers, fullers, dyers, washers, and wringers,
that puddle and muddle in their dark recesses, to make us Clothes, and
die that we may live,--let us but turn the reader's attention upon
two small divisions of mankind, who, like moths, may be regarded as
Cloth-animals, creatures that live, move and have their being in Cloth:
we mean, Dandies and Tailors.

In regard to both which small divisions it may be asserted without
scruple, that the public feeling, unenlightened by Philosophy, is at
fault; and even that the dictates of humanity are violated. As will
perhaps abundantly appear to readers of the two following Chapters.



CHAPTER X. THE DANDIACAL BODY.

First, touching Dandies, let us consider, with some scientific
strictness, what a Dandy specially is. A Dandy is a Clothes-wearing
Man, a Man whose trade, office and existence consists in the wearing
of Clothes. Every faculty of his soul, spirit, purse and person is
heroically consecrated to this one object, the wearing of Clothes
wisely and well: so that as others dress to live, he lives to dress.
The all-importance of Clothes, which a German Professor, of unequalled
learning and acumen, writes his enormous Volume to demonstrate, has
sprung up in the intellect of the Dandy without effort, like an
instinct of genius; he is inspired with Cloth, a Poet of Cloth. What
Teufelsdrockh would call a "Divine Idea of Cloth" is born with him; and
this, like other such Ideas, will express itself outwardly, or wring his
heart asunder with unutterable throes.

But, like a generous, creative enthusiast, he fearlessly makes his Idea
an Action; shows himself in peculiar guise to mankind; walks forth, a
witness and living Martyr to the eternal worth of Clothes. We called him
a Poet: is not his body the (stuffed) parchment-skin whereon he writes,
with cunning Huddersfield dyes, a Sonnet to his mistress' eyebrow? Say,
rather, an Epos, and _Clotha Virumque cano_, to the whole world, in
Macaronic verses, which he that runs may read. Nay, if you grant, what
seems to be admissible, that the Dandy has a Thinking-principle in
him, and some notions of Time and Space, is there not in this
life-devotedness to Cloth, in this so willing sacrifice of the Immortal
to the Perishable, something (though in reverse order) of that blending
and identification of Eternity with Time, which, as we have seen,
constitutes the Prophetic character?

And now, for all this perennial Martyrdom, and Poesy, and even Prophecy,
what is it that the Dandy asks in return? Solely, we may say, that you
would recognize his existence; would admit him to be a living object; or
even failing this, a visual object, or thing that will reflect rays
of light. Your silver or your gold (beyond what the niggardly Law has
already secured him) he solicits not; simply the glance of your eyes.
Understand his mystic significance, or altogether miss and misinterpret
it; do but look at him, and he is contented. May we not well cry shame
on an ungrateful world, which refuses even this poor boon; which will
waste its optic faculty on dried Crocodiles, and Siamese Twins; and
over the domestic wonderful wonder of wonders, a live Dandy, glance with
hasty indifference, and a scarcely concealed contempt! Him no Zoologist
classes among the Mammalia, no Anatomist dissects with care: when did we
see any injected Preparation of the Dandy in our Museums; any specimen
of him preserved in spirits! Lord Herringbone may dress himself in a
snuff-brown suit, with snuff-brown shirt and shoes: it skills not; the
undiscerning public, occupied with grosser wants, passes by regardless
on the other side.

The age of Curiosity, like that of Chivalry, is indeed, properly
speaking, gone. Yet perhaps only gone to sleep: for here arises the
Clothes-Philosophy to resuscitate, strangely enough, both the one and
the other! Should sound views of this Science come to prevail, the
essential nature of the British Dandy, and the mystic significance that
lies in him, cannot always remain hidden under laughable and lamentable
hallucination. The following long Extract from Professor Teufelsdrockh
may set the matter, if not in its true light, yet in the way towards
such. It is to be regretted, however, that here, as so often elsewhere,
the Professor's keen philosophic perspicacity is somewhat marred by a
certain mixture of almost owlish purblindness, or else of some perverse,
ineffectual, ironic tendency; our readers shall judge which:--


"In these distracted times," writes he, "when the Religious Principle,
driven out of most Churches, either lies unseen in the hearts of good
men, looking and longing and silently working there towards some new
Revelation; or else wanders homeless over the world, like a disembodied
soul seeking its terrestrial organization,--into how many strange
shapes, of Superstition and Fanaticism, does it not tentatively and
errantly cast itself! The higher Enthusiasm of man's nature is for the
while without Exponent; yet does it continue indestructible, unweariedly
active, and work blindly in the great chaotic deep: thus Sect after
Sect, and Church after Church, bodies itself forth, and melts again into
new metamorphosis.

"Chiefly is this observable in England, which, as the wealthiest and
worst-instructed of European nations, offers precisely the elements
(of Heat, namely, and of Darkness), in which such moon-calves and
monstrosities are best generated. Among the newer Sects of that country,
one of the most notable, and closely connected with our present subject,
is that of the _Dandies_; concerning which, what little information I
have been able to procure may fitly stand here.

"It is true, certain of the English Journalists, men generally without
sense for the Religious Principle, or judgment for its manifestations,
speak, in their brief enigmatic notices, as if this were perhaps
rather a Secular Sect, and not a Religious one; nevertheless, to the
psychologic eye its devotional and even sacrificial character
plainly enough reveals itself. Whether it belongs to the class of
Fetish-worships, or of Hero-worships or Polytheisms, or to what other
class, may in the present state of our intelligence remain undecided
(_schweben_). A certain touch of Manicheism, not indeed in the Gnostic
shape, is discernible enough; also (for human Error walks in a cycle,
and reappears at intervals) a not-inconsiderable resemblance to that
Superstition of the Athos Monks, who by fasting from all nourishment,
and looking intensely for a length of time into their own navels, came
to discern therein the true Apocalypse of Nature, and Heaven Unveiled.
To my own surmise, it appears as if this Dandiacal Sect were but a new
modification, adapted to the new time, of that primeval Superstition,
_Self-worship_; which Zerdusht, Quangfoutchee, Mahomet, and others,
strove rather to subordinate and restrain than to eradicate; and which
only in the purer forms of Religion has been altogether rejected.
Wherefore, if any one chooses to name it revived Ahrimanism, or a new
figure of Demon-Worship, I have, so far as is yet visible, no objection.

"For the rest, these people, animated with the zeal of a new Sect,
display courage and perseverance, and what force there is in man's
nature, though never so enslaved. They affect great purity and
separatism; distinguish themselves by a particular costume (whereof some
notices were given in the earlier part of this Volume); likewise, so
far as possible, by a particular speech (apparently some broken
_Lingua-franca_, or English-French); and, on the whole, strive to
maintain a true Nazarene deportment, and keep themselves unspotted from
the world.

"They have their Temples, whereof the chief, as the Jewish Temple did,
stands in their metropolis; and is named _Almack's_, a word of
uncertain etymology. They worship principally by night; and have their
High-priests and High-priestesses, who, however, do not continue for
life. The rites, by some supposed to be of the Menadic sort, or perhaps
with an Eleusinian or Cabiric character, are held strictly secret.
Nor are Sacred Books wanting to the Sect; these they call _Fashionable
Novels_: however, the Canon is not completed, and some are canonical and
others not.

"Of such Sacred Books I, not without expense, procured myself some
samples; and in hope of true insight, and with the zeal which beseems an
Inquirer into Clothes, set to interpret and study them. But wholly to
no purpose: that tough faculty of reading, for which the world will not
refuse me credit, was here for the first time foiled and set at naught.
In vain that I summoned my whole energies (_mich weidlich anstrengte_),
and did my very utmost; at the end of some short space, I was uniformly
seized with not so much what I can call a drumming in my ears, as a kind
of infinite, unsufferable, Jew's-harping and scrannel-piping there; to
which the frightfullest species of Magnetic Sleep soon supervened. And
if I strove to shake this away, and absolutely would not yield, there
came a hitherto unfelt sensation, as of _Delirium Tremens_, and a
melting into total deliquium: till at last, by order of the Doctor,
dreading ruin to my whole intellectual and bodily faculties, and a
general breaking up of the constitution, I reluctantly but determinedly
forbore. Was there some miracle at work here; like those Fire-balls,
and supernal and infernal prodigies, which, in the case of the Jewish
Mysteries, have also more than once scared back the Alien? Be this as
it may, such failure on my part, after best efforts, must excuse the
imperfection of this sketch; altogether incomplete, yet the completest I
could give of a Sect too singular to be omitted.

"Loving my own life and senses as I do, no power shall induce me, as a
private individual, to open another _Fashionable Novel_. But luckily,
in this dilemma, comes a hand from the clouds; whereby if not victory,
deliverance is held out to me. Round one of those Book-packages, which
the _Stillschweigen'sche Buchhandlung_ is in the habit of importing
from England, come, as is usual, various waste printed-sheets
(_Maculatur-blatter_), by way of interior wrappage: into these the
Clothes-Philosopher, with a certain Mahometan reverence even for
waste-paper, where curious knowledge will sometimes hover, disdains not
to cast his eye. Readers may judge of his astonishment when on such
a defaced stray-sheet, probably the outcast fraction of some English
Periodical, such as they name _Magazine_, appears something like a
Dissertation on this very subject of _Fashionable Novels_! It sets out,
indeed, chiefly from a Secular point of view; directing itself, not
without asperity, against some to me unknown individual named _Pelham_,
who seems to be a Mystagogue, and leading Teacher and Preacher of the
Sect; so that, what indeed otherwise was not to be expected in such a
fugitive fragmentary sheet, the true secret, the Religious physiognomy
and physiology of the Dandiacal Body, is nowise laid fully open there.
Nevertheless, scattered lights do from time to time sparkle out, whereby
I have endeavored to profit. Nay, in one passage selected from the
Prophecies, or Mythic Theogonies, or whatever they are (for the style
seems very mixed) of this Mystagogue, I find what appears to be a
Confession of Faith, or Whole Duty of Man, according to the tenets of
that Sect. Which Confession or Whole Duty, therefore, as proceeding
from a source so authentic, I shall here arrange under Seven distinct
Articles, and in very abridged shape lay before the German world;
therewith taking leave of this matter. Observe also, that to avoid
possibility of error, I, as far as may be, quote literally from the
Original:--

ARTICLES OF FAITH.

'1. Coats should have nothing of the triangle about them; at the same
time, wrinkles behind should be carefully avoided.

'2. The collar is a very important point: it should be low behind, and
slightly rolled.

'3. No license of fashion can allow a man of delicate taste to adopt the
posterial luxuriance of a Hottentot.

'4. There is safety in a swallow-tail.

'5. The good sense of a gentleman is nowhere more finely developed than
in his rings.

'6. It is permitted to mankind, under certain restrictions, to wear
white waistcoats.

'7. The trousers must be exceedingly tight across the hips.'

"All which Propositions I, for the present, content myself with modestly
but peremptorily and irrevocably denying.

"In strange contrast with this Dandiacal Body stands another British
Sect, originally, as I understand, of Ireland, where its chief seat
still is; but known also in the main Island, and indeed everywhere
rapidly spreading. As this Sect has hitherto emitted no Canonical Books,
it remains to me in the same state of obscurity as the Dandiacal, which
has published Books that the unassisted human faculties are inadequate
to read. The members appear to be designated by a considerable diversity
of names, according to their various places of establishment: in England
they are generally called the _Drudge_ Sect; also, unphilosophically
enough, the _White Negroes_; and, chiefly in scorn by those of other
communions, the _Ragged-Beggar_ Sect. In Scotland, again, I find them
entitled _Hallanshakers_, or the _Stook of Duds_ Sect; any individual
communicant is named _Stook of Duds_ (that is, Shock of Rags), in
allusion, doubtless, to their professional Costume. While in Ireland,
which, as mentioned, is their grand parent hive, they go by a perplexing
multiplicity of designations, such as _Bogtrotters, Redshanks,
Ribbonmen, Cottiers, Peep-of-Day Boys, Babes of the Wood, Rockites,
Poor-Slaves_: which last, however, seems to be the primary and generic
name; whereto, probably enough, the others are only subsidiary species,
or slight varieties; or, at most, propagated offsets from the parent
stem, whose minute subdivisions, and shades of difference, it were
here loss of time to dwell on. Enough for us to understand, what seems
indubitable, that the original Sect is that of the _Poor-Slaves_;
whose doctrines, practices, and fundamental characteristics pervade and
animate the whole Body, howsoever denominated or outwardly diversified.

"The precise speculative tenets of this Brotherhood: how the Universe,
and Man, and Man's Life, picture themselves to the mind of an Irish
Poor-Slave; with what feelings and opinions he looks forward on the
Future, round on the Present, back on the Past, it were extremely
difficult to specify. Something Monastic there appears to be in their
Constitution: we find them bound by the two Monastic Vows, of Poverty
and Obedience; which vows, especially the former, it is said, they
observe with great strictness; nay, as I have understood it, they are
pledged, and be it by any solemn Nazarene ordination or not, irrevocably
consecrated thereto, even _before_ birth. That the third Monastic
Vow, of Chastity, is rigidly enforced among them, I find no ground to
conjecture.

"Furthermore, they appear to imitate the Dandiacal Sect in their grand
principle of wearing a peculiar Costume. Of which Irish Poor-Slave
Costume no description will indeed be found in the present Volume; for
this reason, that by the imperfect organ of Language it did not seem
describable. Their raiment consists of innumerable skirts, lappets
and irregular wings, of all cloths and of all colors; through the
labyrinthic intricacies of which their bodies are introduced by some
unknown process. It is fastened together by a multiplex combination of
buttons, thrums and skewers; to which frequently is added a girdle of
leather, of hempen or even of straw rope, round the loins. To straw
rope, indeed, they seem partial, and often wear it by way of sandals.
In head-dress they affect a certain freedom: hats with partial brim,
without crown, or with only a loose, hinged, or valve crown; in the
former case, they sometimes invert the hat, and wear it brim uppermost,
like a university-cap, with what view is unknown.

"The name Poor-Slaves seems to indicate a Slavonic, Polish, or Russian
origin: not so, however, the interior essence and spirit of their
Superstition, which rather displays a Teutonic or Druidical character.
One might fancy them worshippers of Hertha, or the Earth: for they dig
and affectionately work continually in her bosom; or else, shut up in
private Oratories, meditate and manipulate the substances derived from
her; seldom looking up towards the Heavenly Luminaries, and then with
comparative indifference. Like the Druids, on the other hand, they live
in dark dwellings; often even breaking their glass windows, where they
find such, and stuffing them up with pieces of raiment, or other
opaque substances, till the fit obscurity is restored. Again, like all
followers of Nature-Worship, they are liable to out-breakings of an
enthusiasm rising to ferocity; and burn men, if not in wicker idols, yet
in sod cottages.

"In respect of diet, they have also their observances. All Poor-Slaves
are Rhizophagous (or Root-eaters); a few are Ichthyophagous, and use
Salted Herrings: other animal food they abstain from; except indeed,
with perhaps some strange inverted fragment of a Brahminical feeling,
such animals as die a natural death. Their universal sustenance is the
root named Potato, cooked by fire alone; and generally without condiment
or relish of any kind, save an unknown condiment named _Point_, into
the meaning of which I have vainly inquired; the victual
_Potatoes-and-Point_ not appearing, at least not with specific accuracy
of description, in any European Cookery-Book whatever. For drink, they
use, with an almost epigrammatic counterpoise of taste, Milk, which
is the mildest of liquors, and _Potheen_, which is the fiercest. This
latter I have tasted, as well as the English _Blue-Ruin_, and the Scotch
_Whiskey_, analogous fluids used by the Sect in those countries:
it evidently contains some form of alcohol, in the highest state of
concentration, though disguised with acrid oils; and is, on the whole,
the most pungent substance known to me,--indeed, a perfect liquid
fire. In all their Religious Solemnities, Potheen is said to be an
indispensable requisite, and largely consumed.

"An Irish Traveller, of perhaps common veracity, who presents himself
under the to me unmeaning title of _The late John Bernard_, offers
the following sketch of a domestic establishment, the inmates whereof,
though such is not stated expressly, appear to have been of that Faith.
Thereby shall my German readers now behold an Irish Poor-Slave, as it
were with their own eyes; and even see him at meat. Moreover, in the
so precious waste-paper sheet above mentioned, I have found some
corresponding picture of a Dandiacal Household, painted by that same
Dandiacal Mystagogue, or Theogonist: this also, by way of counterpart
and contrast, the world shall look into.

"First, therefore, of the Poor-Slave, who appears likewise to have been
a species of Innkeeper. I quote from the original:


POOR-SLAVE HOUSEHOLD.

"'The furniture of this Caravansera consisted of a large iron Pot, two
oaken Tables, two Benches, two Chairs, and a Potheen Noggin. There was
a Loft above (attainable by a ladder), upon which the inmates slept; and
the space below was divided by a hurdle into two Apartments; the one for
their cow and pig, the other for themselves and guests. On entering the
house we discovered the family, eleven in number, at dinner: the father
sitting at the top, the mother at the bottom, the children on each side,
of a large oaken Board, which was scooped out in the middle, like a
trough, to receive the contents of their Pot of Potatoes. Little holes
were cut at equal distances to contain Salt; and a bowl of Milk stood on
the table: all the luxuries of meat and beer, bread, knives and dishes
were dispensed with.' The Poor-Slave himself our Traveller found, as he
says, broad-backed, black-browed, of great personal strength, and mouth
from ear to ear. His Wife was a sun-browned but well-featured woman; and
his young ones, bare and chubby, had the appetite of ravens. Of their
Philosophical or Religious tenets or observances, no notice or hint.

"But now, secondly, of the Dandiacal Household; in which, truly, that
often-mentioned Mystagogue and inspired Penman himself has his abode:--


DANDIACAL HOUSEHOLD.

"'A Dressing-room splendidly furnished; violet-colored curtains, chairs
and ottomans of the same hue. Two full-length Mirrors are placed, one on
each side of a table, which supports the luxuries of the Toilet. Several
Bottles of Perfumes, arranged in a peculiar fashion, stand upon a
smaller table of mother-of-pearl: opposite to these are placed the
appurtenances of Lavation richly wrought in frosted silver. A Wardrobe
of Buhl is on the left; the doors of which, being partly open, discover
a profusion of Clothes; Shoes of a singularly small size monopolize
the lower shelves. Fronting the wardrobe a door ajar gives some slight
glimpse of a Bath-room. Folding-doors in the background.--Enter the
Author,' our Theogonist in person, 'obsequiously preceded by a French
Valet, in white silk Jacket and cambric Apron.'

"Such are the two Sects which, at this moment, divide the more unsettled
portion of the British People; and agitate that ever-vexed country. To
the eye of the political Seer, their mutual relation, pregnant with
the elements of discord and hostility, is far from consoling. These two
principles of Dandiacal Self-worship or Demon-worship, and Poor-Slavish
or Drudgical Earth-worship, or whatever that same Drudgism may be, do
as yet indeed manifest themselves under distant and nowise considerable
shapes: nevertheless, in their roots and subterranean ramifications,
they extend through the entire structure of Society, and work
unweariedly in the secret depths of English national Existence; striving
to separate and isolate it into two contradictory, uncommunicating
masses.

"In numbers, and even individual strength, the Poor-Slaves or Drudges,
it would seem, are hourly increasing. The Dandiacal, again, is by nature
no proselytizing Sect; but it boasts of great hereditary resources, and
is strong by union; whereas the Drudges, split into parties, have as yet
no rallying-point; or at best only co-operate by means of partial secret
affiliations. If, indeed, there were to arise a _Communion of Drudges_,
as there is already a Communion of Saints, what strangest effects would
follow therefrom! Dandyism as yet affects to look down on Drudgism: but
perhaps the hour of trial, when it will be practically seen which ought
to look down, and which up, is not so distant.

"To me it seems probable that the two Sects will one day part England
between them; each recruiting itself from the intermediate ranks, till
there be none left to enlist on either side. Those Dandiacal Manicheans,
with the host of Dandyizing Christians, will form one body: the Drudges,
gathering round them whosoever is Drudgical, be he Christian or Infidel
Pagan; sweeping up likewise all manner of Utilitarians, Radicals,
refractory Pot-wallopers, and so forth, into their general mass, will
form another. I could liken Dandyism and Drudgism to two bottomless
boiling Whirlpools that had broken out on opposite quarters of the firm
land: as yet they appear only disquieted, foolishly bubbling wells,
which man's art might cover in; yet mark them, their diameter is daily
widening: they are hollow Cones that boil up from the infinite Deep,
over which your firm land is but a thin crust or rind! Thus daily is
the intermediate land crumbling in, daily the empire of the two
Buchan-Bullers extending; till now there is but a foot-plank, a mere
film of Land between them; this too is washed away: and then--we have
the true Hell of Waters, and Noah's Deluge is out-deluged!

"Or better, I might call them two boundless, and indeed unexampled
Electric Machines (turned by the 'Machinery of Society'), with batteries
of opposite quality; Drudgism the Negative, Dandyism the Positive; one
attracts hourly towards it and appropriates all the Positive Electricity
of the nation (namely, the Money thereof); the other is equally busy
with the Negative (that is to say the Hunger), which is equally potent.
Hitherto you see only partial transient sparkles and sputters: but wait
a little, till the entire nation is in an electric state: till your
whole vital Electricity, no longer healthfully Neutral, is cut into two
isolated portions of Positive and Negative (of Money and of Hunger);
and stands there bottled up in two World-Batteries! The stirring of a
child's finger brings the two together; and then--What then? The Earth
is but shivered into impalpable smoke by that Doom's thunder-peal; the
Sun misses one of his Planets in Space, and thenceforth there are no
eclipses of the Moon.--Or better still, I might liken"--

Oh, enough, enough of likenings and similitudes; in excess of which,
truly, it is hard to say whether Teufelsdrockh or ourselves sin the
more.

We have often blamed him for a habit of wire-drawing and over-refining;
from of old we have been familiar with his tendency to Mysticism and
Religiosity, whereby in everything he was still scenting out Religion:
but never perhaps did these amaurosis-suffusions so cloud and distort
his otherwise most piercing vision, as in this of the _Dandiacal Body_!
Or was there something of intended satire; is the Professor and Seer
not quite the blinkard he affects to be? Of an ordinary mortal we should
have decisively answered in the affirmative; but with a Teufelsdrockh
there ever hovers some shade of doubt. In the mean while, if satire were
actually intended, the case is little better. There are not wanting men
who will answer: Does your Professor take us for simpletons? His irony
has overshot itself; we see through it, and perhaps through him.



CHAPTER XI. TAILORS.

Thus, however, has our first Practical Inference from the
Clothes-Philosophy, that which respects Dandies, been sufficiently
drawn; and we come now to the second, concerning Tailors. On this latter
our opinion happily quite coincides with that of Teufelsdrockh himself,
as expressed in the concluding page of his Volume, to whom, therefore,
we willingly give place. Let him speak his own last words, in his own
way:--


"Upwards of a century," says he, "must elapse, and still the bleeding
fight of Freedom be fought, whoso is noblest perishing in the van,
and thrones be hurled on altars like Pelion on Ossa, and the Moloch
of Iniquity have his victims, and the Michael of Justice his martyrs,
before Tailors can be admitted to their true prerogatives of manhood,
and this last wound of suffering Humanity be closed.

"If aught in the history of the world's blindness could surprise us,
here might we indeed pause and wonder. An idea has gone abroad, and
fixed itself down into a wide-spreading rooted error, that Tailors are a
distinct species in Physiology, not Men, but fractional Parts of a
Man. Call any one a _Schneider_ (Cutter, Tailor), is it not, in our
dislocated, hoodwinked, and indeed delirious condition of Society,
equivalent to defying his perpetual fellest enmity? The epithet
_schneidermassig_ (tailor-like) betokens an otherwise unapproachable
degree of pusillanimity; we introduce a _Tailor's-Melancholy_, more
opprobrious than any Leprosy, into our Books of Medicine; and fable I
know not what of his generating it by living on Cabbage. Why should I
speak of Hans Sachs (himself a Shoemaker, or kind of Leather-Tailor),
with his _Schneider mit dem Panier_? Why of Shakspeare, in his _Taming
of the Shrew_, and elsewhere? Does it not stand on record that the
English Queen Elizabeth, receiving a deputation of Eighteen Tailors,
addressed them with a 'Good morning, gentlemen both!' Did not the same
virago boast that she had a Cavalry Regiment, whereof neither horse nor
man could be injured; her Regiment, namely, of Tailors on Mares? Thus
everywhere is the falsehood taken for granted, and acted on as an
indisputable fact.

"Nevertheless, need I put the question to any Physiologist, whether it
is disputable or not? Seems it not at least presumable, that, under his
Clothes, the Tailor has bones and viscera, and other muscles than the
sartorius? Which function of manhood is the Tailor not conjectured
to perform? Can he not arrest for debt? Is he not in most countries a
taxpaying animal?

"To no reader of this Volume can it be doubtful which conviction is
mine. Nay if the fruit of these long vigils, and almost preternatural
Inquiries, is not to perish utterly, the world will have approximated
towards a higher Truth; and the doctrine, which Swift, with the keen
forecast of genius, dimly anticipated, will stand revealed in clear
light: that the Tailor is not only a Man, but something of a Creator or
Divinity. Of Franklin it was said, that 'he snatched the Thunder from
Heaven and the Sceptre from Kings:' but which is greater, I would ask,
he that lends, or he that snatches? For, looking away from individual
cases, and how a Man is by the Tailor new-created into a Nobleman, and
clothed not only with Wool but with Dignity and a Mystic Dominion,--is
not the fair fabric of Society itself, with all its royal mantles and
pontifical stoles, whereby, from nakedness and dismemberment, we are
organized into Polities, into nations, and a whole co-operating Mankind,
the creation, as has here been often irrefragably evinced, of the Tailor
alone?--What too are all Poets and moral Teachers, but a species of
Metaphorical Tailors? Touching which high Guild the greatest living
Guild-brother has triumphantly asked us: 'Nay if thou wilt have it,
who but the Poet first made Gods for men; brought them down to us; and
raised us up to them?'

"And this is he, whom sitting downcast, on the hard basis of his
Shopboard, the world treats with contumely, as the ninth part of a man!
Look up, thou much-injured one, look up with the kindling eye of hope,
and prophetic bodings of a noble better time. Too long hast thou sat
there, on crossed legs, wearing thy ankle-joints to horn; like some
sacred Anchorite, or Catholic Fakir, doing penance, drawing down
Heaven's richest blessings, for a world that scoffed at thee. Be of
hope! Already streaks of blue peer through our clouds; the thick gloom
of Ignorance is rolling asunder, and it will be Day. Mankind will
repay with interest their long-accumulated debt: the Anchorite that was
scoffed at will be worshipped; the Fraction will become not an Integer
only, but a Square and Cube. With astonishment the world will recognize
that the Tailor is its Hierophant and Hierarch, or even its God.

"As I stood in the Mosque of St. Sophia, and looked upon these
Four-and-Twenty Tailors, sewing and embroidering that rich Cloth, which
the Sultan sends yearly for the Caaba of Mecca, I thought within myself:
How many other Unholies has your covering Art made holy, besides this
Arabian Whinstone!

"Still more touching was it when, turning the corner of a lane, in
the Scottish Town of Edinburgh, I came upon a Signpost, whereon stood
written that such and such a one was 'Breeches-Maker to his Majesty;'
and stood painted the Effigies of a Pair of Leather Breeches, and
between the knees these memorable words, SIC ITUR AD ASTRA. Was not
this the martyr prison-speech of a Tailor sighing indeed in bonds, yet
sighing towards deliverance, and prophetically appealing to a better
day? A day of justice, when the worth of Breeches would be revealed to
man, and the Scissors become forever venerable.

"Neither, perhaps, may I now say, has his appeal been altogether in
vain. It was in this high moment, when the soul, rent, as it were, and
shed asunder, is open to inspiring influence, that I first conceived
this Work on Clothes: the greatest I can ever hope to do; which has
already, after long retardations, occupied, and will yet occupy, so
large a section of my Life; and of which the Primary and simpler Portion
may here find its conclusion."



CHAPTER XII. FAREWELL.

So have we endeavored, from the enormous, amorphous Plum-pudding, more
like a Scottish Haggis, which Herr Teufelsdrockh had kneaded for
his fellow-mortals, to pick out the choicest Plums, and present them
separately on a cover of our own. A laborious, perhaps a thankless
enterprise; in which, however, something of hope has occasionally
cheered us, and of which we can now wash our hands not altogether
without satisfaction. If hereby, though in barbaric wise, some morsel
of spiritual nourishment have been added to the scanty ration of our
beloved British world, what nobler recompense could the Editor desire?
If it prove otherwise, why should he murmur? Was not this a Task which
Destiny, in any case, had appointed him; which having now done with, he
sees his general Day's-work so much the lighter, so much the shorter?


Of Professor Teufelsdrockh, it seems impossible to take leave without
a mingled feeling of astonishment, gratitude, and disapproval. Who will
not regret that talents, which might have profited in the higher
walks of Philosophy, or in Art itself, have been so much devoted to a
rummaging among lumber-rooms; nay too often to a scraping in kennels,
where lost rings and diamond-necklaces are nowise the sole conquests?
Regret is unavoidable; yet censure were loss of time. To cure him of his
mad humors British Criticism would essay in vain: enough for her if she
can, by vigilance, prevent the spreading of such among ourselves. What
a result, should this piebald, entangled, hyper-metaphorical style of
writing, not to say of thinking, become general among our Literary men!
As it might so easily do. Thus has not the Editor himself, working over
Teufelsdrockh's German, lost much of his own English purity? Even as
the smaller whirlpool is sucked into the larger, and made to whirl along
with it, so has the lesser mind, in this instance, been forced to become
portion of the greater, and, like it, see all things figuratively: which
habit time and assiduous effort will be needed to eradicate.

Nevertheless, wayward as our Professor shows himself, is there any
reader that can part with him in declared enmity? Let us confess, there
is that in the wild, much-suffering, much-inflicting man, which almost
attaches us. His attitude, we will hope and believe, is that of a man
who had said to Cant, Begone; and to Dilettantism, Here thou canst not
be; and to Truth, Be thou in place of all to me: a man who had
manfully defied the "Time-Prince," or Devil, to his face; nay perhaps,
Hannibal-like, was mysteriously consecrated from birth to that warfare,
and now stood minded to wage the same, by all weapons, in all places,
at all times. In such a cause, any soldier, were he but a Polack
Scythe-man, shall be welcome.

Still the question returns on us: How could a man occasionally of keen
insight, not without keen sense of propriety, who had real Thoughts to
communicate, resolve to emit them in a shape bordering so closely on the
absurd? Which question he were wiser than the present Editor who should
satisfactorily answer. Our conjecture has sometimes been, that
perhaps Necessity as well as Choice was concerned in it. Seems it
not conceivable that, in a Life like our Professor's, where so much
bountifully given by Nature had in Practice failed and misgone,
Literature also would never rightly prosper: that striving with his
characteristic vehemence to paint this and the other Picture, and ever
without success, he at last desperately dashes his sponge, full of all
colors, against the canvas, to try whether it will paint Foam? With all
his stillness, there were perhaps in Teufelsdrockh desperation enough
for this.

A second conjecture we hazard with even less warranty. It is, that
Teufelsdrockh, is not without some touch of the universal feeling, a
wish to proselytize. How often already have we paused, uncertain whether
the basis of this so enigmatic nature were really Stoicism and Despair,
or Love and Hope only seared into the figure of these! Remarkable,
moreover, is this saying of his: "How were Friendship possible? In
mutual devotedness to the Good and True: otherwise impossible; except
as Armed Neutrality, or hollow Commercial League. A man, be the Heavens
ever praised, is sufficient for himself; yet were ten men, united in
Love, capable of being and of doing what ten thousand singly would fail
in. Infinite is the help man can yield to man." And now in conjunction
therewith consider this other: "It is the Night of the World, and still
long till it be Day: we wander amid the glimmer of smoking ruins, and
the Sun and the Stars of Heaven are as if blotted out for a season;
and two immeasurable Phantoms, HYPOCRISY and ATHEISM, with the Ghoul,
SENSUALITY, stalk abroad over the Earth, and call it theirs: well at
ease are the Sleepers for whom Existence is a shallow Dream."

But what of the awe-struck Wakeful who find it a Reality? Should not
these unite; since even an authentic Spectre is not visible to Two?--In
which case were this Enormous Clothes-Volume properly an enormous
Pitch-pan, which our Teufelsdrockh in his lone watch-tower had
kindled, that it might flame far and wide through the Night, and many
a disconsolately wandering spirit be guided thither to a Brother's
bosom!--We say as before, with all his malign Indifference, who knows
what mad Hopes this man may harbor?

Meanwhile there is one fact to be stated here, which harmonizes ill with
such conjecture; and, indeed, were Teufelsdrockh made like other
men, might as good as altogether subvert it. Namely, that while the
Beacon-fire blazed its brightest, the Watchman had quitted it; that
no pilgrim could now ask him: Watchman, what of the Night? Professor
Teufelsdrockh, be it known, is no longer visibly present at
Weissnichtwo, but again to all appearance lost in space! Some time ago,
the Hofrath Heuschrecke was pleased to favor us with another copious
Epistle; wherein much is said about the "Population-Institute;" much
repeated in praise of the Paper-bag Documents, the hieroglyphic nature
of which our Hofrath still seems not to have surmised; and, lastly,
the strangest occurrence communicated, to us for the first time, in the
following paragraph:--

"_Ew. Wohlgeboren_ will have seen from the Public Prints, with what
affectionate and hitherto fruitless solicitude Weissnichtwo regards the
disappearance of her Sage. Might but the united voice of Germany prevail
on him to return; nay could we but so much as elucidate for ourselves
by what mystery he went away! But, alas, old Lieschen experiences or
affects the profoundest deafness, the profoundest ignorance: in the
Wahngasse all lies swept, silent, sealed up; the Privy Council itself
can hitherto elicit no answer.

"It had been remarked that while the agitating news of those
Parisian Three Days flew from mouth to month, and dinned every ear
in Weissnichtwo, Herr Teufelsdrockh was not known, at the _Gans_ or
elsewhere, to have spoken, for a whole week, any syllable except once
these three: _Es geht an_ (It is beginning). Shortly after, as _Ew.
Wohlgeboren_ knows, was the public tranquillity here, as in
Berlin, threatened by a Sedition of the Tailors. Nor did there want
Evil-wishers, or perhaps mere desperate Alarmists, who asserted that the
closing Chapter of the Clothes-Volume was to blame. In this appalling
crisis, the serenity of our Philosopher was indescribable: nay, perhaps
through one humble individual, something thereof might pass into the
_Rath_ (Council) itself, and so contribute to the country's deliverance.
The Tailors are now entirely pacificated.--

"To neither of these two incidents can I attribute our loss: yet still
comes there the shadow of a suspicion out of Paris and its Politics. For
example, when the _Saint-Simonian Society_ transmitted its Propositions
hither, and the whole _Gans_ was one vast cackle of laughter,
lamentation and astonishment, our Sage sat mute; and at the end of the
third evening said merely: 'Here also are men who have discovered, not
without amazement, that Man is still Man; of which high, long-forgotten
Truth you already see them make a false application.' Since then, as has
been ascertained by examination of the Post-Director, there passed at
least one Letter with its Answer between the Messieurs Bazard-Enfantin
and our Professor himself; of what tenor can now only be conjectured. On
the fifth night following, he was seen for the last time!

"Has this invaluable man, so obnoxious to most of the hostile Sects that
convulse our Era, been spirited away by certain of their emissaries; or
did he go forth voluntarily to their head-quarters to confer with them,
and confront them? Reason we have, at least of a negative sort, to
believe the Lost still living; our widowed heart also whispers that ere
long he will himself give a sign. Otherwise, indeed, his archives must,
one day, be opened by Authority; where much, perhaps the _Palingenesie_
itself, is thought to be reposited."


Thus far the Hofrath; who vanishes, as is his wont, too like an Ignis
Fatuus, leaving the dark still darker.

So that Teufelsdrockh's public History were not done, then, or reduced
to an even, unromantic tenor; nay, perhaps the better part thereof were
only beginning? We stand in a region of conjectures, where substance has
melted into shadow, and one cannot be distinguished from the other. May
Time, which solves or suppresses all problems, throw glad light on this
also! Our own private conjecture, now amounting almost to certainty, is
that, safe-moored in some stillest obscurity, not to lie always still,
Teufelsdrockh, is actually in London!

Here, however, can the present Editor, with an ambrosial joy as of
over-weariness falling into sleep, lay down his pen. Well does he know,
if human testimony be worth aught, that to innumerable British readers
likewise, this is a satisfying consummation; that innumerable British
readers consider him, during these current months, but as an uneasy
interruption to their ways of thought and digestion; and indicate so
much, not without a certain irritancy and even spoken invective. For
which, as for other mercies, ought not he to thank the Upper Powers? To
one and all of you, O irritated readers, he, with outstretched arms and
open heart, will wave a kind farewell. Thou too, miraculous Entity,
who namest thyself YORKE and OLIVER, and with thy vivacities and
genialities, with thy all too Irish mirth and madness, and odor of
palled punch, makest such strange work, farewell; long as thou canst,
_fare-well_! Have we not, in the course of Eternity, travelled some
months of our Life-journey in partial sight of one another; have we not
existed together, though in a state of quarrel?




APPENDIX.

This questionable little Book was undoubtedly written among the mountain
solitudes, in 1831; but, owing to impediments natural and accidental,
could not, for seven years more, appear as a Volume in England;--and had
at last to clip itself in pieces, and be content to struggle out, bit by
bit, in some courageous _Magazine_ that offered. Whereby now, to
certain idly curious readers, and even to myself till I make study, the
insignificant but at last irritating question, What its real history and
chronology are, is, if not insoluble, considerably involved in haze.

To the first English Edition, 1838, which an American, or two American
had now opened the way for, there was slightingly prefixed, under the
title, "_Testimonies of Authors_," some straggle of real documents,
which, now that I find it again, sets the matter into clear light and
sequence:--and shall here, for removal of idle stumbling-blocks and
nugatory guessings from the path of every reader, be reprinted as it
stood. (_Author's Note, of_ 1868.)


TESTIMONIES OF AUTHORS.

I. HIGHEST CLASS, BOOKSELLER'S TASTER.

_Taster to Bookseller_.--"The Author of _Teufelsdrockh_ is a person of
talent; his work displays here and there some felicity of thought and
expression, considerable fancy and knowledge: but whether or not it
would take with the public seems doubtful. For a _jeu d'esprit_ of that
kind it is too long; it would have suited better as an essay or article
than as a volume. The Author has no great tact; his wit is frequently
heavy; and reminds one of the German Baron who took to leaping on
tables and answered that he was learning to be lively. _Is_ the work a
translation?"

_Bookseller to Editor_.--"Allow me to say that such a writer requires
only a little more tact to produce a popular as well as an able work.
Directly on receiving your permission, I sent your MS. to a gentleman in
the highest class of men of letters, and an accomplished German scholar:
I now enclose you his opinion, which, you may rely upon it, is a just
one; and I have too high an opinion of your good sense to" &c. &c.--_Ms.
(penes nos), London, 17th September_, 1831.


II. CRITIC OF THE SUN.

"_Fraser's Magazine_ exhibits the usual brilliancy, and also the" &c.

"_Sartor Resartus_ is what old Dennis used to call 'a heap of clotted
nonsense,' mixed however, here and there, with passages marked by
thought and striking poetic vigor. But what does the writer mean by
'Baphometic fire-baptism'? Why cannot he lay aside his pedantry, and
write so as to make himself generally intelligible? We quote by way
of curiosity a sentence from the _Sartor Resartus_; which may be read
either backwards or forwards, for it is equally intelligible either
way: indeed, by beginning at the tail, and so working up to the head,
we think the reader will stand the fairest chance of getting at its
meaning: 'The fire-baptized soul, long so scathed and thunder-riven,
here feels its own freedom; which feeling is its Baphometic baptism:
the citadel of its whole kingdom it has thus gained by assault, and
will keep inexpugnable; outwards from which the remaining dominions, not
indeed without hard battering, will doubtless by degrees be conquered
and pacificated.' Here is a"...--_Sun Newspaper, 1st April_, 1834.


III. NORTH--AMERICAN REVIEWER.

... "After a careful survey of the whole ground, our belief is that no
such persons as Professors Teufelsdrockh or Counsellor Heuschrecke ever
existed; that the six Paper-bags, with their China-ink inscriptions
and multifarious contents, are a mere figment of the brain; that the
'present Editor' is the only person who has ever written upon the
Philosophy of Clothes; and that the _Sartor Resartus_ is the only
treatise that has yet appeared upon that subject;--in short, that the
whole account of the origin of the work before us, which the supposed
Editor relates with so much gravity, and of which we have given a brief
abstract, is, in plain English, a _hum_.

"Without troubling our readers at any great length with our reasons for
entertaining these suspicions, we may remark, that the absence of all
other information on the subject, except what is contained in the work,
is itself a fact of a most significant character. The whole German
press, as well as the particular one where the work purports to have
been printed, seems to be under the control of _Stillschweigen and Co.
_--Silence and Company. If the Clothes-Philosophy and its author are
making so great a sensation throughout Germany as is pretended, how
happens it that the only notice we have of the fact is contained in a
few numbers of a monthly Magazine published at London! How happens it
that no intelligence about the matter has come out directly to this
country? We pique ourselves here in New England upon knowing at least
as much of what is going on in the literary way in the old Dutch
Mother-land as our brethren of the fast-anchored Isle; but thus far
we have no tidings whatever of the 'extensive close-printed,
close-meditated volume,' which forms the subject of this pretended
commentary. Again, we would respectfully inquire of the 'present Editor'
upon what part of the map of Germany we are to look for the city of
_Weissnichtwo_--'Know-not-where'--at which place the work is supposed
to have been printed, and the Author to have resided. It has been
our fortune to visit several portions of the German territory, and to
examine pretty carefully, at different times and for various purposes,
maps of the whole; but we have no recollection of any such place. We
suspect that the city of _Know-not-where_ might be called, with at
least as much propriety, _Nobody-knows-where_, and is to be
found in the kingdom of _Nowhere_. Again, the village of
_Entepfuhl_--'Duck-pond'--where the supposed Author of the work is said
to have passed his youth, and that of _Hinterschlag_, where he had his
education, are equally foreign to our geography. Duck-ponds enough there
undoubtedly are in almost every village in Germany, as the traveller
in that country knows too well to his cost, but any particular village
denominated Duck-pond is to us altogether _terra incognita_. The names
of the personages are not less singular than those of the places.
Who can refrain from a smile at the yoking together of such a pair of
appellatives as Diogenes Teufelsdrockh? The supposed bearer of
this strange title is represented as admitting, in his pretended
autobiography, that 'he had searched to no purpose through all the
Heralds' books in and without the German empire, and through all manner
of Subscribers'-lists, Militia-rolls, and other Name-catalogues,'
but had nowhere been able to find 'the name Teufelsdrockh, except as
appended to his own person.' We can readily believe this, and we doubt
very much whether any Christian parent would think of condemning a
son to carry through life the burden of so unpleasant a title. That of
Counsellor Heuschrecke--'Grasshopper'--though not offensive, looks much
more like a piece of fancy-work than a 'fair business transaction.'
The same may be said of _Blumine_--'Flower-Goddess'--the heroine of the
fable; and so of the rest.

"In short, our private opinion is, as we have remarked, that the
whole story of a correspondence with Germany, a university of
Nobody-knows-where, a Professor of Things in General, a Counsellor
Grasshopper, a Flower-Goddess Blumine, and so forth, has about as
much foundation in truth as the late entertaining account of Sir John
Herschel's discoveries in the moon. Fictions of this kind are, however,
not uncommon, and ought not, perhaps, to be condemned with too much
severity; but we are not sure that we can exercise the same indulgence
in regard to the attempt, which seems to be made to mislead the public
as to the substance of the work before us, and its pretended German
original. Both purport, as we have seen, to be upon the subject of
Clothes, or dress. _Clothes, their Origin and Influence_, is the title
of the supposed German treatise of Professor Teufelsdrockh and the
rather odd name of _Sartor Resartus_--the Tailor Patched--which the
present Editor has affixed to his pretended commentary, seems to look
the same way. But though there is a good deal of remark throughout the
work in a half-serious, half-comic style upon dress, it seems to be in
reality a treatise upon the great science of Things in General, which
Teufelsdrockh, is supposed to have professed at the university of
Nobody-knows-where. Now, without intending to adopt a too rigid standard
of morals, we own that we doubt a little the propriety of offering to
the public a treatise on Things in General, under the name and in the
form of an Essay on Dress. For ourselves, advanced as we unfortunately
are in the journey of life, far beyond the period when dress is
practically a matter of interest, we have no hesitation in saying,
that the real subject of the work is to us more attractive than the
ostensible one. But this is probably not the case with the mass of
readers. To the younger portion of the community, which constitutes
everywhere the very great majority, the subject of dress is one of
intense and paramount importance. An author who treats it appeals, like
the poet, to the young men end maddens--_virginibus puerisque_--and
calls upon them, by all the motives which habitually operate most
strongly upon their feelings, to buy his book. When, after opening their
purses for this purpose, they have carried home the work in triumph,
expecting to find in it some particular instruction in regard to the
tying of their neckcloths, or the cut of their corsets, and meet with
nothing better than a dissertation on Things in General, they
will--to use the mildest term--not be in very good humor. If the last
improvements in legislation, which we have made in this country, should
have found their way to England, the author, we think, would stand
some chance of being _Lynched_. Whether his object in this piece
of _supercherie_ be merely pecuniary profit, or whether he takes a
malicious pleasure in quizzing the Dandies, we shall not undertake to
say. In the latter part of the work, he devotes a separate chapter to
this class of persons, from the tenor of which we should be disposed
to conclude, that he would consider any mode of divesting them of their
property very much in the nature of a spoiling of the Egyptians.

"The only thing about the work, tending to prove that it is what it
purports to be, a commentary on a real German treatise, is the style,
which is a sort of Babylonish dialect, not destitute, it is true, of
richness, vigor, and at times a sort of singular felicity of expression,
but very strongly tinged throughout with the peculiar idiom of the
German language. This quality in the style, however, may be a mere
result of a great familiarity with German literature; and we cannot,
therefore, look upon it as in itself decisive, still less as outweighing
so much evidence of an opposite character."--_North-American Review, No.
89, October_, 1835.


IV. NEW ENGLAND EDITORS.

"The Editors have been induced, by the expressed desire of many persons,
to collect the following sheets out of the ephemeral pamphlets [*] in
which they first appeared, under the conviction that they contain in
themselves the assurance of a longer date.

     * _Fraser's_ (London) _Magazine_, 1833-34.

"The Editors have no expectation that this little Work will have a
sudden and general popularity. They will not undertake, as there is no
need, to justify the gay costume in which the Author delights to
dress his thoughts, or the German idioms with which he has sportively
sprinkled his pages. It is his humor to advance the gravest speculations
upon the gravest topics in a quaint and burlesque style. If his
masquerade offend any of his audience, to that degree that they will not
hear what he has to say, it may chance to draw others to listen to his
wisdom; and what work of imagination can hope to please all! But we will
venture to remark that the distaste excited by these peculiarities in
some readers is greatest at first, and is soon forgotten; and that the
foreign dress and aspect of the Work are quite superficial, and cover
a genuine Saxon heart. We believe, no book has been published for many
years, written in a more sincere style of idiomatic English, or which
discovers an equal mastery over all the riches of the language. The
Author makes ample amends for the occasional eccentricity of his genius,
not only by frequent bursts of pure splendor, but by the wit and sense
which never fail him.

"But what will chiefly commend the Book to the discerning reader is the
manifest design of the work, which is, a Criticism upon the Spirit of
the Age--we had almost said, of the hour--in which we live; exhibiting
in the most just and novel light the present aspects of Religion,
Politics, Literature, Arts, and Social Life. Under all his gayety
the Writer has an earnest meaning, and discovers an insight into the
manifold wants and tendencies of human nature, which is very rare among
our popular authors. The philanthropy and the purity of moral sentiment,
which inspire the work, will find their way to the heart of every lover
of virtue."--_Preface to Sartor Resartus: Boston_, 1835, 1837.


SUNT, FUERUNT VEL FUERE.

LONDON, 30th June, 1838.





Transcriber's Note: All spelling and punctuation was kept as in the
printed text. Italicized phrases are delimited by _underscores_.
Footnotes (there are only four) have been placed at the ends of the
paragraphs referencing them.

========================================
========================================

HISTORY OF FRIEDRICH II. OF PRUSSIA

FREDERICK THE GREAT

By Thomas Carlyle




BOOK XIX.--FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED IN THE SEVEN-YEARS
WAR.--1759-1760.




Chapter I.--PRELIMINARIES TO A FOURTH CAMPAIGN.

The posting of the Five Armies this Winter--Five of them in Germany, not
counting the Russians, who have vanished to Cimmeria over the horizon,
for their months of rest--is something wonderful, and strikes the
picturesque imagination. Such a Chain of Posts, for length, if for
nothing else! From the centre of Bohemia eastward, Daun's Austrians are
spread all round the western Silesian Border and the southeastern
Saxon; waited on by Prussians, in more or less proximity. Next are
the Reichsfolk; scattered over Thuringen and the Franconian Countries;
fronting partly into Hessen and Duke Ferdinand's outskirts:--the main
body of Duke Ferdinand is far to westward, in Munster Country, vigilant
upon Contades, with the Rhine between. Contades and Soubise,--adjoining
on the Reichsfolk are these Two French Armies: Soubise's, some 25,000,
in Frankfurt-Ems Country, between the Mayn and the Lahn, with its back
to the Rhine; then Contades, onward to Maes River and the Dutch Borders,
with his face to the Rhine,--and Duke Ferdinand observant of him on the
other side. That is the "CORDON of Posts" or winter-quarters this Year.
"From the Giant Mountains and the Metal Mountains, to the Ocean;--to the
mouth of Rhine," may we not say; "and back again to the Swiss Alps or
springs of Rhine, that Upper-Rhine Country being all either French or
Austrian, and a basis for Soubise?" [Archenholtz, i. 306.] Not to speak
of Ocean itself, and its winged War-Fleets, lonesomely hovering and
patrolling; or of the Americas and Indies beyond!

"This is such a Chain of mutually vigilant Winter-quarters," says
Archenholtz, "as was never drawn in Germany, or in Europe, before."
Chain of about 300,000 fighting men, poured out in that lengthy manner.
Taking their winter siesta there, asleep with one eye open, till
reinforced for new business of death and destruction against Spring.
Pathetic surely, as well as picturesque. "Three Campaigns there have
already been," sighs the peaceable observer: "Three Campaigns, surely
furious enough; Eleven Battles in them," [Stenzel, v. 185. This,
I suppose, would be his enumeration: LOBOSITZ (1756); PRAG, KOLIN,
Hastenbeck, Gross-Jagersdorf, ROSSBACH, Breslau, LEUTHEN, (1757);
Crefeld, ZORNDORF, HOCHKIRCH (1758): "eleven hitherto in all."] a Prag,
a Kolin, Leuthen, Rossbach;--must there still be others, then, to
the misery of poor mankind?" thus sigh many peaceful persons. Not
considering what are, and have been, the rages, the iniquities, the loud
and silent deliriums, the mad blindnesses and sins of mankind; and what
amount, of CALCINING these may reasonably take. Not calcinable in three
Campaigns at all, it would appear! Four more Campaigns are needed: then
there will be innocuous ashes in quantity; and a result unexpected, and
worth marking in World-History.

It is notably one of Friedrich's fond hopes,--of which he keeps up
several, as bright cloud-hangings in the haggard inner world he now
has,--that Peace is just at hand; one right struggle more, and Peace
must come! And on the part of Britannic George and him, repeated
attempts were made,--one in the end of this Year 1759;--but one and all
of them proved futile, and, unless for accidental reasons, need not be
mentioned here. Many men, in all nations, long for Peace; but there are
Three Women at the top of the world who do not; their wrath, various in
quality, is great in quantity, and disasters do the reverse of appeasing
it.

The French people, as is natural, are weary of a War which yields them
mere losses and disgraces; "War carried on for Austrian whims, which
likewise seem to be impracticable!" think they. And their Bernis
himself, Minister of Foreign Affairs, who began this sad French-Austrian
Adventure, has already been remonstrating with Kaunitz, and grumbling
anxiously, "Could not the Swedes, or somebody, be got to mediate? Such
a War is too ruinous!" Hearing which, the Pompadour is shocked at the
favorite creature of her hands; hastens to dismiss him ("Be Cardinal
then, you ingrate of a Bernis; disappear under that Red Hat!")--and
appoints, in his stead, one Choiseul (known hitherto as STAINVILLE,
Comte de Stainville, French Excellency at Vienna, but now made Duke on
this promotion), Duc de Choiseul; [Minister of Foreign Affairs,
"11th November, 1758" (Barbier, iv. 294).] who is a Lorrainer, or
Semi-Austrian, by very birth; and probably much fitter for the place. A
swift, impetuous kind of man, this Choiseul, who is still rather young
than otherwise; plenty of proud spirit in him, of shifts, talent of the
reckless sort; who proved very notable in France for the next twenty
years.

French trade being ruined withal, money is running dreadfully low:
but they appoint a new Controller-General; a M. de Silhouette, who is
thought to have an extraordinary creative genius in Finance. Had he but
a Fortunatus-Purse, how lucky were it! With Fortunatus Silhouette as
purse-holder, with a fiery young Choiseul on this hand, and a fiery
old Belleisle on that, Pompadour meditates great things this
Year,--Invasions of England; stronger German Armies; better German
Plans, and slashings home upon Hanover itself, or the vital point;--and
flatters herself, and her poor Louis, that there is on the anvil, for
1759, such a French Campaign as will perhaps astonish Pitt and another
insolent King. Very fixed, fell and feminine is the Pompadour's humor
in this matter. Nor is the Czarina's less so; but more, if possible;
unappeasable except by death. Imperial Maria Theresa has masculine
reasons withal; great hopes, too, of late. Of the War's ending till flat
impossibility stop it, there is no likelihood.

To Pitt this Campaign 1759, in spite of bad omens at the outset, proved
altogether splendid: but greatly the reverse on Friedrich's side; to
whom it was the most disastrous and unfortunate he had yet made, or did
ever make. Pitt at his zenith in public reputation; Friedrich never so
low before, nothing seemingly but extinction near ahead, when this Year
ended. The truth is, apart from his specific pieces of ill-luck, there
had now begun for Friedrich a new rule of procedure, which much altered
his appearance in the world. Thrice over had he tried by the aggressive
or invasive method; thrice over made a plunge at the enemy's heart,
hoping so to disarm or lame him: but that, with resources spent to such
a degree, is what he cannot do a fourth time: he is too weak henceforth
to think of that.

Prussia has always its King, and his unrivalled talent; but that is
pretty much the only fixed item: Prussia VERSUS France, Austria, Russia,
Sweden and the German Reich, what is it as a field of supplies for war!
Except its King, these are failing, year by year; and at a rate fatally
SWIFT in comparison. Friedrich cannot now do Leuthens, Rossbachs;
far-shining feats of victory, which astonish all the world. His fine
Prussian veterans have mostly perished; and have been replaced by new
levies and recruits; who are inferior both in discipline and native
quality;--though they have still, people say, a noteworthy taste of the
old Prussian sort in them; and do, in fact, fight well to the last. But
"it is observable," says Retzow somewhere, and indeed it follows from
the nature of the case, "that while the Prussian Army presents always
its best kind of soldiers at the beginning of a war, Austria, such are
its resources in population, always improves in that particular, and its
best troops appear in the last campaigns." In a word, Friedrich stands
on the defensive henceforth; disputing his ground inch by inch: and is
reduced, more and more, to battle obscurely with a hydra-coil of enemies
and impediments; and to do heroisms which make no noise in the Gazettes.
And, alas, which cannot figure in History either,--what is more a sorrow
to me here!

Friedrich, say all judges of soldiership and human character who have
studied Friedrich sufficiently, "is greater than ever," in these four
Years now coming. [Berenhorst, in _Kriegskunst;_ Retzow; &c.] And
this, I have found more and more to be a true thing; verifiable and
demonstrable in time and place,--though, unluckily for us, hardly in
this time or this place at all! A thing which cannot, by any method,
be made manifest to the general reader; who delights in shining
summary feats, and is impatient of tedious preliminaries and
investigations,--especially of MAPS, which are the indispensablest
requisite of all. A thing, in short, that belongs peculiarly to
soldier-students; who can undergo the dull preliminaries, most dull but
most inexorably needed; and can follow out, with watchful intelligence,
and with a patience not to be wearied, the multifarious topographies,
details of movements and manoeuvrings, year after year, on such a
Theatre of War. What is to be done with it here! If we could, by
significant strokes, indicate, under features true so far as they went,
the great wide fire-flood that was raging round the world; if we could,
carefully omitting very many things, omit of the things intelligible and
decipherable that concern Friedrich himself, nothing that had meaning:
IF indeed--! But it is idle preluding. Forward again, brave reader,
under such conditions as there are!

Friedrich's Winter in Breslau was of secluded, silent, sombre character,
this time; nothing of stir in it but from work only: in marked contrast
with the last, and its kindly visitors and gayeties. A Friedrich given
up to his manifold businesses, to his silent sorrows. "I have passed my
winter like a Carthusian monk," he writes to D'Argens: "I dine alone; I
spend my life in reading and writing; and I do not sup. When one is sad,
it becomes at last too burdensome to hide one's grief continually; and
it is better to give way to it by oneself, than to carry one's gloom
into society. Nothing solaces me but the vigorous application required
in steady and continuous labor. This distraction does force one to put
away painful ideas, while it lasts: but, alas, no sooner is the work
done, than these fatal companions present themselves again, as if
livelier than ever. Maupertuis was right: the sum of evil does certainly
surpass that of good:--but to me it is all one; I have almost nothing
more to lose; and my few remaining days, what matters it much of what
complexion they be?" ["Breslau, 1st March, 1759," To D'Argens (_OEuvres
de Frederic,_ xix. 56).]

The loss of his Wilhelmina, had there been no other grief, has darkened
all his life to Friedrich. Readers are not prepared for the details of
grief we could give, and the settled gloom of mind they indicate. A loss
irreparable and immeasurable; the light of life, the one loved heart
that loved him, gone. His passionate appeals to Voltaire to celebrate
for him in verse his lost treasure, and at least make her virtues
immortal, are perhaps known to readers: [ODE SUR LA MORT DE S. A. S.
MADAME LA PRINCESSE DE BAREITH (in _OEuvres de Voltaire,_ xviii. 79-86):
see Friedrich's Letter to him (6th November, 1758); with Voltaire's
VERSES in Answer (next month); Friedrich's new Letter (Breslau, 23d
January 1759), demanding something more,--followed by the ODE just
cited (Ib. lxxii. 402; lxxviii. 82, 92; or _OEuvres de Frederic,_
xxiii. 20-24: &c.) alas, this is a very feeble kind of immortality, and
Friedrich too well feels it such. All Winter he dwells internally on the
sad matter, though soon falling silent on it to others.

The War is ever more dark and dismal to him; a wearing, harassing,
nearly disgusting task; on which, however, depends life or death. This
Year, he "expects to have 300,000 enemies upon him;" and "is, with his
utmost effort, getting up 150,000 to set against them." Of business,
in its many kinds, there can be no lack! In the intervals he also wrote
considerably: one of his Pieces is a SERMON ON THE LAST JUDGMENT; handed
to Reader De Catt, one evening:--to De Catt's surprise, and to ours; the
Voiceless in a dark Friedrich trying to give itself some voice in this
way! [_OEuvres de Frederic,_ xv. 1-10 (see Preuss's PREFACE there;
Formey, _SOUVENIRS,_ i. 37; &c. &c.)] Another Piece, altogether
practical, and done with excellent insight, brevity, modesty, is ON
TACTICS; [REFLEXIONS SUR LA TACTIQUE: in _OEuvres de Frederic,_ xxviii.
153-166.]--properly it might be called, "Serious very Private Thoughts,"
thrown on paper, and communicated only to two or three, "On the new kind
of Tactics necessary with those Austrians and their Allies," who are
in such overwhelming strength. "To whose continual sluggishness, and
strange want of concert, to whose incoherency of movements, languor of
execution, and other enormous faults, we have owed, with some excuse for
our own faults, our escaping of destruction hitherto,"--but had better
NOT trust that way any longer! Fouquet is one of the highly select,
to whom he communicates this Piece; adding along with it, in Fouquet's
case, an affectionate little Note, and, in spite of poverty, some
New-year's Gift, as usual,--the "Widow's Mite [300 pounds, we find];
receive it with the same heart with which it was set apart for you: a
small help, which you may well have need of, in these calamitous times."
["Breslau, 23d December, 1758;" with Fouquet's Answer, 2d January, 1759:
in _OEuvres de Frederic,_ xx. 114-117.] Fouquet much admires the new
Tactical Suggestions;--seems to think, however, that the certainly
practicable one is, in particular, the last, That of "improving our
Artillery to some equality with theirs." For which, as may appear, the
King has already been taking thought, in more ways than one.

Finance is naturally a heavy part of Friedrich's Problem; the part which
looks especially impossible, from our point of vision! In Friedrich's
Country, the War Budget does not differ from the Peace one. Neither is
any borrowing possible; that sublime Art, of rolling over on you know
not whom the expenditure, needful or needless, of your heavy-laden self,
had not yet--though England is busy at it--been invented among Nations.
Once, or perhaps twice, from the STANDE of some willing Province,
Friedrich negotiated some small Loan; which was punctually repaid when
Peace came, and was always gratefully remembered. But these are as
nothing, in face of such expenses; and the thought how he did contrive
on the Finance side, is and was not a little wonderful. An ingenious
Predecessor, whom I sometimes quote, has expressed himself in these
words:--

"Such modicum of Subsidy [he is speaking of the English Subsidy in
1758], how useful will it prove in a Country bred everywhere to Spartan
thrift, accustomed to regard waste as sin, and which will lay out no
penny except to purpose! I guess the Prussian Exchequer is, by this
time, much on the ebb; idle precious metals tending everywhere towards
the melting-pot. At what precise date the Friedrich-Wilhelm balustrades,
and enormous silver furnitures, were first gone into, Dryasdust has
not informed me: but we know they all went; as they well might. To me
nothing is so wonderful as Friedrich's Budget during this War. One day
it will be carefully investigated, elucidated and made conceivable and
certain to mankind: but that as yet is far from being the case. We
walk about in it with astonishment; almost, were it possible, with
incredulity. Expenditure on this side, work done on that: human nature,
especially British human nature, refuses to conceive it. Never in this
world, before or since, was the like. The Friedrich miracles in War are
great; but those in Finance are almost greater. Let Dryasdust bethink
him; and gird his flabby loins to this Enterprise; which is very
behooveful in these Californian times!"--

The general Secret of Prussian Thrift, I do fear, is lost from the
world. And how an Army of about 200,000, in field and garrison, could
be kept on foot, and in some ability to front combined Europe, on about
Three Million Sterling annually ("25 million THALERS"=3,150,000
pounds, that is the steady War-Budget of those years), remains to us
inconceivable enough;--mournfully miraculous, as it were; and growing
ever more so in the Nugget-generations that now run. Meanwhile, here are
what hints I could find, on the Origins of that modest Sum, which also
are a wonder: [Preuss, ii. 388-392; Stenzel, v. 137-141.]--

"The hoarded Prussian Moneys, or 'TREASURES' [two of them, KLEINE
SCHATZ, GROSSE SCHATZ, which are rigidly saved in Peace years, for
incidence of War], being nearly run out, there had come the English
Subsidy: this, with Saxony, and the Home revenues and remnants of SCHATZ
had sufficed for 1758; but will no longer suffice. Next to Saxony,
the English Subsidy (670,000 pounds due the second time this year) was
always Friedrich's principal resource: and in the latter years of the
War, I observe, it was nearly twice the amount of what all his Prussian
Countries together, in their ravaged and worn-out state, could yield
him. In and after 1759, besides Home Income, which is gradually
diminishing, and English Subsidy, which is a steady quantity,
Friedrich's sources of revenue are mainly Two:--

"FIRST, there is that of wringing money from your Enemies, from those
that have deserved ill of you,--such of them as you can come at.
Enemies, open or secret, even Ill-wishers, we are not particular,
provided only they lie within arm's-length. Under this head fall
principally three Countries (and their three poor Populations, in lieu
of their Governments): Saxony, Mecklenburg (or the main part of it,
Mecklenburg-SCHWERIN), and Anhalt; from these three there is a continual
forced supply of money and furnishings. Their demerits to Friedrich
differ much in intensity; nor is his wringing of them--which in the
cases of Mecklenburg and Saxony increases year by year to the nearly
intolerable pitch--quite in the simple ratio of their demerits; but in a
compound ratio of that and of his indignation and of his wants.

"Saxony, as Prime Author of this War, was from the first laid hold of,
collared tightly: 'Pay the shot, then, what you can' (in the end it was
almost what you cannot)! As to Mecklenburg-Schwerin, the grudge against
Prussia was of very old standing, some generations now; and the present
Duke, not a very wise Sovereign more than his Ancestors, had always
been ill with Friedrich; willing to spite and hurt him when possible:
in Reichs Diet he, of all German Princes, was the first that voted for
Friedrich's being put to Ban of the Reich,--he; and his poor People know
since whether that was a wise step! The little Anhalt Princes, too,
all the Anhalts, Dessau, Bernburg, Cothen, Zerbst [perhaps the latter
partially excepted, for a certain Russian Lady's sake], had voted, or
at least had ambiguously half-voted, in favor of the Ban, and done other
unfriendly things; and had now to pay dear for their bits of enmities.
Poor souls, they had but One Vote among them all Four;--and they only
half gave it, tremulously pulling it back again. I should guess it was
their terrors mainly, and over-readiness to reckon Friedrich a sinking
ship; and to leap from the deck of him,--with a spurn which he took for
insolent! The Anhalt-Dessauers particularly, who were once of his very
Army, half Prussians for generations back, he reckoned to have used him
scandalously ill.

"This Year the requisition on the Four Anhalts--which they submit to
patiently, as people who have leapt into the wrong ship--is, in precise
tale: of money, 330,000 thalers (about 50,000 pounds); recruits, 2,200;
horses, 1,800. In Saxony, besides the fixed Taxes, strict confiscation
of Meissen Potteries and every Royalty, there were exacted heavy
'Contributions,' more and more heavy, from the few opulent Towns,
chiefly from Leipzig; which were wrung out, latterly, under great
severities,--'chief merchants of Leipzig all clapt in prison, kept
on bread-and-water till they yielded,'--AS great severities as would
suffice, but NOT greater; which also was noted. Unfortunate chief
merchants of Leipzig,--with Bruhl and Polish Majesty little likely to
indemnify them! Unfortunate Country altogether. An intelligent Saxon,
who is vouched for as impartial, bears witness as follows: 'And this
I know, that the oppressions and plunderings of the Austrians and
Reichsfolk, in Saxony, turned all hearts away from them; and it was
publicly said, We had rather bear the steady burden of the Prussians
than such help as these our pretended Deliverers bring.' [Stenzel
(citing from KRIEGSKANZLEI, which I have not), v. 137 n.] Whereby, on
the whole, the poor Country got its back broken, and could never look up
in the world since. Resource FIRST was abundantly severe.

"Resource SECOND is strangest of all;--and has given rise to criticism
enough! It is no other than that of issuing base money; mixing your gold
and silver coin with copper,--this, one grieves to say, is the Second
and extreme resource. A rude method--would we had a better--of
suspending Cash-payments, and paying by bank-notes instead!' thinks
Friedrich, I suppose. From his Prussian Mints, from his Saxon [which are
his for the present], and from the little Anhalt-Bernburg Mint [of which
he expressly purchased the sad privilege,--for we are not a Coiner,
we are a King reduced to suspend Cash-payments, for the time being],
Friedrich poured out over all Germany, in all manner of kinds, huge
quantities of bad Coin. This, so long as it would last, is more and
more a copious fountain of supply. This, for the first time, has had to
appear as an item in War-Budget 1759: and it fails in no following,
but expands more and more. It was done through Ephraim, the not lovely
Berlin Jew, whom we used to hear of in Voltaire's time;--through Ephraim
and two others, Ephraim as President: in return for a net Sum, these
shall have privilege to coin such and such amounts, so and so alloyed;
shall pay to General Tauentzien, Army Treasurer, at fixed terms, the
Sums specified: 'Go, and do it; our Mint-Officers sharply watching you;
Mint-Officers, and General Tauentzien [with a young Herr Lessing, as
his Chief Clerk, of whom the King knows nothing]; Go, ye unlovely!' And
Ephraim and Company are making a great deal of money by the unlovely
job. Ephraim is the pair of tongs, the hand, and the unlovely job, are a
royal man's. Alas, yes. And none of us knows better than King Friedrich,
perhaps few of us as well, how little lovely a job it was; how
shockingly UNkingly it was,--though a practice not unknown to German
Kings and Kinglets before his time, and since down almost to ours. [In
STENZEL (v. 141) enumeration of eight or nine unhappy Potentates, who
were busy with it in those same years.] In fact, these are all unkingly
practices;--and the English Subsidy itself is distasteful to a proud
Friedrich: but what, in those circumstances, can any Friedrich do?

"The first coinages of Ephraim had, it seems, in them about 3-7ths of
copper; something less than the half, and more than the third,"--your
gold sovereign grown to be worth 28s. 6d. "But yearly it grew worse; and
in 1762 [English Subsidy having failed] matters had got inverted;
and there was three times as much copper as silver. Commerce, as was
natural, went rocking and tossing, as on a sea under earthquakes; but
there was always ready money among Friedrich's soldiers, as among no
other: nor did the common people, or retail purchasers, suffer by it.
'Hah, an Ephraimite!' they would say, grinning not ill-humoredly, at
sight of one of these pieces; some of which they had more specifically
named 'BLUE-GOWNS' [owing to a tint of blue perceivable, in spite of
the industrious plating in real silver, or at least "boiling in
some solution" of it]; these they would salute with this rhyme, then
current:--

     "Von aussen schon, van innen schlimm;
      Von aussen Friedrich, von innen Ephraim.
      Outside noble, inside slim:
      Outside Friedrich, inside Ephraim.

"By this time, whatever of money, from any source, can be scraped
together in Friedrich's world, flows wholly into the Army-Chest, as the
real citadel of life. In these latter years of the War, beginning, I
could guess, from 1759, all Civil expenditures, and wages of Officials,
cease to be paid in money; nobody of that kind sees the color even of
bad coin; but is paid only in 'Paper Assignments,' in Promises to Pay
'after the Peace.' These Paper Documents made no pretence to the rank of
Currency: such holders of them as had money, or friends, and could wait,
got punctual payment when the term did arrive; but those that could
not, suffered greatly; having to negotiate their debentures on
ruinous terms,--sometimes at an expense of three-fourths.--I will
add Friedrich's practical Schedule of Amounts from all these various
Sources; and what Friedrich's own view of the Sources was, when he could
survey them from the safe distance.

"SCHEDULE OF AMOUNTS [say for 1761]. To make up the Twenty-five Million
thalers, necessary for the Army, there are:--

     "From our Prussian Countries, ruined, harried as THALERS
      they have been,.......... 4 millions only.
      From Saxony and the other Wringings, ..... 7 millions.
      English Subsidy (4 of good gold; becoppered
      into double),........... 8 "
      From Ephraim and his Farm of the Mint
      (MUNZ-PATENT), .......... 7 "

In sum Twenty-six Millions; leaving you one Million of margin,--and
always a plenty of cash in hand for incidental sundries. [Preuss, ii.
388.]

"Friedrich's own view of these sad matters, as he closes his _History
of the Seven-Years War_ [at "Berlin, 17th December, 1763"], is in these
words: 'May Heaven grant,--if Heaven deign to look down on the paltry
concerns of men,--that the unalterable and flourishing destiny of this
Country preserve the Sovereigns who shall govern it from the scourges
and calamities which Prussia has suffered in these times of trouble and
subversion; that they may never again be forced to recur to the violent
and fatal remedies which we (L'ON) have been obliged to employ in
maintenance of the State against the ambitious hatred of the Sovereigns
of Europe, who wished to annihilate the House of Brandenburg, and
exterminate from the world whatever bore the Prussian name!'" [_OEuvres
de Frederic,_ v. 234.]




OF THE SMALL-WAR IN SPRING, 1759. THERE ARE FIVE DISRUPTIONS OF THAT
GRAND CORDON (February-April); AND FERDINAND OF BRUNSWICK FIGHTS HIS
BATTLE OF BERGEN (April 13th).

Friedrich, being denied an aggressive course this Year, by no means
sits idly expectant and defensive in the interim; but, all the more
vigorously, as is observable, from February onwards, strikes out from
him on every side: endeavoring to spoil the Enemy's Magazines, and
cripple his operations in that way. So that there was, all winter
through, a good deal of Small-War (some of it not Small), of more
importance than usual,--chiefly of Friedrich's originating, with the
above view, or of Ferdinand his Ally's, on a still more pressing score.
And, on the whole, that immense Austrian-French Cordon, which goes from
the Carpathians to the Ocean, had by no means a quiet time; but was
broken into, and violently hurled back, in different parts: some four,
or even five, attacks upon it in all; three of them by Prince Henri,--in
two of which Duke Ferdinand's people co-operated; the business being for
mutual behoof. These latter Three were famous in the world, that Winter;
and indeed are still recognizable as brilliant procedures of their kind;
though, except dates and results, we can afford almost nothing of them
here. These Three, intended chiefly against Reichs people and their
Posts and Magazines, fell out on the western and middle part of
the Cordon. Another attack was in the extreme eastward, and was for
Friedrich's own behoof; under Fouquet's management;--intended against
the Austrian-Moravian Magazines and Preparations, but had little
success. Still another assault, or invasive outroad, northward against
the Russian Magazines, there also was; of which by and by. Besides all
which, and more memorable than all, Duke Ferdinand, for vital reasons of
his own, fought a Battle this Spring, considerable Battle, and did NOT
gain it; which made great noise in the world.

It is not necessary the reader should load his memory with details of
all these preliminary things; on the contrary, it is necessary that he
keep his memory clear for the far more important things that lie ahead
of these, and entertain these in a summary way, as a kind of foreground
to what is coming. Perhaps the following Fractions of Note, which put
matters in something of Chronological or Synoptical form, will suffice
him, or more than suffice. He is to understand that the grand tug of
War, this Year, gradually turns out not to be hereabouts, nor with Daun
and his adjacencies at all, but with the Russians, who arrive from the
opposite Northern quarter; and that all else will prove to be merely
prefatory and nugatory in comparison.

JANUARY 2d, 1759: FRANKFURT-ON-MAYN, THOUGH IT IS A REICHSTADT, FINDS
ITSELF SUDDENLY BECOME FRENCH. "Prince de Soubise lies between Mayn and
Lahn, with his 25,000; beautifully safe and convenient,--though ill off
for a place-of-arms in those parts. Opulent Frankfurt, on his right; how
handy would that be, were not Reichs Law so express! Marburg, Giessen
are outposts of his; on which side one of Ferdinand's people, Prince von
Ysenburg, watches him with an 8 or 10,000, capable of mischief in that
quarter.

"On the Eve of New-year's day, or on the auspicious Day itself, Soubise
requests, of the Frankfurt Authorities, permission for a regiment of his
to march through that Imperial City. To which, by law and theory, the
Imperial City can say Yes or No; but practically cannot, without grave
inconvenience, say other than Yes, though most Frankfurters wish it
could. 'Yes,' answer the Frankfurt Magnates; Yes surely, under the known
conditions. Tuesday, January 2d, about 5 in the morning, while all is
still dark in Frankfurt, regiment Nassau appears, accordingly, at the
Sachsenhausen Gate, Town-guard people all ready to receive it and escort
it through; and is admitted as usual. Quite as usual: but instead
of being escorted through, it orders, in calm peremptory voice, the
Town-guard, To ground arms; with calm rapidity proceeds to admit ten
other regiments or battalions, six of them German; seizes the artillery
on the Walls, seizes all the other Gates:--and poor Frankfurt finds
itself tied hand and foot, almost before it is out of bed! Done with
great exactitude, with the minimum of confusion, and without a hurt skin
to anybody. The Inhabitants stood silent, gazing; the Town-guard laid
down their arms, and went home. Totally against Law; but cleverly done;
perhaps Soubise's chief exploit in the world; certainly the one real
success the French have yet had.

"Soubise made haste to summon the Magistrates: 'Law of Necessity alone,
most honored Sirs! Reichs Law is clear against me. But all the more
shall private liberties, religions, properties, in this Imperial
Free-Town, be sacred to us. Defence against any aggression: and the
strictest discipline observed. Depend on me, I bid you!'--And kept his
word to an honorable degree, they say; or in absence, made it be kept,
during the Four Years that follow. Most Frankfurters are, at heart,
Anti-French: but Soubise's affability was perfect; and he gave evening
parties of a sublime character; the Magistrates all appearing there, in
their square perukes and long gowns, with a mournful joy." [Tempelhof,
iii. 7-8; Stenzel, v. 198-200.]

Soubise soon went home, to assist in important businesses,--Invasion of
England, no less; let England look to itself this Summer!--and Broglio
succeeded him, as Army-Captain in the Frankfurt parts; with laurels
accruing, more or less. Soubise, like Broglio, began with Rossbach;
Soubise ends with Frankfurt, for the present; where Broglio also gains
his chief laurels, as will shortly be seen. Frankfurt is a great gain to
France, though an illicit one. It puts a bar on Duke Ferdinand in that
quarter; secures a starting-point for attacks on Hessen, Hanover; for
co-operation with Contades and the Lower Rhine. It is the one success
France has yet had in this War, or pretty much that it ever had in it.
Due to Prince de Soubise, in that illegal fashion.--A highly remarkable
little Boy, now in his tenth year, Johann Wolfgang Goethe, has his
wondering eyes on these things: and, short while hence, meets daily, on
the stairs and lobbies at home, a pleasant French Official Gentlemen who
is quartered there; between whom and Papa occur rubs,--as readers may
remember, and shall hear in April coming.

GRAND CORDON DISRUPTED: ERFURT COUNTRY, 16th FEBRUARY-2d MARCH. "About
six weeks after this Frankfurt achievement, certain Reichsfolk and
Austrian Auxiliaries are observed to be cutting down endless timber,
'18,800 palisades, 6,000 trees of 60 feet,' and other huge furnishings,
from the poor Duke of Gotha's woods; evidently meaning to fortify
themselves in Erfurt. Upon which Prince Henri detaches a General
Knobloch thitherward, Duke Ferdinand contributing 4,000 to meet him
there; which combined expedition, after some sharp knocking and shoving,
entirely disrooted the Austrians and Reichsfolk, and sent them packing.
Had them quite torn out by the end of the month; and had planned to
'attack them on two sides at once' (March 2d), with a view of swallowing
them whole,--when they (these Reichs Volscians, in such a state of
flutter) privately hastened off, one and all of them, the day before."
[Narrative, in _Helden-Geschichte,_ v. 1022 et seq.]

This was BREAKAGE FIRST of the Grand Cordon; an explosive hurling of
it back out of those Erfurt parts. Done by Prince Henri's people, in
concert with Duke Ferdinand's,--who were mutually interested in the
thing.

BREAKAGE SECOND: ERFURT-FULDA COUNTRY, 31st MARCH-8th APRIL. "About the
end of March, these intrusive Austrian Reichsfolk made some attempt to
come back into those Countries; but again got nothing but hard knocks;
and gave up the Erfurt project. For, close following on this FIRST,
there was a SECOND still deeper and rougher Breakage, in those same
regions; the Hereditary Prince of Brunswick dashing through, on a
special Errand of Ferdinand's own [of which presently], with an 8 or
10,000, in his usual fiery manner; home into the very bowels of the
Reich (April 3d, and for a week onward); and returning with 'above
2,000 prisoners' in hand; especially with a Reich well frightened behind
him;--still in time for Duke Ferdinand's Adventure [in fact, for his
Battle of Bergen, of which we are to hear]. Had been well assisted by
Prince Henri, who 'made dangerous demonstrations in the distance,' and
was extremely diligent--though the interest was chiefly Ferdinand's this
time." [Tempelhof, iii. 19-22.]--Contemporary with that FIRST Erfurt
Business, there went on, 300 miles away from it, in the quite opposite
direction, another of the same;--too curious to be omitted.

ACROSS THE POLISH FRONTIER: FEBRUARY, 24th-MARCH 4th. "In the end of
February, General Wobersnow, an active man, was detached from Glogau,
over into Poland, Posen way, To overturn the Russian provision
operations thereabouts; in particular, to look into a certain
high-flying Polack, a Prince Sulkowski of those parts; who with all
diligence is gathering food, in expectation of the Russian advent; and
indeed has formally 'declared War against the King of Prussia;' having
the right, he says, as a Polish Magnate, subject only to his own
high thought in such affairs. The Russians and their wars are dear to
Sulkowski. He fell prisoner in their cause, at Zorndorf, last Autumn;
was stuck, like all the others, Soltikoff himself among them, into the
vaulted parts of Custrin Garrison: 'I am sorry I have no Siberia for
you,' said Friedrich, looking, not in a benign way, on the captive
Dignitaries, that hot afternoon; 'go to Custrin, and see what you have
provided for yourselves!' Which they had to do; nothing, for certain
days, but cellarage to lodge in; King inexorable, deaf to remonstrance.
Which possibly may have contributed to kindle Sulkowski into these
extremely high proceedings.

"At any rate, Wobersnow punctually looks in upon him: seizes his
considerable stock of Russian proviants; his belligerent force, his high
person itself; and in one luckless hour snuffs him out from the list
of potentates. His belligerent force, about 1,000 Polacks, were all
compelled, 'by the cudgel, say my authorities, to take Prussian service
[in garrison regiments, and well scattered about, I suppose]; his
own high person found itself sitting locked in Glogau, left to its
reflections. Sat thus 'till the War ended,' say some; certainly till
the Sulkowski War had been sufficiently exploded by the laughter of
mankind." Here are, succinctly, the dates of this small memorability:--

"End of February, Wobersnow gathers, at Glogau, a force of about 8,000
horse and foot. Marches, 24th FEBRUARY, over Oder Bridge, straight
into Poland; that same night, to the neighborhood of Lissa and Reisen
(Sulkowski's dominion), about thirty miles northeast of Glogau.
Sulkowski done next day;--part of the capture is 'fifteen small guns.'
Wobersnow goes, next, for Posen; arrives, 28th FEBRUARY; destroys
Russian Magazine, ransoms Jews. Shoots out other detachments on the
Magazine Enterprise;--detaches Platen along the Warta, where are picked
up various items, among others 'eighty tuns of brandy,'--but himself
proceeds no farther than Posen. MARCH 4th, sets out again from Posen,
homewards." [NACHRICHT VON DER UNTERNEHMUNG DES GENERAL-MAJORS VON
WOBERSNOW IN POLEN, IM FEB. UND MARZ. 1759: in Seyfarth, _Beylagen,_ ii.
526-529. _Helden-Geschichte,_ v. 829.] We shall hear again of Wobersnow,
in a much more important way, before long.

To the Polish Republic so called, Friedrich explained politely, not
apologetically: "Since you allow the Russians to march through you in
attack of me, it is evident to your just minds that the attacked party
must have similar privilege." "Truly!" answered they, in their just
minds, generally; and I made no complaint about Sulkowski (though Polish
Majesty and Primate endeavored to be loud about "Invasion" and the
like):--and indeed Polish Republic was lying, for a long while past, as
if broken-backed, on the public highway, a Nation anarchic every fibre
of it, and under the feet and hoofs of travelling Neighbors, especially
of Russian Neighbors; and is not now capable of saying much for itself
in such cases, or of doing anything at all.

FRANKFURT COUNTRY, APRIL 13th: DUKE FERDINAND'S BATTLE OF BERGEN. "Duke
Ferdinand, fully aware what a stroke that seizure of Frankfurt was to
him, resolved to risk a long march at this bad season, and attempt
to drive the French out. Contades was absent in Paris,--no fear of an
attack from Contades's Army; Broglio's in Frankfurt, grown now to about
35,000, can perhaps be beaten if vigorously attacked. Ferdinand appoints
a rendezvous at Fulda, of various Corps, Prince Ysenburg's and others,
that lie nearest, Hessians many of them, Hanoverians others; proceeds,
himself, to Fulda, with a few attendants [a drive of about 200
miles];--having left Lord George Sackville [mark the sad name
of him!]--Sackville, head of the English, and General Sporken, a
Hanoverian,--to take charge in Munster Country, during his absence. It
was from Fulda that he shot out the Hereditary Prince on that important
Errand we lately spoke of, under the head of 'BREAKAGE SECOND,'--namely,
to clear his right flank, and scare the Reich well off him, while he
should be marching on Frankfurt. All which, Henri assisting from the
distance, the Hereditary Prince performed to perfection,--and was back
(APRIL 8th) in excellent time for the Battle.

"Ferdinand stayed hardly a day in Fulda, ranking himself and getting on
the road. Did his long march of above 100 miles without accident or loss
of time;--of course, scaring home the Broglio Outposts in haste enough,
and awakening Broglio's attention in a high degree;--and arrives,
Thursday, April 12th, at Windecken, a Village about fifteen miles
northeast of Frankfurt; where he passes the night under arms; intending
Battle on the morrow. Broglio is all assembled, 35,000 strong; his
Assailant, with the Hereditary Prince come in, counts rather under
30,000. Broglio is posted in, and on both sides of, Bergen, a high-lying
Village, directly on Ferdinand's road to Frankfurt. Windecken is about
fifteen miles from Frankfurt; Bergen about six:--idle Tourists of our
time, on their return from Homburg to that City, leave Bergen a little
on their left. The ground is mere hills, woody dales, marshy brooks;
Broglio's position, with its Village, and Hill, and ravines and
advantages, is the choicest of the region; and Broglio's methods,
procedures and arrangements in it are applauded by all judges.

"FRIDAY, 13th APRIL, 1759, Ferdinand is astir by daybreak; comes on,
along one of those woody balleys, pickeering, reconnoitring;--in the
end, directly up the Hill of Bergen; straight upon the key-point. It is
about 10 A.M., when the batteries and musketries awaken there; very loud
indeed, for perhaps two hours or more. Prince von Ysenburg is leader of
Ferdinand's attacking party. Their attack is hot and fierce, and they
stick to it steadily; though garden-hedges, orchards and impediments are
many, and Broglio, with, much cannon helping, makes vigorous defence.
These Ysenburgers fought till their cartridges were nearly spent, and
Ysenburg himself lay killed; but could not take Bergen. Nor could the
Hereditary Prince; who, in aid of them, tried it in flank, with his own
usual impetuosity rekindling theirs, and at first with some success; but
was himself taken in flank by Broglio's Reserve, and obliged to desist.
No getting of Bergen by that method.

"Military critics say coolly, 'You should have smashed it well with
cannon, first [which Ferdinand had not in stock here]; and especially
have flung grenadoes into it, till it was well in flame: impossible
otherwise!' [Mauvillon, ii. 19.] The Ysenburgers and Hereditary Prince
withdraw. No pursuit of them; or almost less than none; for the one or
two French regiments that tried it (against order), nearly got cut up.
Broglio, like a very Daun at Kolin, had strictly forbidden all such
attempts: 'On no temptation quit your ground!'

"The Battle, after this, lay quiet all afternoon; Ferdinand still in
sight; motioning much, to tempt French valor into chasing of him. But
all in vain: Broglio, though his subalterns kept urging, remonstrating,
was peremptory not to stir. Whereupon, towards evening, across certain
woody Heights, perhaps still with some hope of drawing him out,
Ferdinand made some languid attempt on Broglio's wing, or wings;--and
this also failing, had to give up the affair. He continued cannonading
till deep in the night; withdrew to Windecken: and about two next
morning, marched for home,--still with little or no pursuit: but without
hope of Frankfurt henceforth. And, in fact, has a painful Summer ahead.

"Ferdinand had lost 5 cannon, and of killed and wounded 2,500; the
French counted their loss at about 1,900. [Mauvillon, ii. 10-19;
Tempelhof, iii. 26-31.] The joy of France over this immense victory was
extraordinary. Broglio was made Prince of the Reich, Marechal de France;
would have been raised to the stars, had one been able,--for the time
being. 'And your immense victory,' so sneered the by-standers, 'consists
in not being beaten, under those excellent conditions;--perhaps victory
is a rarity just now!'"

This is the Battle which our Boy-Friend Johann Wolfgang watched with
such interest, from his garret-window, hour after hour; all Frankfurt
simmering round him, in such a whirlpool of self-contradictory emotions;
till towards evening, when, in long rows of carts, poor wounded Hessians
and Hanoverians came jolting in, and melted every heart into pity, into
wailing sorrow, and eagerness to help. A little later, Papa Goethe,
stepping downstairs, came across the Official French Gentleman; who said
radiantly: "Doubtless you congratulate yourself and us on this victory
to his Majesty's arms." "Not a whit (KEINESWEGS)," answers Papa Goethe,
a stiff kind of man, nowise in the mood of congratulating: "on the
contrary, I wish they had chased you to the Devil, though I had had to
go too!" Which was a great relief to his feelings, though a dangerous
one in the circumstances. [Goethe's WERKE (Stuttgart und Tubingen,
1829), xxiv. (DICHTUNG UND WAHRHEIT, i.), 153-157.]

BREAKAGE THIRD: OVER THE METAL MOUNTAINS INTO BOHMEN (APRIL 14th-20th).
"Ferdinand's Battle was hardly ending, when Prince Henri poured across
the Mountains,--in two columns, Hulsen leading the inferior or rightmost
one,--into Leitmeritz-Eger Country; and made a most successful business
of the Austrian Magazines he found there. Magazines all filled; Enemy
all galloping for Prag:--Daun himself, who is sitting vigilant, far in
the interior, at Jaromirtz this month past, was thrown into huge flurry,
for some days! Speedy Henri (almost on the one condition of BEING
speedy) had his own will of the Magazines: burnt, Hulsen and he, 'about
600,000 pounds worth' of Austrian provender in those parts, 'what would
have kept 50,000 men five months in bread' (not to mention hay at all);
gave the Enemy sore slaps (caught about 3,000 of him, NOT yet got on
gallop for Prag); burnt his 200 boats on the Elbe:--forced him to begin
anew at the beginning; and did, in effect, considerably lame and retard
certain of his operations through the Summer. Speedy Henri marched
for home April 20th; and was all across the Mountains April 23d: a
profitable swift nine days." [Tempelhof iii. 47-53; _Helden-Geschichte,_
v. 963-966.]--And on the sixth day hence he will have something similar,
and still more important, on foot. A swift man, when he must!

BREAKAGE FOURTH: INTO MAHREN (APRIL 16th-21st). "This is Fouquet's
attempt, alluded to above; of which--as every reader must be satisfied
with Small-War--we will give only the dates. Fouquet, ranking at
Leobschutz, in Neisse Country, did break through into Mahren, pushing
the Austrians before him; but found the Magazines either emptied, or too
inaccessible for any worth they had;--could do nothing on the Magazines;
and returned without result; home at Leobschutz again on the fifth
day." [_ Helden-Geschichte,_ v. 958-963; Tempelhof, iii. 44-47.] This,
however, had a sequel for Fouquet; which, as it brought the King himself
into those neighborhoods, we shall have to mention, farther on.

BREAKAGE FIFTH: INTO FRANKEN (MAY 5th-JUNE 1st). "This was Prince
Henri's Invasion of the Bamberg-Nurnberg Countries; a much sharper thing
than in any former Year. Much the most famous, and," luckily for us,
"the last of the Small-War affairs for the present. Started,--from
Tschopau region, Bamberg way,--April 29th-May 5th. In Three Columns:
Finck leftmost, and foremost (Finck had marched April 29th, pretending
to mean for Bohemia); after whom Knobloch; and (May 5th) the Prince
himself. Who has an eye to the Reichs Magazines and Preparations, as
usual;--nay, an eye to their Camp of Rendezvous, and to a fight with
their miscellaneous Selves and Auxiliaries, if they will stand fight.
'You will have to leave Saxony, and help us with the Russians, soon:
beat those Reichs people first!' urged the King; 'well beaten, they
will not trouble Saxony for a while.' If they will stand fight? But they
would not at all. They struck their tents everywhere; burnt their
own Magazines, in some cases; and only went mazing hither and
thither,--gravitating all upon Nurnberg, and an impregnable Camp which
they have in that neighborhood. Supreme Zweibruck was himself with
them; many Croats, Austrians, led by Maguire and others; all marching,
whirling at a mighty rate; with a countenance sometimes of vigor, but
always with Nurnberg Camp in rear. There was swift marching, really
beautiful manoeuvring here and there; sharp bits of fighting, too,
almost in the battle-form:--Maguire tried, or was for trying, a stroke
with Finck; but made off hastily, glad to get away. [Templehof, iii.
64.] May 11th, at Himmelskron in Baireuth, one Riedesel of theirs had
fairly to ground arms, self and 2,500, and become prisoners of war."
Much of this manoeuvring and scuffling was in Baireuth Territory. Twice,
or even thrice, Prince Henri was in Baireuth Town: "marched through
Baireuth," say the careless Old Books. Through Baireuth:--No Wilhelmina
now there, with her tremulous melodies of welcome! Wilhelminn's loves,
and terrors for her loved, are now all still. Perhaps her poor Daughter
of Wurtemberg, wandering unjustly disgraced, is there; Papa, the
Widower Margraf, is for marrying again: [Married 20th September, 1759
(a Brunswick Princess, Sister's-daughter of his late Wife); died within
four years.]--march on, Prince Henri!

"In Bamberg," says a Note from Archenholtz, "the Reichs troops burnt
their Magazine; and made for Nurnberg, as usual; but left some thousand
or two of Croats, who would not yet. Knobloch and his Prussians appeared
shortly after; summoned Bamberg, which agreed to receive them; and were
for taking possession; but found the Croats determined otherwise. Fight
ensued; fight in the streets; which, in hideousness of noises, if in
nothing else, was beyond parallel. The inhabitants sat all quaking in
their cellars; not an inhabitant was to be seen: a City dead,--and given
up to the demons, in this manner. Not for some hours were the Croats
got entirely trampled out. Bamberg, as usual, became a Prussian
place-of-arms; was charged to pay ransom of 40,000 pounds;--'cannot
possibly!'--did pay some 14,000 pounds, and gave bills for the
remainder." [Archenholtz. i. 371-373.] Which bills, let us mark withal,
the Kaiser in Reichs Diet decreed to be invalid: "Don't pay them!"
A thing not forgotten by Friedrich;--though it is understood the
Bambergers, lest worse might happen, privately paid their bills. "The
Expedition lasted, in whole, not quite four weeks: June 1st, Prince
Henri was at the Saxon frontier again; the German world all ringing
loud,--in jubilation, counter-jubilation and a great variety of
tones,--with the noise of what he had done. A sharp swift man; and,
sure enough, has fluttered the Reichs Volscians in their Corioli to an
unexpected degree." [Seyfarth, _Beylagen,_ ii. 537-563; BERICHT VON
DER UNTERNEHMUNG DES PRINZEN HEINRICH IN FRANKEN, IM JAHR, 1759;
_Helden-Geschichte,_ v. 1033-1039; Tempelhof,????, et seq.]---[COPY
ILLEGIBLE PAGE 203,]

A Colonel Wunsch (Lieutenant-Colonel of the Free Corps WUNSCH)
distinguished himself in this Expedition; The beginning of notably great
things to him in the few following months. Wunsch is a Wurtemberger by
birth; has been in many services, always in subaltern posts, and, this
year, will testify strangely how worthy he was of the higher. What a
Year, this of 1759, to stout old Wunsch! In the Spring, here has he just
seen his poor son, Lieutenant Wunsch, perish in one of these scuffles;
in Autumn, he will see himself a General, shining suddenly bright, to
his King and to all the world; before Winter, he will be Prisoner to
Austria, and eclipsed for the rest of this war!--Kleist, of the GREEN
HUSSARS, also made a figure here; and onwards rapidly ever higher; to
the top of renown in his business:--fallen heir to Mayer's place, as it
were. A Note says: "Poor Mayer of the Free Corps does not ride with
the Prince on this occasion. Mayer, dangerously worn down with the hard
services of last Year, and himself a man of too sleepless temper, caught
a fever in the New-year time; and died within few days: burnt away
before his time; much regretted by his Brethren of the Army, and some
few others. Gone in this way; with a high career just opening on him at
the long last! Mayer was of Austrian, of half Spanish birth; a musical,
really melodious, affectionate, but indignant, wildly stormful mortal;
and had had adventures without end. Something of pathos, of tragedy,
in the wild Life of him. [Still worth reading: in Pauli (our old watery
BRANDENBURG-HISTORY Friend). _Leben grosser Helden_ (Halle, 1759-1764,
9 vols.), iii. 142-188;--much the best Piece in that still rather
watery (or windy) Collection, which, however, is authentic, and has
some tolerable Portraits.] A man of considerable genius, military
and other:--genius in the sleepless kind, which is not the best kind;
sometimes a very bad kind. The fame of Friedrich invites such people
from all sides of the world; and this was no doubt a sensible help to
him."--But enough of all this.

Here, surely, is abundance of preliminary Small-War, on the part of a
Friedrich reduced to the defensive!--Fouquet's Sequel, hinted at above,
was to this effect. On Fouquet's failing to get hold of the Moravian
Magazines, and returning to his Post at Leobschutz, a certain rash
General Deville, who is Austrian chief in those parts, hastily rushed
through the Jagerndorf Hills, and invaded Fouquet. Only for a few days;
and had very bad success, in that bit of retaliation. The King, who is
in Landshut, in the middle of his main cantonments, hastened over
to Leobschutz with reinforcement to Fouquet; in the thought that a
finishing-stroke might be done on this Deville;--and would have done it,
had not the rash man plunged off again (May 1st, or the night before);
homewards, at full speed. So that Friedrich, likewise at full speed,
could catch nothing of him; but merely cannonade him in the Passes
of Zuckmantel, and cut off his rear-guard of Croats. Poor forlorn of
Croats, whom he had left in some bushy Chasm; to gain him a little time,
and then to perish if THEY must! as Tempelhof remarks. [Tempelhof, iii.
56.] Upon which Friedrich returned to Landshut; and Fouquet had peace
again.

It was from this Landshut region, where his main cantonments are,
that Friedrich had witnessed all these Inroads, or all except the very
earliest of them; the first Erfurt one, and the Wobersnow-Sulkowski. He
had quitted Breslau in the end of March, and gone to his cantonments;
quickened thither, probably, by a stroke that had befallen him at
Griefenberg, on his Silesian side of the Cordon. At Griefenberg
stood the Battalion Duringshofen, with its Colonel of the same
name,--grenadier people of good quality, perhaps near 1,000 in whole.
Which Battalion, General Beck, after long preliminary study of it,
from his Bohemian side,--marching stealthily on it, one night (March
25-26th), by two or more roads, with 8,000 men, and much preliminary
Croat-work,--contrived to envelop wholly, and carry off with him, before
help could come up. This, I suppose, had quickened Friedrich's arrival.
He has been in that region ever since,--in Landshut for the last week or
two; and returns thither after the Deville affair.

And at Landshut,--which is the main Pass into Bohemia or from it, and is
the grand observatory-point at present,--he will have to remain till the
first days of July; almost three months. Watching, and waiting on the
tedious Daun, who has the lifting of the curtain this Year! Daun
had come to Jaromirtz, to his cantonments, "March 24th" (almost
simultaneously with Friedrich to his); expecting Friedrich's Invasion,
as usual. Long days sat Daun, expecting the King in Bohemia:--"There
goes he, at last!" thought Daun, on Prince Henri's late flamy appearance
there (BREAKAGE THIRD we labelled it);--and Daun had hastily pushed a
Division thitherward, double-quick, to secure Prag; but found it was
only the Magazines. "Above four millions worth [600,000 pounds, counting
the THALERS into sterling], above four millions worth of bread
and forage gone to ashes, and the very boats burnt? Well; the
poor Reichsfolk, or our poor Auxiliaries to them, will have empty
haversacks:--but it is not Prag!" thinks Daun.

At what exact point of time Daun came to see that Friedrich was not
intending Invasion, and would, on the contrary, require to be invaded, I
do not know. But it must have been an interesting discovery to Daun, if
he foreshadowed to himself what results it would have on him: "Taking
the defensive, then? And what is to become of one's Cunctatorship in
that case!" Yes, truly. Cunctatorship is not now the trade needed; there
is nothing to be made of playing Fabius-Cunctator:--and Daun's fame
henceforth is a diminishing quantity. The Books say he "wasted above
five weeks in corresponding with the Russian Generals." In fact, he
had now weeks enough on hand; being articulately resolved (and even
commanded by Kriegshofrath) to do nothing till the Russians came
up;--and also (INarticulately and by command of Nature) to do as little
as possible after! This Year, and indeed all years following, the
Russians are to be Daun's best card.

Waiting for three months here till the curtain rose, it was Friedrich
that had to play Cunctator. A wearisome task to him, we need not doubt.
But he did it with anxious vigilance; ever thinking Daun would try
something, either on Prince Henri or on him, and that the Play would
begin. But the Play did not. There was endless scuffling and
bickering of Outposts; much hitching and counter-hitching, along that
Bohemian-Silesian Frontier,--Daun gradually hitching up, leftwards,
northwards, to be nearer his Russians; Friedrich counter-hitching,
and, in the end, detaching against the Russians, as they approached in
actuality. The details of all which would break the toughest patience.
Not till July came, had both parties got into the Lausitz; Daun into
an impregnable Camp near Mark-Lissa (in Gorlitz Country); Friedrich,
opposite and eastward of him, into another at Schmottseifen:--still
after which, as the Russians still were not come, the hitching (if we
could concern ourselves with it), the maze of strategic shuffling and
counter-dancing, as the Russians get nearer, will become more intricate
than ever.

Except that of General Beck on Battalion Duringshofen,--if that was
meant as retaliatory, and was not rather an originality of Beck's, who
is expert at such strokes,--Daun, in return for all these injurious
Assaults and Breakages, tried little or no retaliation; and got
absolutely none. Deville attempted once, as we saw; Loudon once, as
perhaps we shall see: but both proved futile. For the present absolutely
none. Next Year indeed, Loudon, on Fouquet at Landshut--But let us not
anticipate! Just before quitting Landshut for Schmottseifen, Friedrich
himself rode into Bohemia, to look more narrowly; and held Trautenau, at
the bottom of the Pass, for a day or two--But the reader has had enough
of Small-War! Of the present Loudon attempt, Friedrich, writing to
Brother Henri, who is just home from his Franconian Invasion (BREAKAGE
FIFTH), has a casual word, which we will quote. "Reich-Hennersdorf" is
below Landshut, farther down the Pass; "Liebau" still farther down,--and
its "Gallows," doubtless, is on some knoll in the environs!

REICH-HENNERSDORF, 9th JUNE. "My congratulations on the excellent
success you have had [out in Frankenland yonder]! Your prisoners, we
hear, are 3,000; the desertion and confusion in the Reichs Army are
affirmed to be enormous:--I give those Reichs fellows two good months
[scarcely took so long] to be in a condition to show face again. As for
ourselves, I can send you nothing but contemptibilities. We have never
yet had the beatific vision of Him with the Hat and Consecrated
Sword [Papal Daun, that is]; they amuse us with the Sieur Loudon
instead;--who, three days ago [7th July, two days] did us the honor of
a visit, at the Gallows of Liebau. He was conducted out again, with all
the politeness imaginable, on to near Schatzlar," well over the Bohemian
Border; "where we flung a score of cannon volleys into the"--into the
"DERRIERE of him, and everybody returned home." [In SCHONING, ii. 65:
"9th June, 1759."]

Perhaps the only points now noticeable in this tedious Landshut interim,
are Two, hardly noticed then at all by an expectant world. The first is:
That in the King's little inroad down to Trautenau, just mentioned, four
cannon drawn by horses were part of the King's fighting gear,--the first
appearance of Horse Artillery in the world. "A very great invention,"
says the military mind: "guns and carriages are light, and made of the
best material for strength; the gunners all mounted as postilions to
them. Can scour along, over hill and dale, wherever horse can; and burst
out, on the sudden, where nobody was expecting artillery. Devised in
1758; ready this Year, four light six-pounders; tried first in the
King's raid down to Trautenau [June 29th-30th]. Only four pieces as
yet. But these did so well, there were yearly more. Imitated by the
Austrians, and gradually by all the world." [Seyfarth, ii. 543.]

The second fact is: That Herr Guichard (Author of that fine Book on the
War-methods of the Greeks and Romans) is still about Friedrich, as he
has been for above a year past, if readers remember; and, during those
tedious weeks, is admitted to a great deal of conversation with the
King. Readers will consent to this Note on Guichard; and this shall be
our ultimatum on the wearisome Three Months at Landshut.

MAJOR QUINTUS ICILIUS. "Guichard is by birth a Magdeburger, age now
thirty-four; a solid staid man, with a good deal of hard faculty in him,
and of culture unusual for a soldier. A handy, sagacious, learned and
intelligent man; whom Friedrich, in the course of a year's experience,
has grown to see willingly about him. There is something of positive in
Guichard, of stiff and, as it were, GRITTY, which might have offended a
weaker taste; but Friedrich likes the rugged sense of the man; his real
knowledge on certain interesting heads; and the precision with which
the known and the not rightly known are divided from one another, in
Guichard.

"Guichard's business about the King has been miscellaneous, not worth
mention hitherto; but to appearance was well done. Of talk they are
beginning to have more and more; especially at Landshut here, in these
days of waiting; a great deal of talk on the Wars of the Ancients,
Guichard's Book naturally leading to that subject. One night, datable
accidentally about the end of May, the topic happened to be Pharsalia,
and the excellent conduct of a certain Centurion of the Tenth Legion,
who, seeing Pompey's people about to take him in flank, suddenly flung
himself into oblique order [SCHRAGE STELLUNG, as we did at Leutheu],
thereby outflanking Pompey's people, and ruining their manoeuvre and
them. 'A dexterous man, that Quintus Icilius the Centurion!' observed
Friedrich. 'Ah, yes: but excuse me, your Majesty, his name was Quintus
Caecilius,' said Guichard. 'No, it was Icilius,' said the King, positive
to his opinion on that small point; which Guichard had not the art to
let drop; though, except assertion and counter-assertion, what could be
made of it there? Or of what use was it anywhere?

"Next day, Guichard came with the book [what "Book" nobody would ever
yet tell me], and putting his finger on the passage, 'See, your Majesty:
Quintus CAEcilius!' extinguished his royal opponent. 'Hm,' answered
Friedrich: 'so?--Well, you shall be Quintus Icilius, at any rate!'
And straightway had him entered on the Army Books 'as Major Quintus
Icilius;' his Majorship is to be dated '10th April, 1758' (to give him
seniority); and from and after this '26th May, 1759,' he is to
command the late Du Verger's Free-Battalion. All which was done:--the
War-Offices somewhat astonished at such advent of an antique Roman
among them; but writing as bidden, the hand being plain, and the man an
undeniable article. Onward from which time there is always a 'Battalion
Quintus' on their Books, instead of Battalion Du Verger; by degrees
two Batallions Quintus, and at length three, and Quintus become a
Colonel:--at which point the War ended; and the three Free-Battalions
Quintus, like all others of the same type, were discharged." This is
the authentic origin of the new name Quintus, which Guichard got, to
extinction of the old; substantially this, as derived from Quintus
himself,--though in the precise details of it there are obscurities,
never yet solved by the learned. Nicolai, for example, though he had
the story from Quintus in person, who was his familiar acquaintance, and
often came to see him at Berlin, does not, with his usual punctuality,
say, nor even confess that he has forgotten, what Book it was that
Quintus brought with him to confute the King on their Icilius-Caecilius
controversy; Nicolai only says, that he, for his part, in the fields of
Roman Literature and History, knows only three Quintus-Iciliuses,
not one of whom is of the least likelihood; and in fact, in the above
summary, I have had to INVERT my Nicolai on one point, to make the story
stick together. [Nicolai, _Anekdoten,_ vi. 129-145.]

"Quintus had been bred for the clerical profession; carefully, at
various Universities, Leyden last of all; and had even preached, as
candidate for license,--I hope with moderate orthodoxy;--though he soon
renounced that career. Exchanged it for learned and vigorous general
study, with an eye to some College Professorship instead. He was still
hardly twenty-three, when, in 1747, the new Stadtholder," Prince of
Orange, whom we used to know, "who had his eye upon him as a youth of
merit, graciously undertook to get him placed at Utrecht, in a vacancy
which had just occurred there,--whither the Prince was just bound, on
some ceremonial visit of a high nature. The glad Quintus, at that time
Guichard and little thinking of such an alias, hastened to set off in
the Prince's train; but could get no conveyance, such was the press of
people all for Utrecht. And did not arrive till next day,--and found
quarter, with difficulty, in the garret of some overflowing Inn.

"In the lower stories of his Inn, solitary Guichard, when night fell,
heard a specific GAUDEAMUS going on; and inquired what it was.
'A company of Professors, handselling a newly appointed
Professor;'--appointed, as the next question taught, to the very Chair
poor Quintus had come for! Serene Highness could not help himself; the
Utrechters were so bent on the thing. Quintus lay awake, all night, in
his truckle-bed; and gloomily resolved to have done with Professorships,
and become a soldier. 'If your Serene Highness do still favor me,'
said Quintus next day, 'I solicit, as the one help for me, an ensign's
commission!'--And persisted rigorously, in spite of all counsellings,
promises and outlooks on the professorial side of things. So that Serene
Highness had to grant him his commission; and Quintus was a soldier
thenceforth. Fought, more or less, in the sad remainder of that
Cumberland-Saxe War; and after the Peace of 1748 continued in the Dutch
service. Where, loath to be idle, he got his learned Books out again,
and took to studying thoroughly the Ancient Art of War. After years of
this, it had grown so hopeful that he proceeded to a Book upon it; and,
by degrees, determined that he must get to certain Libraries in
England, before finishing. In 1754, on furlough, graciously allowed and
continued, he came to London accordingly; finished his manuscript there
(printed at the Hague 1757 [_Memoires Militaires sur les &c._ (a La
Haye, 1757: 2 vols. 4to);--was in the 5th edition when I last heard of
it.]): and new War having now begun, went over (probably with English
introductions) as volunteer to Duke Ferdinand. By Duke Ferdinand he
was recommended to Friedrich, the goal of all his efforts, as of every
vagrant soldier's in those times:--and here at last, as Quintus
Icilius, he has found permanent billet, a Battalion and gradually three
Battalions, and will not need to roam any farther.

"They say, what is very credible, that Quintus proved an active, stout
and effectual soldier, in his kind; and perhaps we may hear of some of
his small-war adventures by and by: that he was a studious, hard-headed,
well-informed man, and had written an excellent Book on his subject,
is still abundantly clear. Readers may look in the famous Gibbon's
_Autobiography,_ or still better in the Guichard Book itself, if
they want evidence. The famous Gibbon was drilling and wheeling, very
peaceably indeed, in the Hampshire Militia, in those wild years of
European War. Hampshire Militia served as key, or glossary in a sort,
to this new Book of Guichard's, which Gibbon eagerly bought and studied;
and it, was Guichard, ALIAS Quintus Icilius, who taught Gibbon all he
ever knew of Ancient War, at least all the teaching he ever had of it,
for his renowned DECLINE AND FALL." [See Gibbon's _Works_ (4to, London,
1796: _Memoirs of my Life and Writings_], i. 97; and (_Extraits de mes
Lectures_), ii. 52-54, of dates May 14th-26th, 1762,--during which days
Gibbon is engaged in actual reading of the _Memoires Militaires;_ and
already knows the Author by his ALIAS of Quintus Icilius, "a man of
eminent sagacity and insight, who was in the Dutch, and is now, I
believe, in the Prussian service."

It was in the last days of June that Daun, after many litchings, got
into more decisive general movement northward; and slowly but steadily
planted himself at Mark-Lissa in the Lausitz: upon which, after some
survey of the phenomenon, Friedrich got to Schmottseifen, opposite
him, July 10th. Friedrich, on noticing such stir, had ridden down to
Trautenau (June 29th-30th), new Horse-Artillery attending, to look
closer into Daun's affairs; and, seeing what they were, had thereupon
followed. Above a month before this, Friedrich had detached a
considerable force against the Russians,--General Dohna, of whom in next
Chapter:--and both Daun and he again sit waiting, till they see farther.
Rapid Friedrich is obliged to wait; watching Daun and the Dohna-Russian
adventure: slow Daun will continue to wait and watch there, long weeks
and months, after that is settled, that and much else, fully to his
mind! Each is in his impregnable Camp; and each, Daun especially,
has his Divisions and Detachments hovering round him, near or far, on
different strategic errands; each Main-Camp like a planet with various
moons--Mark-Lissa especially, a kind of sun with planets and comets and
planetary moons:--of whose intricate motions and counter-motions, mostly
unimportant to us, we promised to take no notice, in face of such a
crisis just at hand.

By the 6th of July, slow Daun had got hitched into his Camp of
Mark-Lissa; and four days after, Friedrich attending him, was in
Schmottseifen: where again was pause; and there passed nothing
mentionable, even on Friedrich's score; and till July was just ending,
the curtain did not fairly rise. Panse of above two weeks on Friedrich's
part, and of almost three months on Daun's. Mark-Lissa, an impregnable
Camp, is on the Lausitz Border; with Saxony, Silesia, Bohemia all
converging hereabouts, and Brandenburg itself in the vicinity,--there is
not a better place for waiting on events. Here, accordingly, till
well on in September, Daun sat immovable; not even hitching now,--only
shooting out Detachments, planetary, cometary, at a great rate, chiefly
on his various Russian errands.

Daun, as we said, had been uncomfortably surprised to find, by degrees,
that Invasion was not Friedrich's plan this Year; that the dramatic
parts are redistributed, and that the playing of Fabius-Cunctator will
not now serve one's turn. Daun, who may well be loath to believe such
a thing, clings to his old part, and seems very lazy to rise and try
another. In fact, he does not rise, properly speaking, or take up his
new part at all. This Year, and all the following, he waits carefully
till the Russian Lion come; will then endeavor to assist,--or even do
jackal, which will be safer still. The Russians he intends shall act
lion; he himself modestly playing the subaltern but much safer part!
Diligent to flatter the lion; will provide him guidances, and fractional
sustenances, in view of the coming hunt; will eat the lion's leavings,
once the prey is slaughtered. This really was, in some sort, Daun's
yearly game, so long as it would last!--

July ending, and the curtain fairly risen, we shall have to look at
Friedrich with our best eyesight. Preparatory to which, there is, on
Friedrich's part, ever since the middle of June, this Anti-Russian Dohna
adventure going on:--of which, at first, and till about the time of
getting to Schmottseifen, he had great hopes; great, though of late
rapidly sinking again:--into which we must first throw a glance, as
properly the opening scene.

Fouquet has been left at Landshut, should the Daun remnants still in
Bohemia think of invading. Fouquet is about rooting himself rather
firmly into that important Post; fortifying various select Hills round
Landshut, with redoubts, curtains, communications; so as to keep ward
there, inexpugnable to a much stronger force. There for about a year,
with occasional short sallies, on errands that arise, Fouquet sat
successfully vigilant; resisting the Devilles, Becks, Harsches;
protecting Glatz and the Passes of Silesia: in about a year we shall
hear of his fortunes worsening, and of a great catastrophe to him in
that Landshut Post.

Friedrich allowed the Reichsfolk "two good months," after all that
flurrying and havoc done on them, "before they could show face in
Saxony." They did take about that time; and would have taken more,
had not Prince Henri been called away by other pressing occasions in
Friedrich's own neighborhood; and Saxony, for a good while (end of June
to beginning of September), been left almost bare of Prussian troops.
Which encourages the Reichs Army to hurry afield in very unprepared
condition,--still rather within the two months. End of July, Light
people of them push across to Halberstadt or Halle Country; and are
raising Contributions, and plundering diligently, if nothing else. Of
which we can take no notice farther: if the reader can recollect it,
well; if not, also well. The poor Reichs Army nominally makes a figure
this Year, but nominally only; the effective part of it, now and
henceforth, being Austrian Auxiliaries, and the Reichs part as flaccid
and insignificant as ever.

Prince Henri's call to quit Saxony was this. Daun, among the numerous
Detachments he was making, of which we can take no notice, had shot
out Two (rather of COMETARY type, to use our old figure),--which every
reader must try to keep in mind. Two Detachments, very considerable:
Haddick (who grew at last to 20,000), and Loudon (16,000); who are
hovering about mysteriously over the Lausitz;--intending what? Their
intention, Friedrich thinks, especially Haddick's intention, may be
towards Brandenburg, and even Berlin: wherefore he has summoned Henri to
look after it. Henri, resting in cantonments about Tschopau and Dresden,
after the late fatigues, and idle for the moment, hastens to obey;
and is in Bautzen neighborhood, from about the end of June and onward.
Sufficiently attentive to Haddick and Loudon: who make no attempt on
Brandenburg; having indeed, as Friedrich gradually sees, and as all of
us shall soon see, a very different object in view!--





Chapter II.--GENERAL DOHNA; DICTATOR WEDELL: BATTLE OF ZULLICHAU.

The Russian Lion, urged by Vienna and Versailles, made his entry, this
Year, earlier than usual,--coming now within wind of Mark-Lissa, as we
see;--and has stirred Daun into motion, Daun and everybody. From the
beginning of April, the Russians, hibernating in the interior parts
of Poland, were awake, and getting slowly under way. April 24th, the
Vanguard of 10,000 quitted Thorn; June 1st, Vanguard is in Posen;
followed by a First Division and a Second, each of 30,000. They called
it "Soltikof crossing the Weichsel with 100,000 men;" but, exclusive
of the Cossack swarms, there were not above 76,000 regulars: nor was
Soltikof their Captain just at first; our old friend Fermor was, and
continued to be till Soltikof, in a private capacity, reached Posen
(June 29th), and produced his new commission. At Fermor's own request,
as Fermor pretended,--who was skilled in Petersburg politics, and with a
cheerful face served thenceforth as Soltikof's second.

At Posen, as on the road thither, they find Sulkowski's and the other
burnt provenders abundantly replaced: it is evident they intend, in
concert with Daun, to enclose Friedrich between two fires, and do
something considerable. Whether on Brandenburg or Silesia, is not yet
known to Friedrich. Friedrich, since the time they crossed Weichsel,
has given them his best attention; and more than once has had schemes on
their Magazines and them,--once a new and bigger Scheme actually afoot,
under Wobersnow again, our Anti-Sulkowski friend; but was obliged to
turn the force elsewhither, on alarms that rose. He himself cannot quit
the centre of the work; his task being to watch Daun, and especially,
should Daun attempt nothing else, to prevent junction of Soltikof and
him.

Daun still lies torpid, or merely hitching about; but now when
the Russians are approaching Posen, and the case becomes pressing,
Friedrich, as is usual to him, draws upon the Anti-Swedish resource,
upon the Force he has in Pommern. That is to say, orders General Dohna,
who has the Swedes well driven in at present, to quit Stralsund Country,
to leave the ineffectual Swedes with some very small attendance; and to
march--with certain reinforcements that are arriving (Wobersnow already,
Hulsen with 10,000 out of Saxony in few days)--direct against the
Russians; and at once go in upon them. Try to burn their Magazines
again; or, equally good, to fall vigorously on some of their separate
Divisions, and cut them off in the vagrant state;--above all, to be
vigorous, be rapid, sharp, and do something effectual in that quarter.
These were Dohna's Instructions. Dohna has 18,000; Hulsen, with his
10,000, is industriously striding forward, from the farther side of
Saxony; Wobersnow, with at least his own fine head, is already there.
Friedrich, watching in the Anti-Junction position, ready for the least
chance that may turn up.

Dohna marched accordingly; but was nothing like rapid enough: an old
man, often in ill health too; and no doubt plenty of impediments about
him. He consumed some time rallying at Stargard; twelve days more at
Landsberg, on the Warta, settling his provision matters: in fine, did
not get to Posen neighborhood till June 23d, three weeks after the
Russian Vanguard of 10,000 had fixed itself there, and other Russian
parties were daily dropping in. Dohna was 15,000, a Wobersnow with him:
had he gone at once on Posen, as Wobersnow urged, it is thought he might
perhaps have ruined this Vanguard and the Russian Magazine; which would
have been of signal service for the remaining Campaign. But he preferred
waiting for Hulsen and the 10,000, who did not arrive for seven or eight
days more; by which time Soltikof and most of the Russian Divisions had
got in;--and the work was become as good as hopeless, on those languid
terms. Dohna did try upon the Magazine, said to be ill guarded in some
Suburb of Posen; crossed the Warta with that view, found no Magazine;
recrossed the Warta; and went manoeuvring about, unable to do the least
good on Soltikof or his Magazines or operations. Friedrich was still in
Landshut region, just about quitting it,--just starting on that little
Trautenau Expedition, with his Four Pieces of Horse-Artillery (June
29th), when the first ill news of Dohna came in; which greatly
disappointed Friedrich, and were followed by worse, instead of better.

The end was, Soltikof, being now all ready, winded himself out of Posen
one day, veiled by Cossacks; and, to Dohna's horror, had got, or was in
the act of getting, between Dohna and Brandenburg; which necessitated
new difficult manoeuvres from Dohna. Soltikof too can manoeuvre a
little: Soltikof edges steadily forward; making for Crossen-on-Oder,
where he expects to find Austrians (Haddick and Loudon, if Friedrich
could yet guess it), with 30,000 odd, especially with provision,
which is wearing scarce with him. Twice or so there was still a pretty
opportunity for Dohna on him; but Dohna never could resolve about it
in time. Back and ever back goes Dohna; facing Soltikof; but always
hitching back; latterly in Brandenburg ground, the Russians and
he;--having no provision, he either. In fine, July 17th (one week after
Friedrich had got to Schmottseifen), Dohna finds himself at the little
Town of Zullichau (barely in time to snatch it before Soltikof could),
within thirty miles of Crossen; and nothing but futility behind and
before. [Tempelhof, iii, 78-88; _ Helden-Geschichte,_ v. 835-847.]

We can imagine Friedrich's daily survey of all this; his gloomy
calculations what it will soon amount to if it last. He has now no
Winterfeld, Schwerin, no Keith, Retzow, Moritz:--whom has he? His
noblest Captains are all gone; he must put up with the less noble. One
Wedell, Lieutenant-General, had lately recommended himself to the royal
mind by actions of a prompt daring. The royal mind, disgusted with these
Dohna hagglings, and in absolute necessity of finding somebody that had
resolution, and at least ordinary Prussian skill, hoped Wedell was the
man. And determined, the crisis being so urgent, to send Wedell in the
character of ALTER-EGO, or "with the powers of a Roman Dictator," as the
Order expressed it. [Given in Preuss, ii. 207, 208; in Stenzel, v. 212,
other particulars.] Dictator Wedell is to supersede Dohna; shall go,
at his own swift pace, fettered by nobody;--and, at all hazards, shall
attack Soltikof straightway, and try to beat him. "You are grown too
old for that intricate hard work; go home a little, and recover your
health," the King writes to Dohna. And to the Dohna Army, "Obey this
man, all and sundry of you, as you would myself;" the man's private
Order being, "Go in upon Soltikof; attack him straightway; let us have
done with this wriggling and haggling." Date of this Order is "Camp at
Schmottseifen, 20th July, 1759." The purpose of such high-flown Title,
and solemnity of nomination, was mainly, it appears, to hush down any
hesitation or surprise among the Dohna Generals, which, as Wedell was
"the youngest Lieutenant-General of the Army," might otherwise have been
possible.

Wedell, furnished with some small escort and these Documents, arrives
in Camp Sunday Evening, 22d July:--poor Dohna has not the least word
or look of criticism; and every General, suppressing whatever thoughts
there may be, prepares to yield loyal obedience to Dictator Wedell.
"Wobersnow was the far better soldier of the two!" murmured the
Opposition party, then and long afterwards, [Retzow, &c.]--all the more,
as Wobersnow's behavior under it was beautiful, and his end tragical, as
will be seen. Wobersnow I perceive to have been a valiant sharp-striking
man, with multifarious resources in his head; who had faithfully helped
in these operations, and I believe been urgent to quicken them. But
what I remember best of him is his hasty admirable contrivance for
field-bakery in pressing circumstances,--the substance of which shall
not be hidden from a mechanical age:--

"You construct six slight square iron frames, each hinged to the other;
each, say, two feet square, or the breadth of two common tiles, and
shaped on the edges so as to take in tiles;--tiles are to be found on
every human cottage. This iron frame, when you hook it together, becomes
the ghost of a cubic box, and by the help of twelve tiles becomes a
compact field-oven; and you can bake with it, if you have flour and
water, and a few sticks. The succinctest oven ever heard of; for your
operation done, and your tiles flung out again, it is capable of all
folding flat like a book." [Retzow, ii. 82 n.] Never till now had
Wobersnow's oven been at fault: but in these Polish Villages, all of
mere thatched hovels, there was not a tile to be found; and the Bakery,
with astonishment, saw itself unable to proceed.

Wedell arrived Sunday evening, 22d July; had crossed Oder at
Tschischerzig,--some say by Crossen Bridge; no matter which. Dohna's
Camp is some thirty miles west of Crossen; in and near the small
Town called Zullichau, where his head-quarter is. In those dull
peaty Countries, on the right, which is thereabouts the NORTHERN (not
eastern), bank of Oder; between the Oder and the Warta; some seventy
miles south-by-east of Landsberg, and perhaps as far southwest of Posen:
thither has Dohna now got with his futile manoeuvrings. Soltikof, drawn
up amid scrubby woods and sluggish intricate brooks, is about a mile to
east of him.

Poor Dohna demits at once; and, I could conjecture, vanishes that very
night; glad to be out of such a thing. Painfully has Dohna manoeuvred
for weeks past; falling back daily; only anxious latterly that Soltikof,
who daily tries it, do not get to westward of him on the Frankfurt
road, and so end this sad shuffle. Soltikof as yet has not managed that
ultimate fatality; Dohna, by shuffling back, does at least contrive to
keep between Frankfurt and him;--will not try attacking him, much as
Wobersnow urges it. Has agreed twice or oftener, on Wobersnow's urgency:
"Yes, yes; we have a chance," Dohna would answer; "only let us rest till
to-morrow, and be fresh!" by which time the opportunity was always gone
again.

Wedell had arrived with a grenadier battalion and some horse for escort;
had picked up 150 Russian prisoners by the way. Retzow has understood
he came in with a kind of state; and seemed more or less inflated;
conscious of representing the King's person, and being a Roman
Dictator,--though it is a perilously difficult office too, and requires
more than a Letter of Instructions to qualify you for it! This is not
Leonidas Wedell, whom readers once knew; poor Leonidas is dead long
since, fell in the Battle of Sohr, soon after the heroic feat of
Ziethen's and his at Elbe-Teinitz (Defence of Elbe against an Army);
this is Leonidas's elder Brother. Friedrich had observed his fiery
ways on the day of Leuthen: "Hah, a new Winterfeld perhaps?" thought
Friedrich, "All the Winterfeld I now have!"--which proved a fond hope.
Wedell's Dictatorship began this Sunday towards sunset; and lasted--in
practical fact, it lasted one day.




DICTATOR WEDELL FIGHTS HIS BATTLE (Monday, 23d July, 1759), WITHOUT
SUCCESS.

Monday morning early, Wedell is on the heights, reconnoitring Soltikof;
cannot see much of him, the ground being so woody; does see what he
takes to be Soltikof's left wing; and judges that Soltikof will lie
quiet for this day. Which was far from a right reading of Soltikof; the
fact being that Soltikof, in long columns and divisions, beginning with
his right wing, was all on march since daybreak; what Wedell took for
Soltikof's "left wing" being Soltikof's rear-guard and baggage, waiting
till the roads cleared. Wedell, having settled everything on the above
footing, returns to Zullichau about 10 o'clock; and about 11, Soltikof,
miles long, disengaged from the bushy hollows, makes his appearance on
the open grounds of Palzig: he, sure enough (though Wedell can hardly
believe it),--five or six miles to northeast yonder; tramping diligently
along, making for Crossen and the Oder Bridge;--and is actually got
ahead of us, at last!

This is what Wedell cannot suffer, cost what it may. Wedell's orders
were, in such case, Attack the Russians. Wedell instantly took his
measures; not unskilfully, say judges,--though the result proved
disappointing; and Wobersnow himself earnestly dissuaded: "Too
questionable, I should doubt! Soltikof is 70,000, and has no end of
Artillery; we are 26,000, and know not if we can bring a single gun to
where Soltikof is!" [Tempelhof, iii. 132-134.]

Wedell's people have already, of their own accord, got to arms again;
stand waiting his orders on this new emergency. No delay in Wedell or in
them. "May not it be another Rossbach (if we are lucky)?" thinks Wedell:
"Cannot we burst in on their flank, as they march yonder, those awkward
fellows; and tumble them into heaps?" The differences were several-fold:
First, that Friedrich and Seidlitz are not here. Many brave men we have,
and skilful; but not a master and man like these Two. Secondly, that
there is no Janus Hill to screen our intentions; but that the Russians
have us in full view while we make ready. Thirdly, and still
more important, that we do not know the ground, and what hidden
inaccessibilities lie ahead. This last is judged to have been the
killing circumstance. Between the Russians and us there is a paltry
little Brook, or line of quagmire; scarcely noticeable here, but
passable nowhere except at the Village-Mill of Kay, by one poor Bridge
there. And then, farther inwards, as shelter of the Russians, there
is another quaggy Brook, branch of the above, which is without bridge
altogether. Hours will be required to get 26,000 people marched up
there, not to speak of heavy guns at all.

The 26,000 march with their usual mathematical despatch: Manteuffel and
the Vanguard strike in with their sharpest edge, foot and horse, direct
on the Head of the Russian Column, Manteuffel leading on, so soon as his
few battalions and squadrons are across. Head means BRAIN (or life)
to this Russian Column; and these Manteuffel people go at it with
extraordinary energy. The Russian Head gives way; infantry and
cavalry:--their cavalry was driven quite to rear, and never came in
sight again after this of Manteuffel. But the Russians have abundance
of Reserves; also of room to manoeuvre in,--no lack of ground open, and
ground defensible (Palzig Village and Churchyard, for example);--above
all, they have abundance of heavy guns.

Well in recoil from Manteuffel and his furies, the beaten Russians
succeed in forming "a long Line behind Palzig Village," with that
Second, slighter or Branch Quagmire between them and us; they get the
Village beset, and have the Churchyard of it lined with batteries,--say
seventy guns. Manteuffel, unsupported, has to fall back;--unwillingly,
and not chased or in disorder,--towards Kay-Mill again; where many
are by this time across. Hulsen, with the Centre, attacks now, as the
Vanguard had done; with a will, he too: Wobersnow, all manner of people
attack; time after time, for about four hours coming: and it proves
all in vain, on that Churchyard and new Line. Without cannon, we are
repulsed, torn away by those Russian volcano-batteries; never enough of
us at once!

Hulsen, Wobersnow, everybody in detail is repulsed, or finds his success
unavailing. Poor Wobersnow did wonders; but he fell, killed. Gone he;
and has left so few of his like: a man that could ill be spared at
present!--Day is sinking; we find we have lost, in killed, wounded and
prisoners, some 6,000 men. "About sunset,"--flaming July sun going down
among the moorlands on such a scene,--Wedell gives it up; retires slowly
towards Kay Bridge. Slowly; not chased, or molested; Soltikof too glad
to be rid of him. Soltikof's one aim is, and was, towards Crossen;
towards Austrian Junction, and something to live upon. Soltikof's loss
of men is reckoned to be heavier even than Wedell's: but he could far
better afford it. He has gained his point; and the price is small in
comparison. Next day he enters Crossen on triumphant terms.

Poor Wedell had returned over Kay-Mill Bridge, in the night-time after
his Defeat. On the morrow (Tuesday, 24th, day of Soltikof's glad entry),
Wedell crosses Oder; at Tschischerzig, the old place of Sunday evening
last,--in how different a humor, this time!--and in a day more, posts
himself opposite to Crossen Bridge, five or six miles south; and again
sits watchful of Soltikof there. At Crossen, triumphant Soltikof has
found no Austrian Junction, nor anything additional to live upon. A
very disappointing circumstance to Soltikof; "Austrian Junction still
a problem, then; a thing in the air? And perhaps the King of Prussia
taking charge of it now!" Soltikof, more and more impatient, after
waiting some days, decided Not to cross Oder by that Bridge;--"shy of
crossing anywhere [think the French Gentlemen, Montazet, Montalembert],
to the King of Prussia's side!" [Stenzel, iv. 215 (indistinct, and
giving a WRONG citation of "Montalembert, ii. 87").] Which is not
unlikely, though the King is above 100 miles off him, and has Daun
on his hands. Certain enough, keeping the River between him and any
operations of the King, Soltikof set out for Frankfurt, forty or fifty
miles farther down. In the hope probably of finding something of human
provender withal? July 30th, one week after his Battle, the vanguard of
him is there.

Thus, in two days, or even in one, has Wedell's Dictatorship ended. Easy
to say scoffingly, "Would it had never begun!" Friedrich knows that,
and Wedell knows it;--AFTER the event everybody knows it! Friedrich said
nothing of reproachful; the reverse rather,--"I dreaded something of the
kind; it is not your fault;" [TO WEDELL, FROM THE KING, "Schmottseifen,
July 24th. 1759" (in Schoning, ii. 118).]--ordered Wedell to watch
diligently at Crossen Bridge, and be ready on farther signal. The Wedell
Problem, in such ruined condition, has now fallen to Friedrich himself.

This is the BATTLE OF ZULLICHAU (afternoon of 23d July, 1759); the
beginning of immense disasters in this Campaign. Battle called also of
KAY and of PALZIG, those also being main localities in it. It was lost,
not by fault of Wedell's people, who spent themselves nobly upon it, nor
perhaps by fault of Wedell himself, but principally, if not solely,
by those two paltry Brooks, or threads of Quagmire, one of which turns
Kay-Mill; memorable Brooks in this Campaign, 1759. [Tempelhof, iii.
125-131.]

Close in the same neighborhood, there is another equally contemptible
Brook, making towards Oder, and turning the so-called Krebsmuhle, which
became still more famous to the whole European Public twenty years
hence. KREBS-MUHLE (Crab-Mill), as yet quite undistinguished among
Mills; belonging to a dusty individual called Miller Arnold, with a
dusty Son of his own for Miller's Lad: was it at work this day? Or had
the terrible sound from Palzig quenched its clacking?--

Some three weeks ago (4th-6th JULY), there occurred a sudden sharp thing
at Havre-de-Grace on the French Coast, worth a word from us in this
place. The Montazets, Montalemberts, watching, messaging about, in the
Austrian-Russian Courts and Camps, assiduously keeping their Soltikofs
in tune, we can observe how busy they are. Soubise with his Invasion of
England, all the French are very busy; they have conquered Hessen from
Duke Ferdinand, and promise themselves a glorious Campaign, after that
Seizure of Frankfurt. Soubise, intent on his new Enterprise, is
really making ardent preparations: at Vanues in the Morbihan,
such rendezvousing and equipping;--especially at Havre, no end of
flat-bottomed boats getting built; and much bluster and agitation among
the weaker sorts in both Nations. Whereupon,--

"JULY 1st [just in the days while Friedrich was first trying Horse
Artillery], Rear-Admiral Rodney sails from Portsmouth with a few
Frigates, and Six Bomb-ketches [FIREDRAKE, BASILISK, BLAST, and such
nomenclatures [List of him, in Beatson, _Naval and Military Memoirs_
(London, 1804), ii. 241; his Despatch excellently brief, ib. ii. 323]];
and in the afternoon of Tuesday, 3d, arrives in the frith or bay of
Havre. Steers himself properly into 'the Channel of Honfleur' before
dark; and therefrom, with his Firedrake, Basilisk and Company, begins
such a bombardment of Havre and the flat-bottomed manufactories as was
quite surprising. Fifty-two incessant hours of it, before he thought
poor Havre had enough. Poor Havre had been on fire six times; the flat
manufactory (unquenchable) I know not how many; all the inhabitants off
in despair; and the Garrison building this battery to no purpose, then
that; no salvation for them but in Rodney's 'mortars getting too hot.'
He had fired of shells 1,900, of carcasses, 1,150: from Wednesday about
sunrise till Friday about 8 A.M.,--about time now for breakfast; which
I hope everybody had, after such a stretch of work. 'No damage to speak
of,' said the French Gazetteers; 'we will soon refit everything!' But
they never did; and nothing came of Havre henceforth. Vannes was always,
and is now still more, to be the main place; only that Hawke--most
unexpectedly, for one fancied all their ships employed in distant
parts--rides there with a Channel Fleet of formidable nature; and the
previous question always is: 'Cannot we beat Hawke? Can we! Or will not
he perhaps go, of himself, when the rough weather comes?'"




Chapter III.--FRIEDRICH IN PERSON ATTEMPTS THE RUSSIAN PROBLEM; NOT WITH
SUCCESS.

Before Wedell's catastrophe, the Affair of those Haddick-Loudon
Detachments had become a little plainer to Friedrich. The intention,
he begins to suspect, is not for Berlin at all; but for junction with
Soltikof,--at Crossen, or wherever it may be. This is in fact their real
purpose; and this, beyond almost Berlin itself, it is in the highest
degree important to prevent! Important; and now as if become impossible!

Prince Henri had come to Bautzen with his Army, specially to look after
Loudon and Haddick; and he has, all this while, had Finck with some
10,000 diligently patrolling to westward of them, guarding Berlin; he
himself watching from the southern side,--where, as on the western,
there was no danger from them. Some time before Wedell's affair,
Friedrich had pushed out Eugen of Wurtemberg to watch these people on
the eastern side;--suspicious that thitherward lay their real errand.
Eugen had but 6,000; and, except in conjunction with Finck and Henri,
could do nothing,--nor can, now when Friedrich's suspicion turns out to
be fatally true. Friedrich had always the angry feeling that Finck and
Prince Henri were the blameworthy parties in what now ensued; that they,
who were near, ought to have divined these people's secret, and spoiled
it in time; not have left it to him who was far off, and so busy
otherwise. To the last, that was his fixed private opinion; by no means
useful to utter,--especially at present, while attempting the now very
doubtful enterprise himself, and needing all about him to be swift
and zealous. This is one of Friedrich's famous labors, this of the
Haddick-Loudon junction with Soltikof; strenuous short spasm of effort,
of about a week's continuance; full of fiery insight, velocity, energy;
still admired by judges, though it was unsuccessful, or only had half
success. Difficult to bring home, in any measure, to the mind of modern
readers, so remote from it.

Friedrich got the news of Zullichau next day, July 24th;--and instantly
made ready. The case is critical; especially this Haddick-Loudon part of
it: add 30 or 36,000 Austrians to Soltikof, how is he then to be dealt
with? A case stringently pressing:--and the resources for it few and
scattered. For several days past, Haddick, and Loudon under him, whose
motions were long enigmatic, have been marching steadily eastward
through the Lausitz,--with the evident purpose of joining
Soltikof; unless Wedell could forbid. Wedell ahead was the grand
opposition;--Finck, Henri, Wurtemberg, as good as useless;--and Wedell
being now struck down, these Austrians will go, especially Loudon will,
at a winged rate. They are understood to be approaching Sagan Country;
happily, as yet, well to westward of it, and from Sagan Town well
NORTH-westward;--but all accounts of them are vague, dim: they are an
obscure entity to Friedrich, but a vitally important one. Sagan Town may
be about 70 miles northward of where Friedrich now is: from Sagan, were
they once in the meridian of Sagan, their road is free eastward and
northward;--to Crossen is about 60 miles north-by-east from Sagan, to
Frankfurt near 100 north. Sagan is on the Bober; Bober, in every event,
is between the Austrians and their aim.

Friedrich feels that, however dangerous to quit Daun's neighborhood, he
must, he in person, go at once. And who, in the interim, will watch Daun
and his enterprises? Friedrich's reflections are: "Well, in the crisis
of the moment, Saxony--though there already are marauding Bodies of
Reichsfolk in it--must still be left to itself for a time; or cannot
Finck and his 10,000 look to it? Henri, with his Army, now useless at
Bautzen, shall instantly rendezvous at Sagan; his Army to go with me,
against the Russians and their Haddick-Loudons; Henri to Schmottseifen,
instead of me, and attend to Daun; Henri, I have no other left! Finck
and his 10,000 must take charge of Saxony, such charge as he can:--how
lucky those Spring Forays, which destroyed the Reichs Magazines! Whereby
there is no Reichs Army yet got into Saxony (nothing but preliminary
pulses and splashings of it); none yet, nor like to be quite at once."
That is Friedrich's swift plan.

Henri rose on the instant, as did everybody concerned: July 29th, Henri
and Army were at Sagan; Army waiting for the King; Henri so far on his
road to Schmottseifen. He had come to Sagan "by almost the rapidest
marches ever heard of,"--or ever till some others of Henri's own, which
he made in that neighborhood soon. Punctual, he, to his day; as are
Eugen of Wurtemberg's people, and all Detachments and Divisions:
Friedrich himself arrives at Sagan that same 29th, "about
midnight,"--and finds plenty of work waiting: no sleep these two nights
past; and none coming just yet! A most swift rendezvous. The speed of
everybody has been, and needs still to be, intense.

This rendezvous at Sagan--intersection of Henri and Friedrich, bound
different roads (the Brothers, I think, did not personally meet, Henri
having driven off for Schmottseifen by a shorter road)--was SUNDAY, JULY
29th. Following which, are six days of such a hunt for those Austrian
reynards as seldom or never was! Most vehement, breathless, baffling
hunt; half of it spent in painfully beating cover, in mere finding and
losing. Not rightly successful, after all. So that, on the eighth day
hence, AUGUST 6th, at Mullrose, near Frankfurt, 80 miles from Sagan,
there is a second rendezvous,--rendezvous of Wedell and Friedrich, who
do not now "intersect," but meet after the hunt is done;--and in the
interim, there has been a wonderful performance, though an unsuccessful.
Friedrich never could rightly get hold of his Austrians. Once only, at
Sommerfeld, a long march northwest of Sagan, he came upon some outskirts
of them. And in general, in those latter eight days, especially in
the first six of them, there is, in that Kotbus-Sagan Country, such an
intersecting, checking, pushing and multifarious simmering of marches,
on the part of half a dozen Strategic Entities, Friedrich the centre
of them, as--as, I think, nobody but an express soldier-student, well
furnished with admiration for this particular Soldier, would consent to
have explained to him. One of the maziest, most unintelligible whirls
of marching; inextricable Sword Dance, or Dance of the Furies,--five
of them (that is the correct number: Haddick, Loudon, Friedrich,
Wurtemberg, Wedell);--and it is flung down for us, all in a huddle, in
these inhuman Books (which have several errors of the press, too): let
no man rashly insist with himself on understanding it, unless he have
need! Humanly pulled straight, not inhumanly flung down at random, here
the essentials of it are,--in very brief state:--

"SAGAN, MONDAY, 30th JULY. Friedrich is at Sagan, since midnight last,
busier and busier;" beating cover, as we termed it, and getting his
hounds (his new Henri-Army) in leash; "endeavoring, especially, to get
tidings of those Austrian people; who are very enigmatic,--Loudon a
dexterous man,--and have hung up such a curtain of Pandours between
Friedrich and them as is nearly impenetrable. In the course of this
Monday Friedrich ascertains that they are verily on the road; coming
eastward, for Sommerfeld,--'thence for Crossen!' he needs no ghost to
tell him. Wherefore,

"TUESDAY, SAGAN TO NAUMBURG. Tuesday before daybreak Friedrich too is
on the road: northwestward; in full march towards Naumburg on Bober,
meaning to catch the Bridge from them there. March of the swiftest;
he himself is ahead, as usual, with the Vanguard of Horse. He reaches
Naumburg (northward, a march of 20 miles); finds, not Haddick or Loudon,
but a Detachment of theirs: which he at once oversets with his cavalry,
and chases,--marking withal that 'westward is the way they run.'
Westward; and that we are still ahead, thank Heaven!

"Before his Infantry are all up, or are well rested in Naumburg,
Friedrich ascertains, on more precise tidings, that the Austrians are in
Sommerfeld, to westward (again a 20 miles); and judges That, no doubt,
they will bear off more to leftward, by Guben probably, and try to avoid
him,--unless he can still catch them in Sommerfeld. About nightfall
he marches for Sommerfeld, at his swiftest; arrives Wednesday early;
finds--alas!--

"SOMMERFELD, WEDNESDAY MORNING, AUGUST 1st, Friedrich finds that Loudon
was there last night,--preterite tense, alas; the question now being,
Where is he!" In fact, Loudon had written yesterday to Daun (Letter
still extant, "Sommerfeld, July 31st"), That "being swift and light,"
consisting of horse for most part, "he may probably effect Junction
this very night;"--but has altered his mind very much, on sight of these
fugitives from Naumburg, since! And has borne off more to leftward.
Straight north now, and at a very brisk pace; being now all of
horse;--and has an important conference with Haddick at Guben, when
they arrive there. "Not in Sommerfeld?" thinks Friedrich (earnestly
surveying, through this slit he has made in the Pandour veil): "Gone
to Guben most likely, bearing off from us to leftward?"--Which was
the fact; though not the whole fact. And indeed the chase is now again
fallen uncertain, and there has to be some beating of covers. For one
thing, he learns to-day (August 1st) that the Russians are gone to
Frankfurt: "Follow them, you Wedell,"--orders Friedrich: them we shall
have to go into,--however this hunt end!--

"To Markersdorf, Thursday, August 2d. Friedrich takes the road for
Guben; reaches Markersdorf (twenty miles' march, still seven or eight
from Guben); falls upon--What phenomenon is this? The Austrian heavy
Train; meal-wagons not a few, and a regiment of foot in charge of
it;--but going the wrong way, not TOWARDS the Russians, but from them!
What on earth can this be? This is Haddick,--if Friedrich could yet
clearly know it,--Haddick and Train, who for his own part has given up
the junction enterprise. At Guben, some hours ago, he had conference
with Loudon; and this was the conclusion arrived at: 'Impossible, with
that King so near! You, Herr Loudon, push on, without heavy baggage, and
with the Cavalry altogether: you can get in, almost 20,000 strong; I,
with the Infantry, with the meal and heavy guns, will turn, and make for
the Lausitz again!'

"This mysterious Austrian Train, going the wrong way, Friedrich
attacks, whatever it be (hoping, I suppose, it might be the Austrians
altogether); chases it vigorously; snatches all the meal-wagons, and
about 1,000 prisoners. Uncertain still what it is,--if not the Austrians
altogether? To his sorrow, he finds, on pushing farther into it, that
it is only Haddick and the Infantry; that Loudon, with the 20,000
Horse, will have gone off for Frankfurt;--irretrievably ahead, the swift
Loudon,--ever careering northward all this while, since that
afternoon at Sommerfeld, when the fugitives altered his opinion: a now
unattainable Loudon. In the course of Thursday night, Friedrich has
satisfied himself that the Loudon junction is a thing as good as
done;--in effect, Loudon did get to Frankfurt, morning of August 3d, and
joined the Russians there; and about the same time, or only a few hours
sooner, Friedrich, by symptoms, has divined that his hunt has ended,
in this rather unsuccessful way; and that chasing of Haddick is not the
road to go." [Tempelhof, iii. 135-139.]

Not Haddick now; with or without their Austrians, it shall be the
Russians now! Two days ago (Wednesday, as was mentioned), before sight
of those enigmatic meal-wagons, Friedrich had learned that the
Russians were to be in Frankfurt again; and had ordered Wedell to march
thitherward, at any rate. Which Wedell is doing, all this Thursday
and the four following days. As does likewise, from and after "FRIDAY,
AUGUST 3d, 1 A.M." (hunt then over), Friedrich himself,--renouncing
Haddick and the hunt. Straight towards Frankfurt thenceforth;
head-quarters Beeskow that night; next night, Mullrose, whither Wedell
is appointed, within twelve miles of Frankfurt. This is the end of
Friedrich's sore Chase and March; burnt deeply into his own weary brain,
if ours still refuse it admittance! Here, of utterly fatigued tone, is a
Note of his, chiefly on business, to Minister Finkenstein. Indeed there
are, within the next ten days, Three successive Notes to Finkenstein,
which will be worth reading in their due places. This is the First of
them:--

THE KING TO GRAF VON FINKENSTEIN (at Berlin).

"BEESKOW, 3d August,1759."

"I am just arrived here, after cruel and frightful marchings [CHECKS
HIMSELF, HOWEVER]. There is nothing desperate in all that; and I believe
the noise and disquietude this hurly-burly has caused will be the worst
of it. Show this Letter to everybody, that it may be known the State is
not undefended. I have made above 1,000 prisoners from Haddick. All his
meal-wagons have been taken. Finck, I believe, will keep an eye on him,"
and secure Berlin from attempts of his. "This is all I can say.

"To-morrow I march to within two leagues of Frankfurt [to Mullrose,
namely]. Katte [the Minister who has charge of such things] must send
me instantly Two Hundred Wispels [say tons] of Meal, and Bakers One
Hundred, to Furstenwalde. I shall encamp at Wulkow. I am very tired. For
six nights I have not closed an eye. Farewell.--F."

During the above intricate War-Dance of Five,--the day while Friedrich
was at Sommerfeld, the day before he came in sight of Haddick's
meal-wagons going the wrong road,--there went on, at Minden, on the
Weser, three hundred miles away, a beautiful feat of War, in the highest
degree salutary to Duke Ferdinand and Britannic Majesty's Ministry; feat
which requires a word from us here. A really splendid Victory, this of
Minden, August 1st: French driven headlong through the Passes there;
their "Conquest of Hanover and Weser Country" quite exploded and flung
over the horizon; and Duke Ferdinand relieved from all his distresses,
and lord of the ascendant again in those parts. Highly interesting
to Friedrich;--especially to Prince Henri; whose apprehensions about
Ferdinand and the old Richelieu Hastenbeck-Halberstadt time returning
on us, have been very great; and who now, at Schmottseifen, fires
FEU-DE-JOIE for it with all his heart. This is a Battle still of some
interest to English readers. But can English readers consent to halt
in this hot pinch of the Friedrich crisis; and read the briefest thing
which is foreign to it? Alas, I fear they can;--and will insert the Note
here:--

BATTLE OF MINDEN: WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 1st, 1759.---"Ever since Bergen,
things have gone awry with Ferdinand, and in spite of skilful
management, of hard struggles and bright sparkles of success, he has
had a bad Campaign of it. The French, it would seem, are really got into
better fighting order; Belleisle's exertions as War-Minister have
been almost wonderful,--in some respects, TOO wonderful, as we shall
hear!--and Broglio and Contades, in comparison with Clermont and
Soubise, have real soldier qualities. Contades, across Rhine again, in
those Weser Countries, who is skilful in his way, and is pricked on
by emulation of Broglio, has been spreading himself out steadily
progressive there; while Broglio, pushing along from Frankfurt-on-Mayn,
has conquered Hessen; is into Hanover; on the edge of conquering
Hanover,--which how is Ferdinand to hinder? Ferdinand has got two, if
not three Armies to deal with, and in number is not much superior
to one. If he run to save Hanover from Broglio, he loses Westphalia:
Osnabruck (his magazine)? Munster, Lippstadt,--Contades, if left to
himself, will take these, after short siege; and will nestle himself
there, and then advance, not like a transitory fever-fit, but like
visible death, on Hanover. Ferdinand, rapid yet wary, manoeuvred his
very best among those interests of his, on the left bank of Weser; but
after the surprisal of Minden from him (brilliantly done by Broglio,
and the aid of a treacherous peasant), especially after the capture of
Osnabruck, his outlooks are gloomy to a degree: and at Versailles,
and at Minden where Contades has established himself, 'the Conquest
of Hanover' (beautiful counterweight to all one's losses in America or
elsewhere) is regarded as a certainty of this Year.

"For the last ten days of July, about Minden, the manoeuvring,
especially on Ferdinand's part, had been intense; a great idea in the
head of Ferdinand, more or less unintelligible to Contades. Contades,
with some 30,000, which is the better half of his force, has taken one
of the unassailablest positions. He lies looking northward, his
right wing on the Weser with posts to Minden (Minden perhaps a mile
northeastward there), on his left impassable peat-bogs and quagmires;
in front a quaggy River or impassable black Brook, called the Bastau,
coming from the westward, which disembogues at Minden: [Sketch of Plan,
p. 238]--there lies Contades, as if in a rabbit-hole, say military men;
for defence, if that were the sole object, no post can be stronger.
Contades has in person say 30,000; and round him, on both sides of the
Weser, are Broglio with 20,000; besides other Divisions, I know not
how many, besieging Munster, capturing Osnabruck (our hay magazine),
attempting Lippstadt by surprise (to no purpose), and diligently working
forward, day by day, to Ferdinand's ruin in those Minden regions. Three
or four Divisions busy in that manner;--and above all, we say, he has
Broglio with a 20,000 on the right or east bank of the Weser,--who, if
Ferdinand quit him even for a day, seems to have Hanover at discretion,
and can march any day upon Hanover City, where his light troops have
already been more than once. Why does n't Ferdinand cross Weser,
re-cross Weser; coerce Broglio back; and save Hanover? cry the
Gazetteers and a Public of weak judgment. Pitt's Public is inclined
to murmur about Ferdinand; Pitt himself never. Ferdinand persists in
sticking by Minden neighborhood,--and, in a scarcely accountable way,
manoeuvring there, shooting out therefrom what mischief he can upon the
various Contades people in their sieges and the like.

"On Contades himself he can pretend to do nothing,--except hoodwink
him, entice him out, and try to get a chance on him. But for his own
subsistence and otherwise, he is very lively;--snatches, by a sudden
stroke, Bremen City: 'Yes truly, Bremen is a Reichstadt; nor shall YOU
snatch it, as you did Frankfurt; but I will, instead; and my English
proviant-ships shall have a sure haven henceforth!' Snatches Bremen
by one sudden stroke; RE-snatches Osnabruck by another ('our magazine
considerably INCREASED since you have had it, many thanks!'); does lose
Munster, to his sorrow; but nevertheless sticks by his ground here;--nay
detaches his swift-cutting Nephew, the Hereditary Prince, who is growing
famous for such things, to cut out Contades's strong post to southward
(Gohfeld, ten miles up the Weser), which guards his meal-wagons, after
their long journey from the south. That is Contades's one weak point,
in this posture of things: his meal is at Cassel, seventy miles off.
Broglio and he see clearly, 'Till we can get a new magazine much nearer
Hanover, or at lowest, can clear out these people from infesting us
here, there is no moving northward!' To both Contades and Broglio
that is an evident thing: the corollary to which is, They must fight
Ferdinand; must watch lynx-like till a chance turn up of beating him in
fight. That is their outlook; and Ferdinand knows it is,--and manoeuvres
accordingly. Military men admire much, not his movements only, but his
clear insight into Contades's and Broglio's temper of mind, and by what
methods they were to be handled, they and his own affairs together, and
brought whither he wanted them. [In MAUVILLON (ii. 41-44) minute account
of all that.]

"This attempt on Gohfeld was a serious mischief to Contades, if it
succeeded. But the detaching of the Prince of Brunswick on it, and
weakening one's too weak Army, 'What a rashness, what an oversight!'
thinks Contades (as Ferdinand wished him to do): 'Is our skilful enemy,
in this extreme embarrassment, losing head, then? Look at his left wing
yonder [General Wangenheim, sitting behind batteries, in his Village of
Todtenhausen, looking into Minden from the north]:--Wangenheim's left
leans on the Weser, yes; but Wangenheim's right, observe, has no support
within three miles of it: tear Wangenheim out, Ferdinand's flank is
bare!' These things seemed to Contades the very chance he had been
waiting for; and brought him triumphantly out of his rabbit-hole, into
the Heath of Minden, as Ferdinand hoped they would do.

"And so, TUESDAY EVENING, JULY 31st, things being now all ripe, upwards
of 50,000 French are industriously in motion. Contades has nineteen
bridges ready on the Bastau Brook, in front of him; TATTOO this night,
in Contades's Camp, is to mean GENERAL MARCH, 'March, all of you, across
these nineteen Bridges, to your stations on the Plain or Heath of Minden
yonder,--and be punctual, like the clock!' Broglio crosses Weser by
the town Bridge, ranks himself opposite Todtenhausen; and through the
livelong night there is, on the part of the 50,000 French, a very great
marching and deploying. Contades and Broglio together are 51,400 foot
and horse. Ferdinand's entire force will be near 46,000; but on the day
of Battle he is only 36,000,--having detached the Hereditary Prince on
Gohfeld, in what view we know.--The BATTLE OF MINDEN, called also of
TONHAUSEN (meaning TODTENhausen), which hereupon fell out, has still its
fame in the world; and, I perceive, is well worth study by the soldier
mind: though nothing but the rough outline of it is possible here.

"Ferdinand's posts extend from the Weser river and Todtenhausen round by
Stemmern, Holzhausen, to Hartum and the Bog of Bastau (the chief part
of him towards Bastau),--in various Villages, and woody patches and
favorable spots; all looking in upon Minden, from a distance of five
or seven miles; forming a kind of arc, with Minden for centre. He
will march up in eight Columns; of course, with wide intervals between
them,--wide, but continually narrowing as he advances; which will
indeed be ruinous gaps, if Ferdinand wait to be attacked; but which will
coalesce close enough, if he be speedy upon Contades. For Contades's
line is also of arc-like or almost semicircular form, behind it Minden
as centre; Minden, which is at the intersection of Weser and the Brook;
his right flank is on Weser, Broglio VERSUS Wangenheim the extreme
right; his left, with infantry and artillery, rests on that black Brook
of Bastau with its nineteen Bridges. As the ground on both wings is
rough, not so fit for Cavalry, Contades puts his Cavalry wholly in the
centre: they are the flower of the French Army, about 10,000 horse in
all; firm open ground ahead of them there, with strong batteries, masses
of infantry to support on each flank; batteries to ply with cross-fire
any assailant that may come on. Broglio, we said, is right wing; strong
in artillery and infantry. Broglio is to root out Waugenheim: after
which,--or even before which, if Wangenheim is kept busy and we are
nimble,--what becomes of Ferdinand's left flank, with a gap of three
miles between Wangenheim and him, and 10,000 chosen horse to take
advantage of it! Had the French been of Prussian dexterity and
nimbleness in marching, it is very possible something might have come of
this latter circumstance: but Ferdinand knows they are not; and intends
to take good care of his flank.

"Contades and his people were of willing mind; but had no skill in
'marchiug up:' and, once got across the Bastau by their nineteen
Bridges, they wasted many hours:--'Too far, am I? not far enough?
Too close? not close enough?'--and broiled about, in much hurry and
confusion, all night. Fight was to have begun at 5 in the morning.
Broglio was in his place, silently looking into Wangenheim, by five
o'clock; but unfortunately did nothing upon Wangenheim ('Not ready you,
I see!'), except cannonade a little;--and indeed all through did nothing
('Still not ready you others!'); which surely was questionable conduct,
though not reckoned so at Versailles, when the case came to be argued
there. As to the Contades people, across those nineteen Bridges, they
had a baffling confused night; and were by no means correctly on their
ground at sunrise, nor at 7 o'clock, nor at 8; and were still mending
themselves when the shock came, and time was done.

"The morning is very misty; but Ferdinand has himself been out examining
since the earliest daybreak: his orders last night were, 'Cavalry be
saddled at 1 in the morning,'--having a guess that there would be work,
as he now finds there will. From 5 A.M. Ferdinand is issuing from
his Camp, flowing down eastward, beautifully concentric, closing on
Contades; horse NOT in centre, but English Infantry in centre (Six
Battalions, or Six REGIMENTS by English reckoning); right opposite those
10,000 Horse of Contades's, the sight of whom seems to be very animating
to them. The English Cavalry stand on the right wing, at the Village of
Hartum: Lord George Sackville had not been very punctual in saddling at
1 o'clock; but he is there, ranked on the ground, at 8,--in what humor
nobody knows; sulky and flabby, I should rather guess. English Tourists,
idle otherwise, may take a look at Hartum on the south side, as the spot
where a very ugly thing occurred that day.

"Soon after 8 the Fight begins: attack, by certain Hessians, on Hahlen
and its batteries; attempt to drive the French out of Hahlen, as the
first thing,--which does not succeed at once (indeed took three
attacks in all); and perhaps looks rather tedious to those Six English
Battalions. Ferdinand's order to them was, 'You shall march up to
attack, you Six, on sound of drum;' but, it seems, they read it, 'BY
sound of drum;' 'Beating our own drums; yes, of course!'--and, being
weary of this Hahlen work, or fancying they had no concern with it,
strode on, double-quick, without waiting for Hahlen at all! To the
horror of their Hanoverian comrades, who nevertheless determined to
follow as second line. 'The Contades cross-fire of artillery, battery
of 30 guns on one flank, of 36 on the other, does its best upon this
forward-minded Infantry, but they seem to heed it little; walk right
forward; and, to the astonishment of those French Horse and of all
the world, entirely break and ruin the charge made on them, and
tramp forward in chase of the same. The 10,000 Horse feel astonished,
insulted; and rush out again, furiously charging; the English halt and
serry themselves: 'No fire till they are within forty paces;' and then
such pouring torrents of it as no horse or man can endure. Rally after
rally there is, on the part of those 10,000; mass after mass of them
indignantly plunges on,--again, ever again, about six charges in
all;--but do not break the English lines: one of them (regiment
Mestrede-Camp, raised to a paroxysm) does once get through, across the
first line, but is blown back in dreadful circumstances by the second.
After which they give it up, as a thing that cannot be done. And rush
rearward, hither, thither, the whole seventy-five squadrons of them;
and 'between their two wings of infantry are seen boiling in complete
disorder.'

"This has lasted about an hour: this is essentially the soul of the
Fight,--though there wanted not other activities, to right of it and to
left, on both sides; artilleries going at a mighty rate on both wings;
and counter-artilleries (superlative practice 'by Captain Phillips' on
OUR right wing); Broglio cannonading Wangenheim very loudly, but
with little harm done or suffered, on their right wing. Wangenheim is
watchful of that gap between Ferdinand and him, till it close itself
sufficiently. Their right-wing Infantry did once make some attempt
there; but the Prussian Horse--(always a small body of Prussians serve
in this Allied Army)--shot out, and in a brilliant manner swept them
home again.

PLAN OF BATTLE HERE--PAGE 239,----

Artillery and that pretty charge of Prussian Horse are all one
remembers, except this of the English and Hanover Foot in the centre:
'an unsurpassable thing,' says Tempelhof (though it so easily might have
been a fatal!)--which has set Contades's centre boiling, and reduced
Contades altogether to water, as it were. Contades said bitterly:
'I have seen what I never thought to be possible,--a single line of
infantry break through three lines of cavalry ranked in order of battle,
and tumble them to ruin!' [Stenzel, v. 204.]

"This was the feat, this hour's work in the centre, the essential soul
of the Fight:--and had Lord George Sackville, General of the Horse,
come on when galloped for and bidden, here had been such a ruin, say all
judges, as seldom came upon an Army. Lord George--everlasting disgrace
and sorrow on the name of him--could not see his way to coming on;
delayed, haggled; would not even let Granby, his lieutenant, come; not
for a second Adjutant, not for a third; never came on at all; but rode
to the Prince, asking, 'How am I to come on?' Who, with a politeness I
can never enough admire, did not instantly kill him, but answered,
in mild tone, 'Milord, the opportunity is now past!' Whereby Contades
escaped ruin, and was only beaten. By about 10 in the morning all was
over. When a man's centre is gone to water, no part of him is far
from the fluid state. Contades retreated into his rabbit-hole by those
nineteen bridges,--well tormented, they say, by Captain Phillips's
artillery, till he got beyond the knolls again. Broglio, who had never
been in musket-fire at all, but had merely barked on Wangenheim all
morning, instead of biting, covered the retreat, and withdrew into
Minden. And we are a beaten Army,--thanks to Lord George, not an
annihilated one. Our loss being only 7,086 (with heavy guns, colors,
cavalry flags and the like); theirs being 2,822,--full half of it
falling on those rash Six Battalions. [Mauvillon, ii. 44-60; Tempelhof,
iii. 154-179, &c. &c.: and _Proceedings of a Court-Martial, held at the
Horse-Guards, 7th-24th March and 25th March-5th April, 1760, in Trial of
Lord George Sackville_ (London, 1760)]. In Knesebeck, _Ferdinand wahrend
des siebenjahrigen Krieges_ (i. 395), Ferdinand's Letter to Friedrich of
"July 31st;" and (i. 398-418 and ii. 33-36) many special details about
Sackville and "August 1st."

"And what is this one hears from Gohfeld in the evening? The Hereditary
Prince, busy there on us during the very hours of Minden, has blown our
rear-guard division to the winds there;--and we must move southward,
one and all of us, without a moment's delay! Out of this rabbit-hole
the retreat by rearward is through a difficult country, the Westphalian
Gates so called; fatal to Varus's Legions long ago. Contades got under
way that very night; lost most of his baggage, all his conquests, that
shadow-conquest of Hanover, and more than all his glories (Versailles
shrieking on him, 'Resign you; let Broglio be chief,);--and, on the
whole, jumbled homeward hither and thither, gravitating towards the
Rhine, nothing but Wesel to depend on in those parts, as heretofore.
Broglio retreated Frankfurt-way, also as usual, though not quite so far;
and at Versailles had clearly the victory. Zealous Belleisle could
not protect his Contades; it is not known whether he privately blamed
Contades or blamed Broglio for loss of Minden. Zealous old man, what a
loss to himself withal had Minden been! That shadow-conquest of Hanover
is quite vanished: and worse, in Ferdinand's spoil were certain LETTERS
from Belleisle to Contades, inculcating strange things;--for example,
'IL FAUT FAIRE UN DESERT DU PAYS [all Hessen, I think, lest Ferdinand
advance on you] DEVANT L'ARMEE,' and the like. Which Ferdinand saw good
to publish, and which resounded rather hideously through the general
mind." [Were taken at Detmold (Tempelhof, iii. 223); Old Newspapers full
of Excerpts from them, in the weeks following.]

Ignominious Sackville was tried by Court-martial; cashiered,
declared incapable of again serving his Majesty "in any military
capacity;"--perhaps a mild way of signifying that he wanted the common
courage of a soldier? Zealous Majesty, always particular in soldier
matters, proclaimed it officially to be "a sentence worse than death;"
and furthermore, with his own royal hand, taking the pen himself, struck
out Sackville from the List of Privy-Councillors. Proper surely, and
indispensable;--and should have been persisted in, like Fate; which,
in a new Reign, it was not! For the rest, there was always, and is,
something of enigma in Sackville's palpably bad case. It is difficult
to think that a Sackville wanted common courage. This Sackville fought
duels with propriety; in private life, he was a surly, domineering kind
of fellow, and had no appearance of wanting spirit. It is known, he did
not love Duke Ferdinand; far from it! May not he have been of peculiarly
sour humor that morning, the luckless fool; sulky against Ferdinand, and
his "saddling at one o'clock;" sulky against himself, against the
world and mankind; and flabbily disinclined to heroic practices for the
moment? And the moment came; and the man was not there, except in that
foggy, flabby and forever ruinous condition! Archenholtz, alone of
Writers, judges that he expressly wanted to spoil the Battle of Minden
and Ferdinand's reputation, and to get appointed Commander in his stead.
Wonderful; but may have some vestige of basis, too! True, this Sackville
was as fit to lead the courses of the stars as to lead armies. But such
a Sackville has ambition, and, what is fatally more peculiar to him, a
chance for unfolding it;--any blockhead has an ambition capable, if you
encourage it sufficiently, of running to the infinite. Enough of this
particular blockhead; and may it be long before we see his like again!--

The English Cavalry was in a rage with Sackville. Of the English
Infantry, Historians say, what is not now much heard of in this Country,
"That these unsurpassable Six [in industrious valor unsurpassable,
though they mistook orders, and might have fared badly!] are ever since
called the Minden Regiments; that they are the 12th, 20th, 23d, 25th,
37th and 51st of the British Line; and carry 'Minden' on their colors,"
[Kausler, _Schlachter, _ &c. p, 587.]--with silent profit, I hope!

Fancy how Pitt's public, lately gloomy and dubious, blazed aloft into
joyful certainty again! Pitt's outlooks have been really gloomy all this
season; nor are the difficulties yet ended, though we hope they will
end. Let us add this other bit of Synchronism, which is still of
adverse aspect, over Seas; and will be pungently interesting to Pitt and
England, when they come to hear of it.

"BEFORE QUEBEC, JULY 31st, 1759. This same Evening, at Quebec, on the
other side of the Atlantic,--evening at Quebec, 9 or 10 at night for
Contades and his nineteen Bridges,--there is a difficult affair going
on. Above and below the Falls of Montmorenci, and their outflow into the
St. Lawrence: attempt on General Wolfe's part to penetrate through upon
the French, under Marquis de Montcalm, French Commander-in-chief, and to
get a stroke at Quebec and him. From the south side of the St. Lawrence,
nothing can be done upon Quebec, such the distance over. From Isle
d'Orleans and the north side, it is also impossible hitherto. Easy
enough to batter the Lower Town, from your ships and redoubts: but the
High Town towers aloft on its sheer pinnacles, inaccessible even to
cannon; looks down on the skilfulest British Admiral and Fleet as if
with an air of indifference,--trying him on dark nights with fire-ships,
fire-rafts, the cunningest kinds of pyrotechny, which he skilfully tows
aside.

"A strenuous thing, this of Wolfe's; though an unsuccessful. Towards
evening, the end of it; all Quebec assembled on the southern ramparts,
witnessing with intense interest; the sublime Falls of Montmorenci
gushing on, totally indifferent. For about a month past, General Wolfe,
with the proper equipments, and about 10,000 men, naval and military,
who was expressly selected by Pitt to besiege Quebec, and is dying to
succeed, has been trying every scheme to get into contact with it:--to
no purpose, so lofty, chasmy, rocky is the ground, cut by mountainous
precipices and torrent streams, branches of the grand St. Lawrence
River; so skilfully taken advantage of by Montcalm and his people, who
are at home here, and in regulars nearly equal Wolfe, not to speak of
Savages and Canadians, Wolfe's plan of the 31st was not ill laid; and
the execution has been zealous, seamen and landsmen alike of willing
mind;--but it met with accidents. Accidents in boating; then a still
worse accident on landing; the regiment of grenadiers, which crossed
below the Falls, having, so soon as landed, rushed off on the redoubt
there on their own score, without waiting for the two brigades that were
to cross and co-operate ABOVE the Falls! Which cut Wolfe to the heart;
and induced him, especially as the tide was making again, to give up
the enterprise altogether, and recall everybody, while it was yet time.
[_Gentleman's Magazine_ for 1759, pp. 470-473; Thackeray, i. 488.] Wolfe
is strict in discipline; loves the willing mind, none more, and can
kindle it among those about him; but he loves discipline withal, and
knows how fatal the too willing may be. For six weeks more there is toil
on the back of toil everywhere for poor Wolfe. He falls into fevers,
into miseries, almost into broken heart;--nothing sure to him but that
of doing his own poor utmost to the very death. After six weeks, we
shall perhaps hear of him again. Gliding swiftly towards death; but also
towards victory and the goal of all his wishes."

And now, after this flight half round the world, it is time we return
to Oder Country, and a Friedrich on the edge of formidable things there.
Next day after Beeskow, where we left him, he duly arrived at Mullrose;
was joined by Wedell there, August 6th; and is now at Wulkow,--"encamped
between Lebus and Wulkow," as we hear elsewhere;--quite in the environs
of Frankfurt and of great events.


FRIEDRICH TO GRAF VON FINKENSTEIN (Second Note).

WULKOW, 8th August, 1759.

"If you hear of firing to-morrow, don't be surprised; it is our
rejoicing for the Battle of Minden. I believe I shall have to keep you
in suspense some days yet. I have many arrangements to make; I find
great difficulties to surmount,--and it is required to save our Country,
not to lose it: I ought both to be more prudent and more enterprising
than ever. In a word, I will do and undertake whatever I find feasible
and possible. With all that, I see myself in the necessity of making
haste, to check the designs Haddick may have on Berlin. Adieu, MON CHER.
In a little, you will have either a DE PROFUNDIS or a TE DEUM.--F."
[_OEuvres de Frederic, _ xxv. 305, 306.]




Chapter IV.--BATTLE OF KUNERSDORF.

Sunday, July 29th, at Frankfurt-on-Oder divine worship was broken in
upon, and the poor City thrown into consternation, by actual advent,
or as good as advent, of the Russians: "On the Crossen road, close by;
coming, come!" And they did undeniably appear, next morning, in force;
on the opposite, eastern or Kunersdorf side of the River, on the top
of the Oder-Dam there; and demanded instant admission, under penalty of
general death by fire.

Within the Town stood Major Arnim, a Veteran of those parts, with 400
militia; these, with their muskets and with two cannon, are the only
defence of Frankfurt, The Town has Gates; but its walls, I doubt, are
mainly garden-walls and house-walls. On the eastern side, the River,
especially if you have cannon on the Bridge, gives it something of
protection; but on the western and all other sides, it is overhung by
heights. This Frankfurt, like its bigger Namesake on the Mayn, is known
as a busy trading place, its Fairs much frequented in those Eastern
parts; and is believed by the Russians to be far richer than it is. The
reader, as there happens to be ocular testimony extant, [Johann Zudwig
Kriele, SCHLACHT BEI KUNERSDORF, MIT &C. (Berlin, 1801). Kriele was
subsequent Pastor in the Parish, an excellent intelligent man: has
compiled in brief form, with an elaborate Chart too, a clear account of
everything, in the Battle and before and after it.] may like to see a
little how they behaved there.

"Arnim, taking survey of the Russian Party, values it, or what he can
see of it, at 1,000 [they really were 6,000]; keeps his Drawbridge up;
and answers stoutly enough, 'No.' Upon which, from the Oder-Dam, there
flies off one fiery grenado; one and no more,--which alighted in the
house of 'Mrs. Thielicke, a Baker's Widow, who was standing at the
door;'--killed poor Mrs. Thielicke, blew the house considerably to
wreck, but did not set fire to it. Amim, all the Magistrates entreating
him for the love of Heaven to leave them, is secretly shoving off his
two cannon to the Northern Gate; and in fact is making his packages
with full speed: 'Push for Custrin,' thinks Arnim, and save selves and
cannon, since no good is to be done here!'

"It was about 11 A.M. when the Thielicke grenado fell: obstinate Arnim
would by no means go; only packed all the faster. A second summons
came: still, No. For the third and last time the Russians then summon:
'Grenadoes, a hundred more of them lie ready, unless--!' 'We will, we
will; O merciful servant of Czarish Majesty!' passionately signify the
Magistrates. But Arnim is still negative, still keeps the Bridge up. One
of the hundred does go, by way of foretaste: this lighted 'near the
Ober Kirche, in the chimney of the Town Musikus;' brought the chimney
crashing down on him [fancy a man with some fineness of ear]; tore the
house a good deal to pieces, but again did not set it on fire. 'Your
obstinate Town can be bombarded, then,--cannot it?' observed the Russian
Messenger.--'Give us Free Withdrawal!' proposes Amim. 'No; you to
be Prisoners of War; Town at Czarish Majesty's discretion.' 'Never,'
answers Arnim (to the outward ear).--'Go, oh, for the love of Heaven,
go!' cry all Official people.

"Arnim, deaf to clamor, but steadily diligent in getting ready, does at
last go; through the Lebus Suburb, quick march; steady, yet at his best
step;--taking the Town-keys in his pocket, and leaving the Drawbridge
up. One is sorry for poor Arnim and his 400 Militia; whose conduct was
perfect, under difficulties and alarms; but proved unsuccessful. The
terrified Magistrates, finding their Keys gone, and the conflagrative
Russians at their gates, got blacksmiths on the instant; smote down, by
chisel and mallet, the locked Drawbridge, smote open the Gates: 'Enter,
O gracious Sirs; and may Czarish Majesty have mercy on us!' So that
Arnim had small start for marchers on foot; and was overtaken about
half-way. Would not yield still, though the odds were overwhelming; drew
himself out on the best ground discoverable; made hot resistance; hot
and skilful; but in vain. About six in the evening, Arnim and Party
were brought back, Prisoners, to Frankfurt again,--self, surviving men,
cannons and all (self in a wounded state);--and 'were locked in various
Brew-houses;' little of careful surgery, I should fear. Poor Arnim; man
could do no more; and he has been unfortunate."

It is by no means our intention to describe the Iliad of miseries,
the agitations, terrors and disquietudes, the tribulation and utter
harrowing to despair, which poor Frankfurt underwent, incessantly from
that day forward, for about five weeks to come. "The furnishings of
victual [Russian stock quite out] were to an inconceivable amount;
surrender of arms, of linens, cloths, of everything useful to a hungry
Army; above all things, of horses, so that at last there were but four
horses left in all Frankfurt; and"--But we must not go into details.

"On the second day, besides all this," what will be significant of it
all, "there was exacted 'ransom of 600,000 thalers (90,000 pounds), or
you shall be delivered to the Cossacks!' Frankfurt has not above 12,000
inhabitants within its bounds; here is a sudden poll-tax of 7 pounds
10s. per head. Frankfurt has not such a sum; the most rigorous
collection did not yield above the tenth part of it. And more than once
those sanguinary vagabonds were openly drawn out, pitch-link in hand:
'The 90,000 pounds or--!' Civic Presidency Office in Frankfurt was not a
bed of roses. The poor Magistrates rushed distractedly about; wrung out
moneys to the last drop; moneys, and in the end plate from those that
had it; went in tearful deputation to General Soltikof,--a severe proud
kind of man, capable perhaps of being flattered,--who usually locked
them up instead. Magistrates were locked in Russian ward, at one time,
for almost a week; sat in the blazing sun; if you try for the shade of
a tree, the sentry handles arms upon you;--and were like to die. To me,
Kriele, it is a miracle how the most of us lived; nay we never really
wanted food, so kind was Providence, so generous our poor neighbors out
of all the Towns round. The utmost of money that could be raised was
6,000 pounds; nothing but some little of plate, and our Bill for the
remainder. Soltikof, a high kind of gentleman, saw at last how it
stood; let the Magistrates out of ward; sent back the plate--'Nothing of
that!'--nay, Czarish Majesty was herself generous; and FORGAVE the Bill,
on our petition, next Year. Cossacks, indeed, were a plunderous wild
crew; but the Russians kept them mostly without the gates. The regular
Russians were civil and orderly, officers and men,--greatly beyond the
Austrians in behavior." [Kriele, _Schlacht bei Kunersdorf;_ pp. 1-15 (in
compressed state).] By these few traits conceive Frankfurt: this, now
forgotten in most books, is a background on which things were transacted
still memorable to everybody.

"Friday, August 3d, General Loudon came to hand: arrived early, in the
Guben (or Western) Suburb, his 18,000 and he. In high spirits naturally,
and somewhat exultant to have evaded Friedrich; but found a reception
that surprised him. The Russians had been living in the hope of
junction; but still more vividly in that of meal. 'Auxiliaries;
humph,--only 18,000 of them; how much welcomer had been as many
hundredweights of meal!' Loudon had pushed his baggage direct into
Frankfurt; and likewise a requisition of such and such proviants,
weights of meal and the like, in exuberant amount, to be furnished
straightway by the City: neither of which procedures would the
Russians hear of for a moment. 'Out with you!' said they roughly to the
baggage-people: 'quarter in the Guben Suburb, or where you like; not
here!' And with regard to the requisition of proviant, they answered
in a scornful angry key, 'Proviant? You too without it? You have not
brought us meal, according to covenant; instead of meal, you bring us
18,000 new eaters, most of them on horse-back,--Satan thank you! From
Frankfurt be very certain you can get no ounce of meal; Frankfurt is our
own poor meal-bag, dreadfully scanty: stay outside, and feed where and
how you can!'

"All this, Loudon, though of hot temper, easily capable of rising to
the fierce point, had to endure in silence, for the common interest.
Loudon's own table is furnished from Frankfurt; no other Austrian man's:
all others have to shift how they can. Sad requisitioning needed, and
sad plunder to supplement it: the Austrian behavior was very bad, say
the Frankfurters; 'in particular, they had burnt gradually all the
corn-mills in the country; within many miles not one mill standing
when they left us,'--and four horses all the conveyance power we had.
Soltikof lodges in great pomp, much soldiery and cannon parading before
his doors; not an undignified man, or an inhuman or essentially foolish,
but very high in his ways, and distasteful to Austrian dignitaries."

The Russian Army lies mainly across Oder; encamped on the Judenberg, and
eastward there, along the Heights, near three miles, to Kunersdorf and
beyond. They expect Friedrich at the gates of Frankfurt shortly; know
well that they cannot defend Frankfurt. They calculate that Friedrich
will attack them in their Judenberg Encampment, but hope they are nearly
ready for him there. Loudon, from the Guben Suburb, will hasten across,
at any moment;--welcome on such fighting occasion, though ill seen
when the question is of eating! The Russians have their Wagenburg on an
Island southward, farther up the River; they have three Pontoon Bridges
leading thither, a free retreat should they be beaten. And in the
mean while are intrenching themselves, as only Daun would,--cannon and
redoubts all round those Heights;--and except it be screwing Frankfurt
to do its impossible duty, and carting provender with all the horses
except four, have not much farther to do but wait till the King come.
Which will be speedily, it is probable!--

Wednesday, August 8th, Russian and Austrian Generals, a cheerful party
of them, had rendezvoused at FISCHERS MUHLE; a Mill not yet burnt, and a
pleasant Tavern as well; in one of the prettiest valleys in the Western
Environs;--intending to dine there, and have a pleasant day. But the
Miller's Boy runs in upon them, wide-eyed, "HIMMEL UND ERDE, Prussian
Hussars!" It was in verity Prussian Hussars; the King of Prussia with
them in person. He is come out reconnoitring,--the day after his arrival
in those parts. The pleasuring Generals, Russian and Austrian, sprang to
horseback at their swiftest,--hope of dinner gone futile, except to the
intervening Prussian Hussars;--and would have all been captured, but
for that Miller's Boy; whose Mill too was burnt before long. This gallop
home of the undined Generals into Frankfurt was the first news we poor
Frankfurters had of the King's arrival.

The King has been punctual to his reckoning: he picked up Wedell at
Mullrose,--not too cordial to Wedell's people: "None of you speak to
those beaten wretches," ordered he; "till perhaps they wipe off
their Zullichau stain!" On the 7th, Friedrich advanced to Frankfurt
neighborhood; took Camp between Wulkow and Lebus;--and has just been
out reconnoitring. And has raised, fancy what emotion in poor Frankfurt
lying under its nightmare! "Next day, August 9th, from Wulkow-Lebus hand,
we" of Frankfurt, "heard a great firing; cannon-salvos, musket-volleys:
'Nothing of fight,' the Russian Officers told us; 'it is the King of
Prussia doing joy-fire for Minden,' of which we till now knew nothing."

Friedrich, on survey of this Russian-Austrian Army, some 90,000 in
number, with such posts, artilleries, advantages, judges that he,
counting only 40,000, is not strong enough. And, indeed, had so
anticipated, and already judged; and, accordingly, has Finck on march
hitherward again,--Berlin must take its risk, Saxony must shift for
itself in the interim. Finck is due in two days,--not here at Lebus
precisely, but at another place appointed; Finck will raise him to
50,000; and then business can begin! Contrary to Russian expectation,
Friedrich does not attack Frankfurt; seems quite quiet in his
cantonments;--he is quietly (if one knew it) making preparations
farther down the River. About Reitwein, between this and Custrin, there
arrangements are proceeding, by no means of a showy sort.

The Russian-Austrian Army quits Frankfurt, leaving only some hundreds
of garrison: Loudon moves across, Soltikof across; to the Oder-Dam and
farther; and lie, powerfully intrenched, on those Kunersdorf Heights,
and sandy Moorlands, which go eastward at right-angles to Oder-Dam. One
of the strongest Camps imaginable. All round there, to beyond Kunersdorf
and back again, near three miles each way, they have a ring of redoubts,
and artillery without end. And lie there, in order of battle, or nearly
so; ready for Friedrich, when he shall attack, through Frankfurt or
otherwise. They face to the North (Reitwein way, as it happens); to
their rear, and indeed to their front, only not so close, are woods and
intricate wilds. Loudon has the left flank; that is to say, Loudon's
left hand is towards the Oder-Dam and Frankfurt; he lies at the ROTHE
VORWERK ("Red Grange," a Farmstead much mentioned just now); rather
to northwestward of the Jew Hill and Jew Churchyard (JUDENBERG and
JUDENKIRCHHOF, likewise much mentioned); and in advance of the general
Mass. Soltikof's head-quarter, I rather understand, is on the right
wing; probably in Kunersdorf itself, or beyond that Village; there, at
least, our highly important Russian right wing is; there, elaborately
fortified; and, half a mile farther, ends,--on the edge of steep dells;
the Russian brink of which is strongly fringed with cannon, while
beyond, on the farther brink, they have built an abatis; so making
assurance doubly sure. Looking to the northward all these 90,000; their
left rather southward of Frankfurt Bridge, over which Friedrich will
probably arrive. Leftward, somewhat to rearward, they have bridges of
their own; should anything sinister befall; three bridges which lead
into that Oder Island, and the Russian Wagenburg there.

August 10th, Finck, punctual to time, arrives in the neighborhood of
Reitwein (which is some ten miles down stream from Lebus, from Frankfurt
perhaps fifteen); Friedrich, the same day, is there before him; eager
to complete the Bridges, and get to business. One Bridge is of pontoons;
one of "Oder-boats floated up from Custrin." Bridges are not begun till
nightfall, lest eyes be abroad; are ready in the minimum of time. And
so, during the same night of the 10th, all the Infantry, with their
artilleries and battle-furnitures, pour over in two columns; the
Cavalry, at the due point of time, riding by a ford short way to the
right. And at four, in the gray of the August morning (Saturday, 11th
August, 1759), all persons and things find themselves correctly across;
ranked there, in those barren, much-indented "Pasture-grounds of Goritz"
or of OEtscher; intending towards Kunersdorf; ready for unfolding into
order of battle there. They leave their heavy baggage at Goritz, Wunsch
to guard the Bridges and it; and, in succinct condition, are all under
way. At one in the afternoon we are got to Leissow and Bischofsee;
scrubby hamlets (as the rest all are), not above two miles from
Kunersdorf. The August day is windless, shiny, sultry; man and horse are
weary with the labors, and with the want of sleep: we decide to bivouac
here, and rest on the scrubby surface, heather or whatever it is, till
to-morrow.

Finck is Vanguard, ahead short way, and with his left on a bit of lake
or bog; the Army is in two lines, with its right on Leissow, and has
Cavalry in the kind of wood which there is to rear. Friedrich, having
settled the positions, rides out reconnoitring; hither, thither,
over the Heights of Trettin. "The day being still hot, he suffers
considerably from thirst [it is our one Anecdote] in that arid tract: at
last a Peasant does bring him, direct from the fountain, a jug of pure
cold water; whom, lucky man, the King rewarded with a thaler; and not
only so, but, the man being intelligent of the localities, took with him
to answer questions." Readers too may desire to gain some knowledge of
the important ground now under survey.

"Frankfurt, a very ancient Town, not a very beautiful," says my Note,
"stands on an alluvium which has been ground down from certain clay
Hills on the left bank of Oder. It counted about 12,000 inhabitants in
Friedrich's time; has now perhaps about 20,000; not half the bulk of
its namesake on the Mayn; but with Three great Fairs annually, and much
trade of the rough kind. On this left or west bank of Oder the country
is arable, moderately grassy and umbrageous, the prospect round you
not unpleasant; but eastward, over the River, nothing can be more in
contrast. Oder is of swift current, of turbid color, as it rolls under
Frankfurt Bridge,--Wooden Bridge, with Dam Suburb at the end;--a River
treeless, desolate, as you look up and down; which has, evidently,
often changed its course, since grinding down that alluvium as site for
Frankfurt; and which, though now holding mainly to northward, is still
given to be erratic, and destructive on the eastern low grounds,--had
not the Frankfurters built an 'Oder-Dam' on that side; a broad strong
Earth-mound, running for many miles, and confining its floods. Beyond
the Dam there are traces of an 'Old Oder (ALTE ODER);' and, in fact,
Oder, in primeval and in recent time, has gone along, many-streamed;
indenting, quarrying, leaving lakelets, quagmires, miscellaneous sandy
tumult, at a great rate, on that eastern shore. Making of it one of
the unloveliest scenes of chaotic desolation anywhere to be met
with;--fallen unlovelier than ever in our own more recent times.

"What we call the Heights of Kunersdorf is a broad Chain of Knolls;
coming out, at right-angles, or as a kind of spur, from the eastern high
grounds; direct towards Oder and Frankfurt. Mill-Hill (MUHLBERG) is
the root or easternmost part of this spur. From the Muhlberg, over
Kunersdorf, to Oder-Dam, which is the whole length of the spur, or Chain
of Knolls, will be little short of four miles; the breadth of the Chain
is nowhere one mile,--which is its grand defect as a Camp: 'too narrow
for manoeuvring in.' Here, atop and on the three sides of this Block
of Knolls, was fought the furious Battle of Kunersdorf [to be fought
to-morrow], one of the most furious ever known. A Block of Knolls
memorable ever since.

"To all appearance: it was once some big Island or chain of Islands
in the Oder deluges: it is still cut with sudden hollows,--KUHGRUND
(Cow-Hollow), TIEFE WEG (Deep Way), and westernmost of all, and
most important for us here, HOHLE GRUND (Big Hollow, let us call it;
'LOUDON'S Hollow' people subsequently called it);--and is everywhere
strangely tumbled up into knolls blunt or sharp, the work of primeval
Oder in his rages. In its highest knolls,--of which let readers note
specially the Spitzberg, the Muhlberg, the Judenberg,--it rises nowhere
to 150 feet; perhaps the general height of it may be about 100. On each
side of it, especially on the north, the Country is of most intricate
character: bushy, scraggy, with brooklets or muddy oozings wandering
about, especially with a thing called the HUNERFLIESS (Hen-Floss), which
springs in the eastern woods, and has inconceivable difficulty to
get into Oder,--if it get at all! This was a sore Floss to Friedrich
to-morrow. Hen-Floss struggles, painfully meandering and oozing, along
the northern side (sometimes close, sometimes not) of our Chain of
Knolls: along the south side of it (in our time, through the middle
of it) goes the Highway to Reppen ["From that Highway will his attack
come!" thought the Russians, always till to-day]: on the north, to
Leissow, to Trettin," where Friedrich is now on survey, "go various
wheel-tracks, but no firm road. A most intricate unlovely Country.
Withered bent-grasses, heath, perhaps gorse, and on both sides a great
deal of straggling Forest-wood, reaching eastward, and especially
southward, for many miles.

"For the rest," to our ill-luck in this place, "the Battlefield of
Kunersdorf has had a peculiar fate in the world; that of being blown
away by the winds! The then scene of things exists no longer; the
descriptions in the Old Books are gone hopelessly irrecognizable. In our
time, there is not anywhere a tract more purely of tumbled sand, than
all this between Kunersdorf and Dam Vorstadt; and you judge, without aid
of record or tradition, that it is greatly altered for the worse since
Friedrich's time,--some rabbit-colony, or other the like insignificancy,
eating out the roots, till all vegetation died, and the wind got hold
and set it dancing;--and that, in 1759, when Russian human beings
took it for a Camp, it must have been at least coherent, more or less;
covered, held together by some film of scrubby vegetation; not blowing
about in every wind as now! Kunersdorf stands with its northern end
pushed into that KUHGRUND (Cow-Hollow); which must then have been a
grassy place. Eastward of Kunersdorf the ground has still some skin of
peat, and sticks together: but westward, all that three miles, it is a
mere tumult of sand-hills, tumbled about in every direction (so diligent
have the conies been, and then the winds); no gullet, or definite cut or
hollow, now traceable anywhere, but only an endless imbroglio of twisted
sand-heaps and sand-hollows, which continually alter in the wind-storms.
Sand wholly, and--except the strong paved Highway that now runs through
it (to Reppen, Meseritz and the Polish Frontier, and is strongly paved
till it get through Kunersdorf)--chaotic wholly; a scene of heaped
barrenness and horror, not to be matched but in Sahara; the features of
the Battle quite blown away, and indecipherable in our time.

"A hundred years ago, it would have some tattered skin,--of peat, of
heather and dwarf whins, with the sand cropping out only here and there.
So one has to figure it in Soltikof's day,--before the conies ruined
it. Which was not till within the last sixty years, as appears. Kriele's
Book (in 1801) still gives no hint of change: the KUHGRUND, which now
has nothing but dry sand for the most industrious ruminant, is still a
place of succulence and herbage in Kriele's time; 'Deep Way,' where 'at
one point two carts could not pass,' was not yet blown out of existence,
but has still 'a Well in it' for Kriele; HOHLE GRUND (since called
Loudon's Hollow), with the Jew Hill and Jew Churchyard beyond, seem
tolerable enough places to Kriele. Probably not unlike what the
surrounding Country still is. A Country of poor villages, and of wild
ground, flat generally, and but tolerably green; with lakelets, bushes,
scrubs, and intricate meandering little runlets and oozelets; and in
general with more of Forest so called than now is:--this is Kunersdorf
Chain of Knolls; Soltikof's Intrenched Camp at present; destined to
become very famous in the world, after lying so long obscure under Oder
and its rages." [TOURIST'S NOTE (Autumnn, 1852).]

From the Knolls of Trettin, that Saturday afternoon, Friedrich takes
view of the Russian Camp. All lying bright enough there; from Muhlberg
to Judenberg, convenient to our glass; between us and the evening Sun.
Batteries most abundant, difficulties great: Soltikof just ahead here,
72,000: Loudon at the Red Grange yonder, on their extreme left, with
18,000 more. An uncommonly strong position for 90,000 against 50,000.
One thing strikes Friedrich: On front in this northern side, close by
the base of the Russian Camp, runs--for the present away FROM Oder, but
intending to join it elsewhere--a paltry little Brook, "Hen-Floss" so
called, with at least two successive Mills on it (KLEINE MUHLE, GROSSE
MUHLE); and on the northern shore of it, spilling itself out into a
wet waste called ELSBRUCH (Alder Waste), which is especially notable
to Friedrich. ALDER Waste? Watery, scrubby; no passage there, thinks
Friedrich; which his Peasant with the water-jug confirms. "Tell me,
however," inquires Friedrich, with strictness, "From the Red Grange
yonder, where General Loudon is, if you wished to get over to the HOHLE
GRUND, or to the Judenberg, would you cross that Hen-Floss?" "It is not
crossable, your Majesty; one has to go round quite westward by the
Dam." "What, from Rothe Vorwerk to Big Hollow, no passage, say you; no
crossing?" "None, your Majesty," insists the Peasant;--who is not aware
that the Russians have made one of firm trestles and logs, and use it
daily for highway there; an error of some interest to Friedrich within
the next twenty-four hours!

Friedrich himself does not know this bit of ground: but there is with
him, besides the Peasant, a Major Linden, whose Regiment used to lie in
Frankfurt, of whom Friedrich makes minute questioning. Linden answers
confidently; has been over all this tract a hundred times; "but knows
it only as a hunter," says Tempelhof, [Tempelhof, iii. 186.] "not as a
soldier," which he ought to have done. His answers are supposed to
have misled Friedrich on various points, and done him essential damage.
Friedrich's view of the case, that evening, is by no means so despondent
as might be imagined: he regards the thing as difficult, not as
impossible,--and one of his anxieties is, that he be not balked of
trying it straightway. Retiring to his hut in Bischofsee, he makes two
Dispositions, of admirable clearness, brevity, and calculated for two
contingencies: [Given in Tempelhof, iii. 182, 183.] That of the
enemy retaining his now posture; and That of the enemy making off for
Reppen;--which latter does not at all concern us, as matters turned! Of
the former the course will unfold itself to us, in practice, shortly. At
2 A.M. Friedrich will be on foot again, at 3 on march again.--The last
phenomenon, at Bischofsee this night, is some sudden glare of disastrous
light rising over the woods:--"Russians burning Kunersdorf!" as
neighbors are sorry to hear. That is the finale of much Russian
rearranging and tumbling, this day; that barbarous burning of
Kunersdorf, before going to bed. To-morrow various other poor Villages
got burnt by them, which they had better have left standing.

The Russians, on hearing that Friedrich was across at Goritz, and coming
on them from the north side, not from Frankfurt by the Reppen Highway,
were in great agitation. Not thrown into terror, but into manifold
haste, knowing what hasty adversary there was. Endless readjustments
they have to make; a day of tumultuous business with the Russians, this
Saturday, 11th, when the news reached them. "They inverted their front
[say all the Books but Friedrich's own]: Not coming by the Reppen
Highway, then!" think they. And thereupon changed rear to front, as at
Zorndorf, but more elaborately;--which I should not mention, were it
not that hereby their late "right wing on the Muhlberg" has, in strict
speech, become their "left," and there is ambiguity and discrepancy in
some of the Books, should any poor reader take to studying them on this
matter. Changed their front; which involves much interior changing;
readjusting of batteries and the like. That of burning Kunersdorf was
the barbaric winding up of all this: barbaric, and, in the military
sense, absurd; poor Kunersdorf could have been burnt at any moment,
if needful; and to the Russians the keeping of it standing was the
profitable thing, as an impediment to Friedrich in his advance there.
They have laid it flat and permeable; ashes all of it,--except the
Church only, which is of stone; not so combustible, and may have uses
withal. Has perhaps served as temporary lock-up, prison for the night,
to some of those Frankfurt Deputations and their troublesome wailings;
and may serve as temporary hospital to-morrow, who knows?

Readjustments in the Russian Camp were manifold: but these are as
nothing, in the tumultuous business of the day. Carting of their
baggage, every article of value, to that safe Wagenburg in the River;
driving of cattle,--the very driving of cattle through Frankfurt,
endless herds of them, gathered by the Cossacks from far and wide,
"lasted for four-and-twenty hours." Oxen in Frankfurt that day were
at the rate of ten shillings per head. Often enough you were offered a
full-grown young steer for a loaf of bread; nay the Cossacks, when there
was absolutely no bidder, would slaughter down the animal, leave its
carcass in the streets, and sell the hide for a TYMPF,--fivepence (very
bad silver at present). Never before or since was seen in Frankfurt such
a Saturday, for bellowing and braying, and raging and tumulting, all
through the day and through the night; ushering in such a Sunday too!

Sunday about 3 in the morning, Friedrich is on march again,--Russians
still in their place; and Disposition FIRST, not SECOND at all, to be
our rule of action! Friedrich, in Two Columns, marches off, eastward
through the woods, as if for Reppen quite away from the Russians and
their Muhlberg; but intending to circle round at the due point, and come
down upon their right flank there (left flank, as he persists to call
it), out of the woods, and clasp it in his arms in an impressive,
unexpected way. In Two Columns; which are meant, as usual, to be the Two
Lines of Battle: Seidlitz, with chosen Cavalry, is at the head of
Column First, and will be Left Wing, were we on the ground; Eugen of
Wurtemberg, closing the rear of Column First, will, he, or Finck and he
together, be Right Wing. That is the order of march;--order of BATTLE,
we shall find, had to alter itself somewhat, for reasons extremely
valid!

Finck with his 12,000 is to keep his present ground; to have two good
batteries got ready, each on its knoll ahead, which shall wait silent
in the interim: Finck to ride out reconnoitring, with many General
Officers, and to make motions and ostentations; in a word, to persuade
the Russians that here is the Main Army coming on from the north. All
which Finck does; avoiding, as his orders were, any firing, or serious
commencement of business, till the King reappear out of the woods. The
Russians give Finck and his General Officers a cannon salvo, here and
there, without effect, and get no answer. "The King does not see his
way, then, after all?" think the Russians. Their Cossacks go scouring
about; on the southern side, "burn Schwetig and Reipzig," without the
least advantage to themselves: most of the Cavalry, and a regiment or
two of excellent Austrian Grenadiers, are with Loudon, near the Red
Grange, in front of the Russian extreme left;--but will have stept over
into Big Hollow at a moment of crisis!

The King's march, through the Forest of Reppen, was nothing like so
expeditious as had been expected. There are thickets, intricacies,
runlets, boggy oozes; indifferent to one man well mounted, but vitally
important to 30,000 with heavy cannon to bring on. Boggy oozings
especially,--there is one dirty stream or floss (HUNERFLIESS, Hen-Floss)
which wanders dismally through those recesses, issuing from the far
south, with dirty daughters dismally wandering into it, and others that
cannot get into it (being of the lake kind): these, in their weary,
circling, recircling course towards Oder,--FAULE LAACKE (Foul Lake,
LITHER-MERE, as it were), Foul Bridge, Swine's Nook (SCHWEINEBUCKT), and
many others,--occasion endless difficulty. Whether Major Linden was shot
that day, or what became of him after, I do not know: but it was pity he
had not studied the ground with a soldier's eye instead of a hunter's!
Plumping suddenly, at last, upon Hen-Floss itself, Friedrich has to
turn angularly; angularly, which occasions great delay: the heavy cannon
(wall-guns brought from Custrin) have twelve horses each, and cannot
turn among the trees, but have to be unyoked, reyoked, turned round by
hand:--in short, it was eight in the morning before Friedrich arrived
at the edge of the wood, on the Klosterberg, Walckberg, and other woody
BERGS or knolls, within reach of Muhlberg, and behind the preliminary
abatis there (abatis which was rather of service to him than
otherwise);--and began privately building his batteries.

At eight o'clock he, with Column First, which is now becoming Line First
(CENTRE of Line First, if we reckon Finck as RIGHT-WING), is there;
busy in that manner: Column Second, which was to have been Rear Line, is
still a pretty way behind; and has many difficulties before it gets into
Kunersdorf neighborhood, or can (having wriggled itself into a kind of
LEFT-WING) co-operate on the Russian Position from the south side. On
the north side, Finck has been ready these five hours.--Friedrich speeds
the building of his batteries: "Silent, too; the Russians have not yet
noticed us!" By degrees the Russians do notice something; shoot out
Cossacks to reconnoitre. Cossacks in quantity; who are so insolent, and
venture so very near, our gunners on the north battery give them a blast
of satisfactory grape-shot; one and then another, four blasts in all,
satisfactory to the gunner mind,--till the King's self, with a look,
with a voice, came galloping: "Silence, will you!" The Russians took no
offence; still considering Finck to be the main thing and Friedrich some
scout party,--till at last,

Half-past eleven, everything being ready on the Walck Hill, Friedrich's
batteries opened there, in a sudden and volcanic way. Volcanically
answered by the Russians, as soon as possible; who have 72 guns on this
Muhlberg, and are nothing loath. Upon whom Finck's battery is opening
from the north, withal: Friedrich has 60 cannon hereabouts; on the
Walckberg, on the LITTLE Spitzberg (called SEIDLITZ HILL ever since);
all playing diligently on the head and south shoulder of this Muhlberg:
while Finck's battery opens on the north shoulder (could he but get near
enough). Volcanic to a degree all these; nor are the Russians wanting,
though they get more and more astonished: Tempelhof, who was in it, says
he never, except at Torgau next Year, heard a louder cannonade. Loud
exceedingly; and more or less appalling to the Russian imagination:
but not destructive in proportion; the distance being too
considerable,--"1,950 paces at the nearest," as Tempelhof has since
ascertained by measuring. Friedrich's two batteries, however, as they
took the Russians in the flank or by enfilade, did good execution.
"The Russian guns were ill-pointed; the Russian batteries wrong-built;
batteries so built as did not allow them sight of the Hollow they were
meant to defend." [Tempelhof, iii. 186, 187.]

After above half an hour of this, Friedrich orders storm of the
Muhlberg: Forward on it, with what of enfilading it has had! Eight
grenadier Battalions, a chosen vanguard appointed for the work (names of
Battalions all given, and deathless in the Prussian War-Annals), tramp
forth on this service: cross the abatis, which the Russian grenadoes
have mostly burnt; down into the Hollow. Steady as planets; "with
a precision and coherency," says Tempelhof, "which even on the
parade-ground would have deserved praises. Once well in the Hollow,
they suffer nothing; though the blind Russian fire, going all over their
heads, rages threefold:" suffered nothing in the Hollow; nor till they
reached almost the brow of the Muhlberg, and were within a hundred steps
of the Russian guns. These were the critical steps, these final ones;
such torrents of grape-shot and musket-shot and sheer death bursting
out, here at last, upon the Eight Battalions, as they come above ground.
Who advanced, unwavering, all the faster,--speed one's only safety. They
poured into the Russian gunners and musketry battalions one volley of
choicest quality, which had a shaking effect; then, with level bayonets,
plunge on the batteries: which are all empty before we can leap
into them; artillery-men, musketeer battalions, all on wing; general
whirlpool spreading. And so, in ten minutes, the Muhlberg and its guns
are ours. Ever since Zorndorf, an idea had got abroad, says Tempelhof,
that the Russians would die instead of yielding; but it proved far
otherwise here. Down as far as Kunersdorf, which may be about a mile
westward, the Russians are all in a whirl; at best hanging in tatters
and clumps, their Officers struggling against the flight; "mixed groups
you would see huddled together a hundred men deep." The Russian Left
Wing is beaten: had we our cannon up here, our cavalry up here, the
Russian Army were in a bad way!

This is a glorious beginning; completed, I think, as far almost as
Kunersdorf by one o'clock: and could the iron continue to be struck
while it is at white-heat as now, the result were as good as certain.
That was Friedrich's calculation: but circumstances which he had not
counted on, some which he could not count on, sadly retarded the matter.
His Left Wing (Rear Line, which should now have been Left Wing) from
southward, his Right Wing from northward, and Finck farther west,
were now on the instant to have simultaneously closed upon the beaten
Russians, and crushed them altogether. The Right Wing, conquerors of the
Muhlberg, are here: but neither Finck nor the Left can be simultaneous
with them. Finck and his artillery are much retarded with the Flosses
and poor single Bridges; and of the Left Wing there are only some
Vanguard Regiments capable of helping ("who drove out the Russians from
Kunersdorf Churchyard," as their first feat),--no Main Body yet for
a long while. Such impediments, such intricacies of bog and bush! The
entire Wing does at last get to the southeast of Kunersdorf, free of the
wood; but finds (contrary to Linden with his hunter eye) an intricate
meshwork of meres and straggling lakes, two of them in the burnt
Village itself; no passing of these except on narrow isthmuses, which
necessitate change of rank and re-change; and our Left Wing cannot, with
all its industry, "march up," that is, arrive at the enemy in fighting
line, without the painfulest delays.

And then the getting forward of our cannon! On the Muhlberg itself
the seventy-two Russian guns, "owing to difference of calibre," or
artillery-men know what, cannot be used by us: a few light guns,
Tempelhof to one of them, a poor four in all, with perhaps 100 shot to
each, did, by the King's order, hasten to the top of the Muhlberg; and
never did Tempelhof see a finer chance for artillery than there. Soft
sloping ground, with Russians simmering ahead of you, all the way
down to Kunersdorf, a mile long: by horizontal pointing, you had such
reboundings (RICOCHETS); and carried beautiful execution! Tempelhof soon
spent his hundred shots: but it was not at once that any of our sixty
heavy guns could be got up thither. Twelve horses to each: fancy it, and
what baffling delays here and elsewhere;--and how the Russian whirlpool
was settling more and more, in the interim! And had, in part, settled;
in part, got through to the rear, and been replaced by fresh troops!

Friedrich's activities, and suppressed and insuppressible impatiences
in this interval, are also conceivable, though not on record for us. The
swiftest of men; tied down, in this manner, with the blaze of perfect
victory ahead, were the moments NOT running out! Slower or faster, he
thinks (I suppose), the victory is his; and that he must possess his
soul till things do arrive. It was in one and more of those embargoed
intervals that he wrote to Berlin [Preuss, ii. 212 n.] (which is
waiting, as if for life or death, the issue of this scene, sixty miles
distant): "Russians beaten; rejoice with me!" Four successive couriers,
I believe, with messages to that effect; and at last a Fifth with
dolefully contrary news!--

In proportion as the cannon and other necessaries gradually got in, the
Fight flamed up from its embers more and more: and there ensued,--the
Russians being now ranked again (fronting eastward now) "in many lines,"
and very fierce,--a second still deadlier bout; Friedrich furiously
diligent on their front and right flank; Finck, from the Alder Waste,
battering and charging (uphill, and under difficulties from those
Flosses and single Bridges) on their left flank. This too, after long
deadly efforts on the Prussian part, ended again clearly in their
favor; their enemies broken a second time, and driven not only out of
Kunersdorf and the Kuhgrund, but some say almost to the foot of the
Judenberg,--what can only be very partially true. Broken portions of the
Russian left flank,--some of Finck's people, in their victorious wrath,
may have chased these very far: but it is certain the general Russian
mass rallied again a long way short of the Judenberg;--though, the
ground being all obliterated by the rabbits and the winds, nobody can
now know with exactitude where.

And indeed the Battle, from this point onwards, becomes blurred and
confused to us, only its grosser features visible henceforth. Where the
"Big Spitzberg" was (so terribly important soon), nobody can now
tell me, except from maps. London's motions too are obscure, though
important. I believe his grenadiers had not yet been in the fire; but am
certain they are now come out of Big Hollow; fresh for the rescue;
and have taken front rank in this Second Rally that is made. Loudon's
Cavalry Loudon himself has in hand, and waits with them in a fit place.
He has 18,000 fresh men; and an eye like few others on a field of war.
Loudon's 18,000 are fresh: of the Prussians that can by no means be
said. I should judge it must be 3 of the afternoon. The day is windless,
blazing; one of the hottest August days; and "nobody, for twelve hours
past, could command a drink of water:" very fresh the poor Prussians
cannot be! They have done two bouts of excellent fighting; tumbled the
Russians well back, stormed many batteries; and taken in all 180 cannon.

At this stage, it appears, Finck and many Generals, Seidlitz among the
others, were of opinion that, in present circumstances, with troops so
tired, and the enemy nearly certain to draw off, if permitted, here
had been enough for one day, and that there ought to be pause till
to-morrow. Friedrich knew well the need of rest; but Friedrich,
impatient of things half-done, especially of Russians half-beaten, would
not listen to this proposal; which was reckoned upon him as a grave and
tragic fault, all the rest of his life; though favorable judges, who
were on the ground, Tempelhof for one, [Tempelhof, iii. 194.] are
willing to prove that pausing here--at the point we had really got to, a
little beyond the Kuhgrund, namely; and not a couple of miles westward,
at the foot of the Jew Hill, where vague rumor puts us--was not feasible
or reasonable. Friedrich considers with himself, "Our left wing has
hardly yet been in fire!" calls out the entire left wing, foot
and horse: these are to emerge from their meshwork of Lakes about
Kunersdorf, and bear a hand along with us on the Russian front
here,--especially to sweep away that raging Battery they have on the Big
Spitzberg, and make us clear of it. The Big Spitzberg lies to south and
ahead of the Russian right as now ranked; fatally covers their right
flank, and half ruins the attack in front. Big Spitzberg is blown
irrecognizable in our time; but it was then an all-important thing.

The left-wing Infantry thread their lake-labyrinth, the soonest
possible; have to rank again on the hither side, under a tearing fire
from that Spitzberg; can then at last, and do, storm onwards, upwards;
but cannot, with their best efforts, take the Spitzberg: and have to
fall back under its floods of tearing case-shot, and retire out of
range. To Friedrich's blank disappointment: "Try it you, then, Seidlitz;
you saved us at Zorndorf!" Seidlitz, though it is an impossible problem
to storm batteries with horse, does charge in for the Russian flank,
in spite of its covering battery: but the torrents of grape-shot are
insufferable; the Seidlitz people, torn in gaps, recoil, whirl round,
and do not rank again till beyond the Lakes of Kunersdorf. Seidlitz
himself has got wounded, and has had to be carried away.

And, in brief, from this point onwards all goes aback with the Prussians
more and more. Repeated attempts on that Spitzberg battery prove
vain; to advance without it is impossible. Friedrich's exertions
are passionate, almost desperate; rallying, animating, new-ordering;
everywhere in the hottest of the fire. "Thrice he personally led on
the main attack." He has had two horses shot down under him; mounting
a third, this too gets a bullet in an artery of the neck, and is about
falling, when two Adjutants save the King. In his waistcoat-pocket some
small gold case (ETUI) has got smitten flat by a bullet, which would
otherwise have ended matters. The people about him remonstrate on such
exposure of a life beyond value; he answers curtly, "We must all of
us try every method here, to win the Battle: I, like every other, must
stand to my duty here!" These, and a second brief word or two farther
on, are all of articulate that we hear from him this day.

Friedrich's wearied battalions here on the Heights, while the Spitzberg
to left goes so ill, fight desperately; but cannot prevail farther; and
in spite of Friedrich's vehement rallyings and urgings, gradually lose
ground,--back at last to Kunersdorf and the Kuhgrund again. The Loudon
grenadiers, and exclaimed masses of fresh Russians, are not to be
broken, but advance and advance. Fancy the panting death-labors, and
spasmodic toilings and bafflings, of those poor Prussians and their
King! Nothing now succeeding; the death-agony now come; all hearts
growing hopeless; only one heart still seeing hope. The Spitzberg is
impossible; tried how often I know not. Finck, from the Alder Waste,
with his Infantry, attacks, and again attacks; without success: "Let the
Cavalry go round, then, and try there. Seidlitz we have not; you Eugen
of Wurtemberg lead them!" Eugen leads them (cuirassiers, or we will
forget what); round by the eastern end of the Muhlberg; then westward,
along the Alder Waste; finally southward, against the Russian flank,
himself foremost, and at the gallop for charging:--Eugen, "looking
round, finds his men all gone," and has to gallop the other way, gets
wounded to boot. Puttkammer, with Hussars, then tried it; Puttkammer was
shot dead, and his Hussars too could do nothing.

Back, slowly back, go the Prussians generally, nothing now succeeds with
them. Back to the Kuhgrund again; fairly over the steep brow there; the
Russians serrying their ranks atop, rearranging their many guns. There,
once more, rose frightful struggle; desperate attempt by the fordone
Prussians to retake that Height. "Lasted fifteen minutes, line to line
not fifty yards asunder;" such musketry,--our last cartridges withal.
Ardent Prussian parties trying to storm up; few ever getting to the top,
none ever standing there alive one minute. This was the death-agony of
the Battle. Loudon, waiting behind the Spitzberg, dashes forward now,
towards the Kuhgrund and our Left Flank. At sight of which a universal
feeling shivers through the Prussian heart, "Hope ended, then!"--and
their solid ranks rustle everywhere; and melt into one wild deluge,
ebbing from the place as fast as it can.

It is towards six o'clock; the sweltering Sun is now fallen low and
veiled; gray evening sinking over those wastes. "N'Y A-T-IL DONC PAS
UN BOUGRE DE BOULET QUI PUISSE M'ATTEINDREE (Is there no one b---- of a
ball that can reach me, then)?" exclaimed Friedrich in despair. Such a
day he had never thought to see. The pillar of the State, the Prussian
Army itself, gone to chaos in this manner. Friedrich still passionately
struggles, exhorts, commands, entreats even with tears, "Children, don't
forsake me, in this pinch (KINDER, VERLASSET HEUTE MICH, EUREN KONIG,
EUREN VATER, NICHT)!" [Kriele, p. 169.]--but all ears are deaf. On the
Muhlberg one regiment still stood by their guns, covering the retreat.
But the retreat is more and more a flight; "no Prussian Army was ever
seen in such a state." At the Bridges of that Hen-Floss, there was such
a crowding, all our guns got jammed; and had to be left, 165 of them of
various calibre, and the whole of the Russian 180 that were once in our
hands. Had the chase been vigorous, this Prussian Army had been heard
of no more. But beyond the Muhlberg, there was little or no pursuit;
through the wood the Army, all in chaos, but without molestation
otherwise, made for its Oder Bridges by the way it had come. [Tempelhof,
iii. 179-200; Retzow, ii. 80-115: in Seyfarth, _Beylagen,_ ii. 589-598,
_ Bericht von der am 12 August, 1759 bey Kunersdorf vorgefallenen
Schlacht_ (Official); and IB. 598-603, _Beschreibung der &c._ (by a
Private Hand): lucidly accurate both.]

Friedrich was among the last to quit the ground. He seemed stupefied
by the excess of his emotions; in no haste to go; uncertain whether
he would go at all. His adjutants were about him, and a small party
of Ziethen Hussars under Captain Prittwitz. Wild swarms of Cossacks
approached the place. "PRITTWITZ, ICH BIN VERLOREN (Prittwitz, I am
lost)!" remarked he. "NEIN, IHRO MAJESTAT!" answered Prittwitz with
enthusiasm; charged fiercely, he and his few, into the swarms of
Cossacks; cut them about, held them at bay, or sent them else-whither,
while the Adjutants seized Friedrich's bridle, and galloped off with
him. At OEtscher and the Bridges, Friedrich found of his late Army not
quite 3,000 men. Even Wunsch is not there till next morning. Wunsch
with his Party had, early in the afternoon, laid hold of Frankfurt,
as ordered; made the garrison prisoners, blocked the Oder Bridge; poor
Frankfurt tremulously thanking Heaven for him, and for such an omen. In
spite of their Wagenburg and these Pontoon-Bridges, it appears, there
would have been no retreat for the Russians except into Wunsch's cannon:
Wagenburg way, latish in the afternoon, there was such a scramble of
runaways and retreating baggage, all was jammed into impassability;
scarcely could a single man get through. In case of defeat, the
Russian Army would have had no chance but surrender or extermination.
[Tempelhof, iii. 194: in Retzow (ii. 110) is some dubious traditionary
stuff on the matter.] At dark, however, Wunsch had summons, so truculent
in style, he knew what it meant; and answering in words peremptorily,
"No" with a like emphasis, privately got ready again, and at midnight
disappeared. Got to Reitwein without accident.

Friedrich found at OEtscher nothing but huts full of poor wounded men,
and their miseries and surgeries;--he took shelter, himself, in a hut
"which had been plundered by Cossacks" (in the past days), but which had
fewer wounded than others, and could be furnished with some bundles of
dry straw. Kriele has a pretty Anecdote, with names and particulars, of
two poor Lieutenants, who were lying on the floor, as he entered this
hut. They had lain there for many hours; the Surgeons thinking them
desperate; which Friedrich did not. "ACH KINDER, Alas, children, you
are badly wounded, then?" "JA, your Majesty: but how goes the Battle?"
(Answer, evasive on this point): "Are you bandaged, though? Have you
been let blood?" "NEIN, EUER MAJESTAT, KEIN TEUFEL WILL UNS VERBINDEN
(Not a devil of them would bandage us)!" Upon which there is a Surgeon
instantly brought; reprimanded for neglect: "Desperate, say you? These
are young fellows; feel that hand, and that; no fever there: Nature
in such cases does wonders!" Upon which the leech had to perform his
function; and the poor young fellows were saved,--and did new fighting,
and got new wounds, and had Pensions when the War ended. [Kriele, pp.
169, 170; and in all the Anecdote-Books.] This appears to have been
Friedrich's first work in that hut at OEtscher. Here next is a Third
Autograph to Finkenstein, written in that hut, probably the first of
several Official things there:--


THE KING TO GRAF VAN FINKENSTEIN (at Berlin): Third Note.

OETSCHER, "12th August," 1759.

"I attacked the Enemy this morning about eleven; we beat him back to the
JUDENKIRCHHOF (Jew Churchyard,"--a mistake, but now of no moment), "near
Frankfurt. All my troops came into action, and have done wonders. I
reassembled them three times; at length, I was myself nearly taken
prisoner; and we had to quit the Field. My coat is riddled with bullets,
two horses were killed under me;--my misfortune is, that I am still
alive. Our loss is very considerable. Of an Army of 48,000 men, I have,
at this moment while I write, not more than 3,000 together; and am no
longer master of my forces. In Berlin you will do well to think of
your safety. It is a great calamity; and I will not survive it: the
consequences of this Battle will be worse than the Battle itself. I have
no resources more; and, to confess the truth, I hold all for lost. I
will not survive the destruction of my Country. Farewell forever
(ADIEU POUR JAMAIS).--F." [In orig. "CE 12," no other date (_OEuvres de
Frederic,_ xxv. 306).]

Another thing, of the same tragic character, is that of handing over
this Army to Finck's charge. Order there is to Finck of that tenor: and
along with it the following notable Autograph,--a Friedrich taking
leave both of Kingship and of life. The Autograph exists; but has no
date,--date of the Order would probably be still OETSCHER, 12th AUGUST;
date of the Autograph, REITWEIN (across the River), next day.

FRIEDRICH TO LIEUT.-GENERAL FINCK (at OEtscher or Reitwein).

"General Finck gets a difficult commission; the unlucky Army which
I give up to him is no longer in condition to make head against the
Russians. Haddick will now start for Berlin, perhaps Loudon too; if
General Finck go after these, the Russians will fall on his rear; if
he continue on the Oder, he gets Haddick on his flank (SO KRIGT ER DEN
HADEK DISS SEIT):--however, I believe, should Loudon go for Berlin, he
might attack Loudon, and try to beat him: this, if it succeeded, would
be a stand against misfortune, and hold matters up. Time gained is much,
in these desperate circumstances. The news from Torgau and Dresden,
Coper my Secretary (COPER MEIN SEGRETER," kind of lieutenant to Eichel
[See Preuss, i. 349, iii. 442.]) "will send him. You (ER) must inform my
Brother [Prince Henri] of everything; whom I have declared Generalissimo
of the Army. To repair this bad luck altogether is not possible: but
what my Brother shall command, must be done:--the Army swears to my
Nephew [King henceforth].

"This is all the advice, in these unhappy circumstances, I am in a
condition to give. Had I still had resources, I would have stayed by
them (SO WEHRE ICH DARBEI GEBLIEBEN).

"FRIEDRICH" [Exact Copy, two exact copies, in PREUSS (i. 450, and again,
ii. 215).]

All this done, the wearied Friedrich flung himself into his truss of dry
straw; and was seen sound asleep there, a single sentry at the door, by
some high Generals that ventured to look in. On the morrow he crossed to
Reitwein; by to-morrow night, there had 23,000 of his fugitives come in
to him;--but this is now to be Finck's affair, not his! That day, too
(for the Paper seems to be misdated), he signed, and despatched to
Schmettau, Commandant in Dresden, a Missive, which proved more fatal
than either of the others; and brought, or helped to bring, very bitter
fruits for him, before long:--

TO LIEUTENANT-GENERAL VON SCHMETTAU (at Dresden).

"REITWEIN, 14th [probably 13th] August, 1759.

"You will perhaps have heard of the Check [L'ECHEC, Kunersdorf to wit!]
I have met with from the Russian Army on the 13th [12th, if you have the
Almanac at hand] of this month. Though at bottom our affairs in regard
to the Enemy here are not desperate, I find I shall not now be able to
make any detachment for your assistance. Should the Austrians attempt
anything against Dresden, therefore, you will see if there are means
of maintaining yourself; failing which, it will behoove you to try and
obtain a favorable Capitulation,--to wit, Liberty to withdraw, with
the whole Garrison, Moneys, Magazines, Hospital and all that we have at
Dresden, either to Berlin or else-whither, so as to join some Corps of
my Troops.

"As a fit of illness [MALADIE, alas!] has come on me,--which I do not
think will have dangerous results,--I have for the present left the
command of my Troops to Lieutenant-General von Finck; whose Orders you
are to execute as if coming to you directly from myself. On this I
pray God to have you in his holy and worthy keeping.--F." [Preuss, ii.
_Urkundenbuch,_ p. 43.]

At Berlin, on this 13th,--with the Five Couriers coming in successively
(and not in the order of their despatch, but the fatal Fifth arriving
some time AHEAD of the Fourth, who still spoke of progress and
victory),--there was such a day as Sulzer (ACH MEIN LIEBER SULZER!)
had never seen in the world. "'Above 50,000 human beings on the Palace
Esplanade and streets about;' swaying hither and thither, in agony of
expectation, in alternate paroxysm of joy and of terror and woe; often
enough the opposite paroxysms simultaneous in the different groups, and
men crushed down in despair met by men leaping into the air for very
gladness:" Sulzer (whose sympathy is of very aesthetic type) "would
not, for any consideration, have missed such a scene." [_Briefe der
Schweitzer Bodmer, Sulzer, Gessner; aus Gleim's literarischen Nachlasse:
herausgegeben von Wilhelm Korte_ (Zurich, 1804), pp. 316-319.] The
"scene" is much obliged to you, MEIN LIEBER!--

Practically we find, in Rodenbeck, or straggling elsewhere, this Note:
"On the day after Kunersdorf, Queen and Court fly to Magdeburg: this is
their second flight. Their first was on Haddick's Visit, October, 1757;
but after Rossbach they soon returned, and Berlin and the Court were
then extremely gay: different gentlemen, French and others of every
Nation, fallen prisoners, made the Queen's soirees the finest in the
world for splendor and variety, at that time." [Rodenbeck, i. 390; &c.
&c.]

One other Note we save, for the sake of poor Major Kleist, "Poet of the
Spring," as he was then called. A valiant, punctual Soldier, and with a
turn for Literature as well; who wrote really pleasant fine things, new
at that time and rapturously welcome, though too much in the sentimental
vein for the times which have followed. Major Kleist,--there is a
General Kleist, a Colonel Kleist of the Green Hussars (called GRUNE
Kleist, a terrible cutting fellow):--this is not Grune Kleist; this
is the Poet of THE SPRING; whose fate at Kunersdorf made a tragic
impression in all intelligent circles of Teutschland. Here is Kriele's
Note (abridged):--

"Christian Ewald von Kleist, 'Poet of the Spring' [a Pommern gentleman,
now in his forty-fourth year], was of Finck's Division; had come on,
after those Eight Battalions took the first Russian battery [that is,
Muhlberg]; and had been assisting, with zeal, at the taking of three
other batteries, regardless of twelve contusions, which he gradually
got. At the third battery, he was farther badly hurt on the left arm and
the right. Took his Colonel's place nevertheless, whom he now saw fall;
led the regiment MUTHIG forward on the fourth battery. A case-shot
smashed his right leg to pieces; he fell from his horse [hour not given,
shall we say 3 P.M.]; sank, exclaiming: 'KINDER, My children, don't
forsake your King!' and fainted there. Was carried to rear and leftward;
laid down on some dry spot in the Elsbruch, not far from the Kuhgrund,
and a Surgeon brought. The Surgeon, while examining, was torn away by
case-shot: Kleist lay bleeding without help. A friend of his, Pfau [who
told Kriele], one of Finck's Generals, came riding that way: Kleist
called to him; asked how the Battle went; uncommonly glad to hear we are
still progressive. Pfau undertook, and tried his utmost, for a carriage
to Kleist; did send one of Finck's own carriages; but after such delays
that the Prussians were now yielding: poor Kleist's had become Russian
ground, and the carriage could not get in.

"Kleist lay helpless; no luck worse than his. In the evening, Cossacks
came round him; stript him stark-naked; threw him, face foremost, into
the nearest swampy place, and went their way. One of these devils had
something so absurd and Teniers-like in the face of him, that Kleist,
in his pains, could not help laughing at remembrance of it. In the
night some Russian Hussars, human and not Cossack, found Kleist in this
situation; took him to a dry place; put a cloak over him, kindled a
watch-fire for themselves, and gave him water and bread. Towards morning
they hastened away, throwing an 8-GROSCHEN STUCK [ninepenny piece,
shilling, say half-crown] on his cloak,--with human farewell. But
Cossacks again came; again stript him naked and bare. Towards noon of
the 13th, Kleist contrived to attract some Russian Cavalry troop passing
that way, and got speech of the Captain (one Fackelberg, a German);
who at once set about helping him;--and had him actually sent into
Frankfurt, in a carriage, that evening. To the House of a Professor
Nikolai; where was plenty of surgery and watchful affection. After near
thirty hours of such a lair, his wounds seemed still curable; there was
hope for ten days. In the tenth night (22d-23d August), the shivered
pieces of bone disunited themselves; cut an artery,--which, after
many trials, could not be tied. August 24th, at two in the morning,
he died.--Great sorrow. August 26th, there was soldier's funeral; poor
Kleist's coffin borne by twelve Russian grenadiers; very many Russian
Officers attending, who had come from the Camp for that end; one Russian
Staff-Officer of them unbuckling his own sword to lay on the bier, as
there was want of one. King Friedrich had Kleist's Portrait hung in the
Garnison Kirche. Freemason Lodge, in 1788, set up a monument to him,"
[Kriele, pp. 39-43.]--which still stands on the Frankfurt pavement, and
is now in sadly ruinous state.

The Prussian loss, in this Battle, was, besides all the cannon and
field-equipages: 6,000 killed, 13,000 wounded (of which latter, 2,000
badly, who fell to the Russians as prisoners); in all, about 19,000
men. Nor was the Russian loss much lighter; of Russians and Austrians
together, near 18,000, as Tempelhof counts: "which will not surprise
your Majesty," reports Soltikof to his Czarina; "who are aware that
the King of Prussia sells his defeats at a dear rate." And privately
Soltikof was heard to say, "Let me fight but another such Victory, and
I may go to Petersburg with the news of it myself, with the staff in my
hand." The joy at Petersburg, striving not to be braggart or immodest,
was solemn, steady and superlative: a great feat indeed for Russia, this
Victory over such a King,--though a kind of grudge, that it was due
to Loudon, dwelt, in spite of Loudon's politic silence on that point,
unpleasantly in the background. The chase they had shamefully neglected.
It is said, certain Russian Officers, who had charge of that business
stept into a peasant's cottage to consult on it; contrived somehow to
find tolerable liquor there; and sat drinking instead. [Preuss, ii.
217.]




Chapter V.--SAXONY WITHOUT DEFENCE: SCHMETTAU SURRENDERS DRESDEN.

Friedrich's despair did not last quite four days. On the fourth
day,--day after leaving Reitwein,--there is this little Document, which
still exists, of more comfortable tenor: "My dear Major-General von
Wunsch,--Your Letter of the 16th to Lieutenant-General von Finck
punctually arrived here: and for the future, as I am now recovered from
my illness, you have to address your Reports directly to Myself.--F."
["Madlitz," on the road to Furstenwalde, "17th August:" in Preuss,
_Friedrich der Grosse; eine historische Portrait-Skizze_ (kind of
LECTURE, so let us call it, if again citing it; Lecture delivered, on
Friedrich's Birthday, to Majesty and Staff-Officers as Audience, Berlin,
24th January, 1855), p. 18.] Finding that, except Tottleben warily
reconnoitring with a few Cossacks, no Russians showed themselves at
Reitwein; that the Russians were encamping and intrenching on the
Wine-Hills south of Frankfurt, not meaning anything immediate,--he took
heart again; ranked his 23,000; sent for General Kleist from Pommern
with his Anti-Swedish handful (leave the Swedes alone, as usual in time
of crisis); considered that artilleries and furnishings could come to
him from Berlin, which is but 60 miles; that there still lay possibility
ahead, and that, though only a miracle could save him, he would try it
to the very last.

A great relief, this of coming to oneself again! "Till death, then;--rage
on, ye elements and black savageries!" Friedrich's humor is not
despondent, now or afterwards; though at this time it is very sad, very
angry, and, as it were, scorning even to hope: but he is at all times of
beautifully practical turn; and has, in his very despair, a sobriety of
eyesight, and a fixed steadiness of holding to his purpose, which are
of rare quality. His utterances to D'Argens, about this time and
onward,--brief hints, spontaneous, almost unconscious,--give curious
testimony of his glooms and moody humors. Of which the reader shall
see something. For the present, he is in deep indignation with his poor
Troops, among other miseries. "Actual running away!" he will have it to
be; and takes no account of thirst, hunger, heat, utter weariness and
physical impossibility! This lasts for some weeks. But in general there
is nothing of this injustice to those about him. In general, nothing
even of gloom is manifested; on the contrary, cheerfulness, brisk hope,
a strangely continual succession of hopes (mostly illusory);--though,
within, there is traceable very great sorrow, weariness and misery. A
fixed darkness, as of Erebus, is grown habitual to him; but is strictly
shut up, little of it shown to others, or even, in a sense, to himself.
He is as a traveller overtaken by the Night and its tempests and
rain-deluges, but refusing to pause; who is wetted to the bone, and does
not care farther for rain. A traveller grown familiar with the howling
solitudes; aware that the Storm-winds do not pity, that Darkness is the
dead Earth's Shadow:--a most lone soul of a man; but continually toiling
forward, as if the brightest goal and haven were near and in view.

Once more the world was certain of Friedrich's ruin;--Friedrich himself
we have seen certain of it, for some few desperate hours:--but the world
and he, as had been repeatedly the world's case, were both disappointed.
Intrinsically there could be little doubt but Friedrich's enemies might
now have ruined him, had they been diligent about it. Now again, and now
more than ever, they have the winning-post in sight. At small distance
is the goal and purpose of all these four years' battlings and
marchings, and ten years' subterranean plottings and intriguings. He
himself says deliberately, "They had only to give him the finishing
stroke (COUP-DE-GRACE)." [_OEuvres de Frederic,_ v. 20.] But they never
gave him that stroke; could not do it, though heartily desirous. Which
was, and is, matter of surprise to an observant public.

The cause of failure may be considered to have been, in good part,
Daun and his cunctations. Daun's zeal was unquestionable; ardent and
continual is Daun's desire to succeed: but to try it at his own risk was
beyond his power. He expected always to succeed by help of others: and
to show them an example, and go vigorously to work himself, was what he
never could resolve on. Could play only Fabius Cunctator, it would seem;
and never was that part less wanted than now! Under such a Chief Figure,
the "incoherency of action," instead of diminishing, as Friedrich had
feared, rose daily towards its maximum; and latterly became extreme. The
old Lernean Hydra had many heads; but they belonged all to one body. The
many heads of this Anti-Friedrich Hydra had withal each its own body,
and separate set of notions and advantages. Friedrich was at least a
unity; his whole strength going one way, and at all moments, under his
own sole command. The value of this circumstance is incalculable; this
is the saving-clause of Pitt and his England (Pitt also a despotic
sovereign, though a temporary one); this, second only to Friedrich's
great gifts from Nature, and the noble use he makes of them, is above
all others the circumstance that saved him in such a duel with the
Hydras.

On the back of Kunersdorf, accordingly, there was not only no finishing
stroke upon Friedrich, but for two months no stroke or serious attempt
whatever in those neighborhoods where Friedrich is. There are four
Armies hereabouts: The Grand Russian, hanging by Frankfurt; Friedrich
at Furstenwalde (whitherward he marched from Reitwein August 16th), at
Furstenwalde or farther south, guarding Berlin;--then, unhurt yet by
battle of any kind, there are the Grand Daunish or Mark-Lissa Army, and
Prince Henri's of Schmottseifen. Of which latter Two the hitchings and
manoeuvrings from time to time become vivid, and never altogether
cease; but in no case come to anything. Above two months' scientific
flourishing of weapons, strategic counter-dancing; but no stroke
struck, or result achieved, except on Daun's part irreparable waste of
time:--all readers would feel it inhuman to be burdened with any notice
of such things. One march of Prince Henri's, which was of a famous and
decisive character, we will attend to, when it comes, that is, were
the end of September at hand; the rest must be imagined as a general
strategic dance in those frontier parts,--Silesia to rearward on one
side, the Lausitz and Frankfurt on the other,--and must go on, silently
for most part, in the background of the reader's fancy. Indeed, Saxony
is the scene of action; Friedrich, Henri, Soltikof, Daun, comparatively
inactive for the next six weeks and more.

Some days before Kunersdorf, Daun personally, with I will forget how
many thousands, had made a move to northward from Mark-Lissa, 60 miles
or so, through Sagan Country; and lies about Priebus, waiting there
ever since. Priebus is some 40 miles north of Gorlitz, about 60 west of
Glogau, south of Frankfurt 80. This is where the Master-Smith, having
various irons in the fire, may be handiest for clutching them out, and
forging at them, as they become successively hot. Daun, as Master-Smith,
has at least three objects in view. The FIRST is, as always, Reconquest
of Silesia: this is obstructed by Prince Henri, who sits, watchful on
the threshold, at Schmottseifen yonder. The SECOND is, as last year,
Capture of Dresden: which is much the more feasible at present,--there
being, except the Garrisons, no Prussian force whatever in Saxony; and
a Reichs Army now actually there at last, after its long haggling about
its Magazines; and above all, a Friedrich with his hands full elsewhere.
To keep Friedrich's hands full,--in other words, to keep the Russians
sticking to him,--that is the THIRD object: or indeed we may call it the
first, second and third; for Daun is well aware that unless Soltikof
can manage to keep Friedrich busy, Silesia, Saxony and all else becomes
impossible.

Ever since the fortunate junction of Loudon with Soltikof, Daun has sat,
and still sits, expectant; elaborately calculative, gathering Magazines
in different parts, planting out-parties, this way, that way, with
an eye to these three objects, all or each,--especially to the third
object, which he discerns to be all AND each. Daun was elaborately
calculative with these views: but to try any military action, upon
Prince Henri for example, or bestir himself otherwise than in driving
provender forward, and marching detachments hither and thither to the
potentially fit and fittest posts, was not in Daun's way,--so much the
worse for Daun, in his present course of enterprise.

Prince Henri had lain quiet at Schmottseifen, waiting his Brother's
adventure; did not hear the least tidings of him till six days after
Kunersdorf, and then only by rumor; hideous, and, though still dubious,
too much of it probable! On the very day of Kunersdorf, Henri had
begun effecting some improvements on his right flank,--always a sharply
strategic, most expert creature,--and made a great many motions, which
would be unintelligible here. [Detailed, every fibre of them (as is
the soul-confusing custom there), in Tempelhof, iii. 228 et seq.] Henri
feels now that upon him lies a world of duties; and foremost of all, the
instant duty of endeavoring to open communication with his Brother. Many
marches, in consequence; much intricate marching and manoeuvring between
Daun and him: of which, when we come to Henri's great March (of 25th
September), there may be again some hint.

For the present, let readers take their Map, and endeavor to fix the
following dates and localities in their mind. Here, in summary, are the
King's various Marches, and Two successive Encampments, two only,
during those Six Weeks of forced inaction, while he is obliged to stand
watching the Russians, and to witness so many complicacies and disasters
in the distance; which he struggles much and fruitlessly to hinder or
help:--

ENCAMPMENT 1st (Furstenwalde, August 18th-30th). Friedrich left Reitwein
AUGUST 16th; 17th, he is at Madlitz [Note to Wunsch written there, which
we read]; 18th, to Furstenwalde, and encamp. Furstenwalde is on the
Spree, straight between Frankfurt and Berlin; 25 miles from the former,
35 from the latter. Here for near a fortnight. At first, much in alarm
about the Russians and Berlin; but gradually ascertaining that the
Russians intend nothing.

"In effect, all this while Soltikof lay at Lossow, 10 miles south of
Frankfurt, with his right on Oder; totally motionless, inactive, except
listening, often rather gloomily, to Daun's and Montalembert's suasive
eloquences and advices,--and once, August 22d, in the little Town of
Guben, holding Conference with Daun [of which by and by]. In consequence
of which, AUGUST 28th, Soltikof and his Russians and Austrians got under
way again; southward, but only a few marches: first to Mullrose, then
to Lieberose:--whom, the instant he heard of their movements, Friedrich,
August 30th, hastened to follow; but had not to follow very far.
Whereupon ensues,

"ENCAMPMENT SECOND (Waldau, till September 15th). AUGUST 30th,
Friedrich, we say, rose from Furstenwalde; hastened to follow this
Russian movement, and keep within wind of it: up the valley of the
Spree; first to Mullrose neighborhood [where the Russians, loitering
some time, spoiled the canal-locks of the Friedrich-Wilhelm Canal, if
nothing more],--thence to Lieberose neighborhood; Waldau, the King's new
place of encampment,--Waldau, with Spree Forest to rear of it: silent
both parties till September 15th, when Soltikof did fairly march, not
towards Berlin, but quite in the opposite direction."

By the middle of September, when the Russians did get on foot, and moved
eastward; especially on and after September 25th, when Henri made his
famous March westward; then it will behoove us to return to Friedrich
and these localities. For the present we must turn to Saxony, where, and
not here, the scene of action is. Take, farther, only the following
bits of Note, which will now be readable. First, these Utterances to
D'Argens; direct glimpses into the heavy-laden, indeed hag-ridden and
nearly desperate inner man of Friedrich, during the first three weeks
after his defeat at Kunersdorf:--


THE KING TO MARQUIS D'ARGENS (at Berlin): Six Notes.

1. "MADLITZ [road from Reitwein to Furstenwalde], 16th AUGUST, 1759.
We have been unfortunate, my dear Marquis; but not, by my fault. The
victory was ours, and would even have been a complete one, when our
infantry lost patience, and at the wrong moment abandoned the field of
battle. The enemy to-day is on march to Mullrose, to unite with Haddick
[not to Mullrose for ten days yet; Haddick had already got united with
THEM]. The Russian infantry is almost totally destroyed. Of my own
wrecks, all that I have been able to assemble amounts to 32,000 men;
with these I am pushing on to throw myself across the enemy's road, and
either perish or save the Capital. That is not what you [you Berliners]
will call a deficiency of resolution.

"For the event I cannot answer. If I had more lives than one, I would
sacrifice them all to my Country. But if this stroke fail, I think I am
clear-scores with her, and that it will be permissible to look a little
to myself. There are limits to everything. I support my misfortune;
courage not abated by it: but I am well resolved, after this stroke,
if it fail, to open an outgate for myself [that small glass tube which
never quits me], and no longer be the sport of any chance."

2. Furstenwalde, 20th AUGUST.... "Remain at Berlin, or retire to
Potsdam; in a little while there will come some catastrophe: it is not
fit that you suffer by it. If things take a good turn, you can be back
to Berlin [from Potsdam] in four hours. If ill-luck still pursue us, go
to Hanover or to Zelle, where you can provide for your safety.

"I protest to you, that in this late Action I did what was humanly
possible to conquer; but my people"--Oh, your Majesty!

3. FURSTENWALDE, 21st AUGUST.... "The enemy is intrenching himself near
Frankfurt; a sign he intends no attempt. If you will do me the pleasure
to come out hither, you can in all safety. Bring your bed with you;
bring my Cook Noel; and I will have you a little chamber ready. You will
be my consolation and my hope."--

This day,--let readers mark the circumstance,--Friedrich, in better
spirits, detaches Wunsch with some poor 6,000, to try if he can be of
help in Saxony; where the Reichs Army, now arrived in force, and with
nothing whatever in the field against them, is taking all the Northward
Garrison-Towns, and otherwise proceeding at a high rate. Too possibly
with an eye towards Dresden itself! Wunsch sets out August 21st.
[Tempelhof, iii. 211.] And we shall hear of him in those Saxon Countries
before long.

4. FURSTENWALDE, 22d AUGUST. "Yesterday I wrote to you to come; but
to-day I forbid it. Daun is at Kotbus; he is marching on Luben and
Berlin [nothing like so rash!].--Fly these unhappy Countries!--This news
obliges me again to attack the Russians between here and Frankfurt. You
may imagine if this is a desperate resolution. It is the sole hope that
remains to me, of not being cut off from Berlin on the one side or the
other. I will give the discouraged troops some brandy"--alas!--"but I
promise myself nothing of success. My one consolation is, that I shall
die sword in hand."

5. SAME PLACE AND DAY (after a Letter FROM D'Argens). "You make the
panegyric, MON CHER, of an Army that does not deserve any. The soldiers
had good limbs to run with, none to attack the enemy. [Alas, your
Majesty; after fifteen hours of such marching and fighting!]

"For certain I will fight; but don't flatter yourself about the event. A
happy chance alone can help us. Go, in God's name, to Tangermunde [since
the Royal Family went, D'Argens and many Berliners are thinking of
flight], to Tangermunde, where you will be well; and wait there how
Destiny shall have disposed of us. I will go to reconnoitre the enemy
to-morrow. Next day, if there is anything to do, we will try it. But if
the enemy still holds to the Wine-Hills of Frankfurt, I shall never dare
to attack him.

"No, the torment of Tantalus, the pains of Prometheus, the doom of
Sisyphus, were nothing like what I suffer for the last ten days [from
Kunersdorf till now, when destruction has to be warded off again, and
the force wanting]. Death is sweet in comparison to such a life. Have
compassion on me and it; and believe that I still keep to myself a great
many evil things, not wishing to afflict or disquiet anybody with them;
and that I would not counsel you to fly these unlucky Countries, if I
had any ray of hope. Adieu, MON CHER."

Four days after, AUGUST 25th, from this same Furstenwalde, the Russians
still continuing stagnant, Friedrich despatches to Schmettau, Commandant
of Dresden (by some industrious hand, for the roads are all blocked), a
Second Letter, "That Dresden is of the highest moment; that in case of
Siege there, relief [Wunsch, namely, and perhaps more that may follow]
is on the road; and that Schmettau must defend himself to the utmost."
Let us hope this Second Missive may counteract the too despondent
First, which we read above, should that have produced discouragement
in Schmettau! [Second Letter is given in _Schmettau's Leben,_ pp. 436,
437.]--D'Argens does run to Wolfenbuttel; stays there till September
9th. Nothing more from Friedrich till 4th September, when matters are
well cooled again.

6. WALDAU, 4th SEPTEMBER. "I think Berlin is now in safety; you may
return thither. The Barbarians [Russians] are in the Lausitz; I keep by
the side of them, between them and Berlin, so that there is nothing to
fear for the Capital. The imminency of danger is past; but there will
still be many bad moments to get through, before reaching the end of
the Campaign. These, however, only regard myself; never mind these. My
martyrdom will last two months yet; then the snows and the ices will end
it." [_OEuvres de Frederic,_ xix. 78, 82, 83, 85, 86.]

Thus at Furstenwalde, then at Waldau, keeping guard, forlorn but
resolute, against the intrusive Russian-Austrian deluges, Friedrich
stands painfully vigilant and expectant,--still for about a fortnight
more. With bad news coming to him latterly, as we shall hear. He is in
those old moorland Wusterhausen Countries, once so well known under far
other circumstances. Thirty years ago, in fine afternoons, we used
to gallop with poor Duhan de Jandun, after school-tasks done, towards
Mittenwalde, Furstenwalde and the furzy environs, far and wide; at home,
our Sister and Mother waiting with many troubles and many loves, and
Papa sleeping, Pan-like, under the shadow of his big tree:--Thirty years
ago, ah me, gone like a dream is all that; and there is solitude and
desolation and the Russian-Austrian death-deluges instead! These, I
suppose, were Friedrich's occasional remembrances; silent always, in
this locality and time. The Sorrows of WERTER, of the GIAOUR, of the
Dyspeptic Tailor in multifarious forms, are recorded in a copious
heart-rending manner, and have had their meed of weeping from a
sympathetic Public: but there are still a good few Sorrows which lie
wrapt in silence, and have never applied there for an idle tear!--Let us
look now into Daun's side of things.

DAUM, AFTER NEGOTIATION, HAS AN INTERVIEW WITH SOLTIKOF (at Guben,
August 22d).--"Daun, who had moved to Priebus, with a view to be nearer
Soltikof, had scarcely got his tent pitched there (August 13th), when
a breathless horseman rode in, with a Note from Loudon, dated the night
before: 'King of Prussia beaten, to the very bone, beyond mistake this
time,--utterly ruined, if one may judge!' What a vision of the Promised
Land! Delighted Daun moves forward, one march, to Triebel on the morrow;
to be one march nearer the scene of glory, and endeavor to forge this
biggest of the hot irons to advantage.

"At Triebel Soltikof's own account, elucidated by oral messengers,
eye-witnesses, and, in short, complete conspectus of this ever memorable
Victory, await the delighted Daun. Who despatches messengers, one and
another; Lacy, the first, not succeeding quite: To congratulate with
enthusiasm the most illustrious of Generals; who has beaten King
Friedrich as none else ever did or could; beaten to the edge of
extinction;--especially to urge him upon trampling out this nearly
extinct King, before he gleam up again. Soltikof understands the
congratulations very well; but as to that of trampling out, snorts an
indignant negative: 'Nay, you, why don't you try it? Surely it is more
your business than my Imperial Mistress's or mine. We have wrenched two
victories from him this season. Kay and Kunersdorf have killed near the
half of us: go you in, and wrench something!' This is Soltikof's logic;
which no messenger of Daun's, Lacy or another, aided by never such
melodies and suasions from Montalembert and Loudon, who are permanently
diligent that way, can shake.

"And truly it is irrefragable. How can Daun, if himself merely
speculative, calculative, hope that Soltikof will continue acting? Men
who have come to help you in a heavy job of work need example. If you
wish me to weep, be grieved yourself first of all. Soltikof angrily
wipes his countenance at this point, and insists on a few tears
from Daun. Without metaphor, Soltikof has shot away all his present
ammunition, his staff of bread is quite precarious in these parts; and
Soltikof thinks always, 'Is it my business, then, or is it yours?'

"Soltikof has intrenched himself on the Wine-Hills at Lossow,
comfortably out of Friedrich's way, and contiguous to Oder and the
provision-routes; sits there, angrily deaf to the voice of the charmer;
nothing to be charmed out of him, but gusts of indignation, instead of
consent. A proud, high-going, indignant kind of man, with a will of
his own. And sees well enough what is what, in all this symphony of the
Lacys, the Montalemberts and surrounding adorers. Montalembert, who is
here this season, our French best man (unprofitable Swedes must put up
with an inferior hand), is extremely persuasive, tries all the arts of
French rhetoric, but effects nothing. 'To let the Austrians come in
for the finishing stroke,---Excellence, it will be to let them gain,
in History, a glory which is of your earning. Daun and Austria, not
Soltikof and Russia, will be said to have extinguished this pestilent
King; whom History will have to remember!' [Choiseul's Letter (not
DUC de Choiseul, but COMTE, now Minister at Vienna) to Montalembert,
"Vienna, 16th August;" and Montalembert's Answer, "Lieberhausen [means
LIEBEROSE], 31st August, 1759:" in Montalembert, _Correspondance,_ ii.
58-65.] 'With all my heart,' answers Soltikof; 'I make the Austrians and
History perfectly welcome! Monsieur, my ammunition is in Posen; my
bread is fallen scarce; in Frankfurt can you find me one horse more?'
Indignant Soltikof is not to be taken by chaff; growls now and then,
if you stir him to the bottom: 'Why should we, who are volunteer
assistants, take all the burden of the work? I will fall back to Posen,
and home to Poland and East Preussen, if this last much longer.'

"Austria has a good deal disgusted these Soltikofs and Russian Chief
Officers;--who are not so stupid as Austria supposes. Austria's steady
wish is, 'Let them do their function of cat's-paw for us; we are here to
eat the chestnuts; not, if we can help it, to burn our own poor fingers
for them!' After every Campaign hitherto, Austria has been in use to
raise eager accusations at Petersburg; and get the Apraxins, Fermors
into trouble: this is not the way to conciliate Russian General
Officers. Austria, taught probably by Daun, now tries the other tack:
heaps Soltikof with eulogies, flatteries, magnificent presents. All
which Soltikof accepts, but with a full sense of what they mean. An
unmanageable Soltikof; his answer always,--'Your turn now to fight a
victory! I will go my ways to Posen again, if you don't.' And, in these
current weeks, in Soltikof's audience-room, if anybody were curious
about it, we could present a very lively solicitation going on, with
answers very gruff and negatory. No suasion of Montalembert, Lacy, and
Daun Embassies, backed by diamond-hilted swords, and splendor of gifts
from Vienna itself, able to prevail on the barbarous people.

"Daun at length resolves to go in person; solicits an Interview with
the distinguished Russian Conqueror; gets it, meets Soltikof at Guben,
half-way house between Frankfurt and Triebel; select suite attending
both Excellencies (August 22d); and exerts whatever rhetoric is in him
on the barbarous man. The barbarous man is stiff as brass; but Daun
comes into all his conditions: 'Saxony, Silesia,--Excellenz, we have
them both within clutch; such our exquisite angling and manoeuvring, in
concert with your immortal victory, which truly gives the life-breath to
everything. Oh, suffer us to clutch them: keep that King away from us;
and see if they are not ours, Saxony first, Silesia next! Provisions of
meal? I will myself undertake to furnish bread for you [though I have to
cart it from Bohemia all the way, and am myself terribly off; but fixed
to do the impossible]; ration of bread shall fail no Russian man, while
you escort us as protective friend. Towards Saxony first, where the
Reichs Army is, and not a Prussian in the field; the very Garrisons
mostly gone by this time. Dresden is to be besieged, within a week;
Dresden itself is ours, if only YOU please! Come into the Lausitz with
us, Magazines are there, loaves in abundance: Saxony done, Dresden ours,
cannot we turn to Silesia together; besiege Glogau together (I am myself
about trying Neisse, by Harsch again); capture Glogau as well as Neisse;
and crown the successfulest campaign that ever was? Oh, Excellenz--!'"

In a word, Excellenz, strictly fixing that condition of the loaves,
consents. Will get ready to leave those Frankfurt Wine-Hills in about
a week. "But the loaves, you recollect: no Bread, no Russian!" Daun
returns to Triebel a victorious man,--though with an onerous condition
incumbent. Tempelhof, minutely computing, finds that to cart from
Bohemia such a cipher of human rations daily into these parts, will
surpass all the vehiculatory power of Daun. [Tempelhof, iii. 225.]'




THE "REICHS ARMY" 80 CALLED HAS ENTERED SAXONY, UNDER FINE OMENS; DOES
SOME FEATS OF SIEGING (August 7th-23d),--WITH AN EYE ON DRESDEN AS THE
CROWNING ONE.

The Reichs Army, though it had been so tumbled about, in Spring, with
such havoc on its magazines and preparations, could not wait to refit
itself, except superficially; and showed face over the Mountains almost
earlier than usual. The chance was so unique: a Saxony left to its mere
Garrisons,--as it continued to be, for near two months this Year. On
such golden opportunity the Reichs Army--first, in light mischievous
precursor parties, who roamed as far as Halle or even as Halberstadt;
then the Army itself, well or ill appointed, under Generalissimo the
Prince von Zweibruck,--did come on, winding through Thuringen towards
the Northwestern Towns; various Austrian Auxiliary-Corps making
appearance on the Dresden side. Eight Austrian regiments, as a
permanency, are in the Reichs Army itself. Commander, or part Commander,
of the eight is (what alone I find noteworthy in them) "Herr General
Thomas von Blonquet:" Irish by nation, says a foot-note; [Seyfarth, ii.
831 n.]--sure enough some adventurous "Thomas PLUNKET," visible
this once, soldiering, in those circumstances; never heard of by a
sympathetic reader before or after. It was while the King was hunting
the Haddick-Loudon people in Sagan Country in such vehement fashion,
that Zweibruck came trumpeting into Saxony,--King, Prince Henri and
everybody, well occupied otherwise, far away!

The Reichs Army has a camp at Naumburg (Rossbach neighborhood): and has
light troops out in Halle neighborhood; which have seized Halle; are
very severe upon Halle, and other places thereabouts, till chased away.
August 7th, the Reichs Army begirt Leipzig; summoned the weak
garrison there. It is a Town capable of ruin, but not of defence:
"Free-withdrawal," proposes the Reichs Army,--and upon these terms gets
hold of Leipzig, for the time being. Leipzig, Torgau, Wittenberg; in
a fortnight or less, all the Prussian posts in those parts fall to
the Reichs Army. Its marchings and siegings, among those Northwestern
places, not one of them capable of standing above a few days' siege, are
worth no mention, except to Parish History: enough that, by little
after the middle of August, Zweibruck had got all these places,
"Free-withdrawal" the terms for all; and that, except it be the
following feature in their Siege of Torgau, feature mainly Biographic,
and belonging to a certain Colonel Wolfersdorf concerned, there is
not one of those Sieges now worth a moment's attention from almost any
mortal. This is the Torgau feature,--feature of human nature, soldiering
under difficulties:--

COLONEL VON WOLFERSDORF BEAUTIFULLY DEFENDS HIMSELF IN TORGAU (August
9th-14th). Two days after Leipzig was had, there appeared at Torgau a
Body of Pandours, 2,000 and more; who attempted some kind of scalade on
Torgau and its small Garrison (of 700 or so),--where are a Magazine, a
Hospital and other properties: not capable, by any garrison, of standing
regular siege; but important to defend till you have proper terms
offered. The multitudinous Pandours, if I remember, made a rush into the
Suburbs, in their usual vociferous way; but were met by the 700 silent
Prussians,--silent except through their fire-arms and field-pieces,--in
so eloquent a style as soon convinced the Pandour mind, and sent it
travelling again. And in the evening of the same day (August 9th),
Colonel Wolfersdorf arrives, as new Commandant, and with reinforcements,
small though considerable in the circumstances.

Wolfersdorf, one dimly gathers, had marched from Wittenberg on this
errand; the whole force in Torgau is now of about 3,000, still with only
field-cannon, but with a Captain over them;--who, as is evident, sets
himself in a very earnest manner to do his utmost in defence of the
place. Next morning Reichs General Kleefeld ("Cloverfield"), with 6 or
8,000 Pandour and Regular, summons Wolfersdorf: "Surrender instantly;
or--!" "We will expect you!" answers Wolfersdorf. Whereupon, same
morning (August 10th), general storm; storm No. 1: beautifully handled
by Wolfersdorf; who takes it in rear (to its astonishment), as well as
in front; and sends it off in haste. On the morrow, Saturday, a second
followed; and on Sunday a third; both likewise beautifully handled.
This third storm, readers see, was "Sunday, August 12th:" a very busy
stormful day at Torgau here,--and also, for some others of us, during
the heats of Kunersdorf, over the horizon far away! Wolfersdorf tumbles
back all storms; furthermore makes mischievous sallies: a destructive,
skilled person; altogether prompt, fertile in expedients; and evidently
is not to be managed by Kleefeld. So that Prince von Stolberg, Second to
supreme Zweibruck himself, has to take it in hand. And,

MONDAY, 13th, at break of day, Stolberg arrives with a train of
battering guns and 6,000 new people; summons Wolfersdorf: "No," as
before. Storms him, a fourth time; likewise "No," as before: attacks,
thereupon, his Elbe Bridge, and his Redoubt across the River; finds a
Wolfersdorf party rush destructively into his rear there. And has to
withdraw, and try battering from behind the Elbe Dam. Continues this,
violently for about two hours; till again Wolfersdorf, whose poor
fieldpieces, the only artillery he has, "cannot reach so far with leaden
balls" (the iron balls are done, and the powder itself is almost done),
manages, by a flank attack, to quench this also. Which produces entire
silence, and considerable private reflection, on the part of indignant
Stolberg. Stolberg offers him the favorablest terms devisable: "Withdraw
freely, with all your honors, all your properties; only withdraw!" Which
Wolfersdorf, his powder and ball being in such a state of ebb, and no
relief possible, agrees to; with stipulations very strict as to every
particular. [In _Anonymous of Hamburg_ (iii. 350) the Capitulation,
"August 14th." given IN EXTENSO.]

COLONEL VON WOLFERSDORF WITHDRAWS, ALSO BEAUTIFULLY (August 15th).
Accordingly, Wednesday, August 15th, at eight in the morning,
Wolfersdorf by the Elbe Gate moves out; across Elbe Bridge, and the
Redoubt which is on the farther shore yonder. Near this Redoubt,
Stolberg and many of his General Officers are waiting to see him go.
He goes in state; flags flying, music playing. Battalion Hessen-Cassel,
followed by all our Packages, Hospital convalescents, King's Artillery,
and whatever is the King's or ours, marches first. Next comes, as
rear-guard to all this, Battalion Grollmann;--along with which is
Wolfersdorf himself, knowing Grollmann for a ticklish article (Saxons
mainly); followed on the heel by Battalion Hofmann, and lastly by
Battalion Salmuth, trusty Prussians both of these.

Battalion Hessen-Cassel and the Baggages are through the Redoubt,
Prince of Stolberg handsomely saluting as saluted. But now, on Battalion
Grollmann's coming up, Stolberg's Adjutant cries out with a loud voice
of proclamation, many Officers repeating and enforcing: "Whoever is a
brave Saxon, whoever is true to his Kaiser, or was of the Reichs Army,
let him step out: Durchlaucht will give him protection!" At sound of
which Grollmann quivers as if struck by electricity; and instantly
begins dissolving;--dissolves, in effect, nearly all, and is in the act
of vanishing like a dream! Wolfersdorf is a prompt man; and needs to be
so. Wolfersdorf, in Olympian rage, instantly stops short; draws pistol:
"I will shoot dead every man that quits rank!" vociferates he; and
does, with his pistol, make instant example of one; inviting every true
Prussian to do the like: "Jagers, Hussars, a ducat for every traitor you
shoot down!" continues Wolfersdorf (and punctually paid it afterwards):
unable to prevent an almost total dissolution of Grollmann. For some
minutes, there is a scene indescribable: storm of vociferation, menace,
musket-shot, pistol-shot; Grollmann disappearing on every side,--"behind
the Redoubt, under the Bridge, into Elbe Boats, under the cloaks of the
Croats;"--in spite of Wolfersdorf's Olympian rages and efforts.

At sight of the shooting, Prince Stolberg, a hot man, had said
indignantly, "Herr, that will be dangerous for you (DAS WIRD NICHT GUT
GEHN)!" Wolfersdorf not regarding him a whit; regarding only Grollmann,
and his own hot business of coercing it at a ducat per head. Grollmann
gone, and Battalion Hofmann in due sequence come up, Wolfersdorf--who
has sent an Adjutant, with order, "Hessen-Cassel, HALT"--gives
Battalion Hofmann these three words of command: "Whole Battalion,
halt!--Front!--Make ready!" (with due simultaneous click of every
firelock, on utterance of that last);--and turning to Prince Stolberg,
with a brow, with a tone of voice: "Durchlaucht, Article 9 of the
Capitulation is express on this point; 'ALL DESERTION STRICTLY
PROHIBITED; NO DESERTER TO BE RECEIVED EITHER ON THE IMPERIAL OR ON
THE PRUSSIAN SIDE!' [Durchlaucht silently gives, we suppose, some faint
sniff.] Since your Durchlaucht does not keep the Capitulation, neither
will I regard it farther. I will now take you and your Suite prisoners,
return into the Town, and again begin defending myself. Be so good as
ride directly into that Redoubt, or I will present, and give fire!"

A dangerous moment for the Durchlaucht of Stolberg; Battalion Salmuth
actually taking possession of the wall again; Hofmann here with its
poised firelock on the cock, "ready" for that fourth word, as above
indicated. A General Lusinsky of Stolberg's train, master of those
Croats, and an Austrian of figure, remarks very seriously: "Every
point of the Capitulation must be kept!" Upon which Durchlaucht has to
renounce and repent; eagerly assists in recovering Grollmann, restores
it (little the worse, little the FEWER); will give Wolfersdorf "COMMAND
of the Austrian Escort you are to have", and every satisfaction and
assurance;--wishful only to get rid of Wolfersdorf. Who thereupon
marches to Wittenberg, with colors flying again, and a name mentionable
ever since. [Templehof, iii. 201-204; Seyfarth, ii. 562 n., and _
Beylagen,_ ii. 587; _Militair-Lexikon,_ iv. 283.]

This Wolfersdorf was himself a Pirna Saxon; serving Polish Majesty, as
Major, in that Pirna time; perhaps no admirer of "Feldmarschall Bruhl"
and Company?--at any rate, he took Prussian service, as then offered
him; and this is his style of keeping it. A decidedly clever soldier,
and comes out, henceforth, more and more as such,--unhappily not for
long. Was taken at Maxen, he too, as will be seen. Rose, in after times,
to be Lieutenant-General, and a man famous in the Prussian military
circles; but given always, they say, to take the straight line (or
shortest distance between self and object), in regard to military
matters, to recruiting and the like, and thus getting himself into
trouble with the Civil Officials.

Wolfersdorf, at Wittenberg or farther on, had a flattering word from the
King; applauding his effective procedures at Torgau; and ordering him,
should Wittenberg fall (as it did, August 23d), to join Wunsch, who is
coming with a small Party to try and help in those destitute localities.
Wunsch the King had detached (21st August), as we heard already. Finck
the King finds, farther, that he can detach (from Waldau Country,
September 7th); [Tempelhof, iii. 211, 237.] Russians being so languid,
and Saxony fallen into such a perilous predicament.

"Few days after Kunersdorf," says a Note, which should be inserted here,
"there had fallen out a small Naval matter, which will be consolatory to
Friedrich, and go to the other side of the account, when he hears of
it: Kunersdorf was Sunday, August 12th; this was Saturday and Sunday
following. Besides their Grand Brest Fleet, with new Flat-bottoms, and
world-famous land-preparations going on at Vannes, for Invasion of
proud Albion, all which are at present under Hawke's strict keeping, the
French have, ever since Spring last, a fine subsidiary Fleet at Toulon,
of very exultant hopes at one time; which now come to finis.

"SEA-FIGHT (PROPERLY SEA-HUNT OF 200 MILES), IN THE CADIZ WATERS, AUGUST
18th-19th. The fine Toulon Fleet, which expected at one time, Pitt's
ships being so scattered over the world, to be 'mistress of the
Mediterranean,' has found itself, on the contrary (such were Pitt's
resources and promptitudes); cooped in harbor all Summer; Boscawen
watching it in the usual strict way. No egress possible; till, in
the sultry weather (8th July-4th August), Boscawen's need of fresh
provisions, fresh water and of making some repairs, took him to
Gibraltar, and gave the Toulon Fleet a transient opportunity, which it
made use of.

"August 17th, at 8 in the evening, Boscawen, at Gibraltar (some of his
ships still in deshabille or under repair), was hastily apprised by one
of his Frigates, That the Toulon Fleet had sailed; been seen visibly at
Ceuta Point so many hours ago. 'Meaning,' as Boscawen guesses, 'to
be through the Straits this very night!' By power of despatch, the
deshabille ships were rapidly got buttoned together (in about two
hours); and by 10 P.M. all were under sail. And soon were in hot chase;
the game, being now in view,--going at its utmost through the Straits,
as anticipated. At 7 next morning (Saturday, August 18th) Boscawen got
clutch of the Toulon Fleet; still well east of Cadiz, somewhere in the
Trafalgar waters, I should guess. Here Boscawen fought and chased the
Toulon Fleet for 24 hours coming; drove it finally ashore, at Lagos on
the coast of Portugal, with five of its big ships burnt or taken,
its crews and other ships flying by land and water, its poor Admiral
mortally wounded; and the Toulon Fleet a ruined article. The wind had
been capricious, here fresh, there calm; now favoring the hunters,
now the hunted; both Fleets had dropped in two. De la Clue, the French
Admiral, complained bitterly how his Captains lagged, or shore off and
forsook him. Boscawen himself, who for his own share had gone at it
eagle-like, was heard grumbling, about want of speed in some people;
and said: 'It is well; but it might have been better!' [Beatson,
ii. 313-319; ib. iii. 237-238, De la Clue, the French Admiral's
Despatch;--Boscawen's Despatch, &c., in _Gentleman's Magazine,_ xxix.
434.]

"De la Clue--fallen long ago from all notions of 'dominating the
Mediterranean'--had modestly intended to get through, on any terms,
into the Ocean; might then, if possible, have joined the Grand 'Invasion
Squadron,' now lying at Brest, till Vannes and the furnishings are
ready, or have tried to be troublesome in the rear of Hawke, who is
blockading all that. A modest outlook in comparison;--and this is
what it also has come to. As for the Grand Invasion Squadron, Admiral
Conflans, commanding it, still holds up his head in Brest Harbor, and
talks big. Makes little of Rodney's havoc on the Flat-bottoms at Havre,
'Will soon have Flat-bottoms again: and you shall see!'--if only Hawke,
and wind and weather and Fortune, will permit."




AUSTRIAN REICHS ARMY DOES ITS CROWNING FEAT (August 26th-September 4th):
DIARY OF WHAT IS CALLED THE "SIEGE" OF DRESDEN.

Since the first weeks of, August there have been Austrian detachments,
Wehla's Corps, Brentano's Corps, entering Saxony from the northeast
or Daun-ward side, and posting themselves in the strong points looking
towards Dresden; waiting there till the Reichs Army should capture its
Leipzigs, Torgaus, Wittenbergs, and roll forward from northwest. To all
which it is easy to fancy what an impetus was given by Kunersdorf
and August 12th; the business, after that, going on double-quick, and
pointing to immediate practical industry on Dresden. The Reichs Army
hastens to settle its northwestern Towns, puts due garrison in each,
leaves a 10 or 12,000 movable for general protection, in those parts;
and, August 23d, marches for Dresden. There are only some 15,000 left
of it now; almost half the Reichs Army drunk up in that manner; were
not Daun now speeding forth his Maguire with a fresh 12,000; who is to
command the Wehlas and Brentanos as well. And, in effect, to be Austrian
Chief, and as regards practical matters, Manager of this important
Enterprise,--all-important to Daun just now. Schmettau in Dresden sees
clearly what mischief is at hand.

To Daun this Siege of Dresden is the alpha to whatever omegas there may
be: he and his Soltikof are to sit waiting this; and can attempt nothing
but eating of provender, till this be achieved. As the Siege was really
important, though not quite the alpha to all omegas, and has in it
curious points and physiognomic traits, we will invite readers to
some transient inspection of it,--the rather as there exist ample
contemporary Narratives, DIARIUMS and authentic records, to render that
possible and easy. [In TEMPELHOF (iii. 210-216-222) complete and careful
Narrative; in ANONYMOUS OF HAMBURG (iii. 371-377) express "DAY-BOOK" by
some Eye-witness in Dresden.]'

"Ever since the rumor of Kunersdorf," says one Diarium, compiled out of
many, "in the last two weeks of August, Schmettau's need of vigilance
and diligence has been on the increase, his outlooks becoming grimmer
and grimmer. He has a poorish Garrison for number (3,700 in all
[Schmettau's LEBEN (by his Son), p. 408.]), and not of the best quality;
deserters a good few of them: willing enough for strokes; fighting
fellows all, and of adventurous turn, but uncertain as to loyalty in a
case of pinch. He has endless stores in the place; for one item, almost
a million sterling of ready money. Poor Schmettau, if he knew it, has
suddenly become the Leonidas of this campaign, Dresden its Thermopylae;
and"--But readers can conceive the situation.

"AUGUST 20th, Schmettau quits the Neustadt, or northern part of Dresden,
which lies beyond the River: unimportant that, and indefensible with
garrison not adequate; Schmettau will strengthen the River-bank, blow up
the Stone Bridge if necessary, and restrict himself to Dresden Proper.
The Court is here; Schmettau does not hope that the Court can avert a
Siege from him; but he fails not to try, in that way too, and may at
least gain time.

"AUGUST 25th, He has a Mine put under the main arch of the Bridge: 'mine
ill-made, uncertain of effect,' reports the Officer whom he sent to
inspect it. But it was never tried, the mere rumor of it kept off
attacks on that side. Same day, August 25th, Schmettau receives that
unfortunate Royal Missive [Tempelhof, iii. 208; Schmettau's LEBEN (p.
421) has "August 27th."] written in the dark days of Reitwein, morrow of
Kunersdorf (14th or 13th August)," which we read above. "That there is
another Letter on the road for him, indicating 'Relief shall be tried,'
is unknown to Schmettau, and fatally continues unknown. While Schmettau
is reading this (August 25th), General Wunsch has been on the road four
days: Wunsch and Wolfersdorf with about 8,000, at their quickest pace,
and in a fine winged frame of mind withal, are speeding on: will cross
Elbe at Meissen to-morrow night,--did Schmettau only know. People say
he did, in the way of rumor, understand that Kunersdorf had not been
the fatal thing it was thought; and that efforts would be made by a King
like his. In his place one might have, at least, shot out a spy or two?
But he did not, then or afterwards.

"Already, ever since the arrival of Wehla and Brentano in those parts,
he has been laboring under many uncertainties; too many for a Leonidas!
Hanging between Yes and No, even about that of quitting the Neustadt,
for example: carrying over portions of his goods, but never heartily the
whole; unable to resolve; now lifting visibly the Bridge pavement,
then again visibly restoring it;--and, I think, though the contrary
is asserted, he had at last to leave in the Neustadt a great deal of
stores, horse-provender and other, not needful to him at present, or
impossible to carry, when dubiety got ended. He has put a mine under the
Bridge; but knows it will not go off.

"Schmettau has been in many wars, but this is a case that tries his
soldier qualities as none other has ever done. A case of endless
intricacy,--if he be quite equal to it; which perhaps he was not
altogether. Nobody ever doubted Schmettau's high qualities as a man and
captain; but here are requisite the very highest, and these Schmettau
has not. The result was very tragical; I suppose, a pain to Friedrich
all his life after; and certainly to Schmettau all his. This is Saturday
night, 25th August: before Tuesday week (September 4th) there will have
sad things arrived, irremediable to Schmettau. Had Schmettau decided to
defend himself, Dresden had not been taken. What a pity Schmettau had
not been spared this Missive, calculated to produce mere doubt! Whether
he could not, and should not, after a ten days of inquiry and new
discernment, have been able to read the King's true meaning, as well
as the King's momentary humor, in this fatal Document, there is no
deciding. Sure enough, he did not read the King's true meaning in it,
but only the King's momentary humor; did not frankly set about defending
himself to the death,--or 'seeing' in that way 'whether he could not
defend himself,'--with a good capitulation lying in the rear, after he
had.

"SUNDAY, AUGUST 26th, Trumpet at the gates. Messenger from Zweibruck is
introduced blindfold; brings formal Summons to Schmettau. Summons duly
truculent: 'Resistance vain; the more you resist, the worse it will
be,--and there is a worst [that of being delivered to the Croats, and
massacred every man], of which why should I speak? Especially if in
anything you fail of your duty to the Kur-Prinz [Electoral Prince and
Heir-Apparent, poor crook-backed young Gentleman, who has an excellent
sprightly Wife, a friend of Friedrich's and daughter of the late Kaiser
Karl VII., whom we used so beautifully], imagine what your fate will
be!'--To which Schmettau answers: 'Can Durchlaucht think us ignorant
of the common rules of behavior to Persons of that Rank? For the rest,
Durchlaucht knows what our duties here are, and would despise us if we
did NOT do them;'--and, in short, our answer again is, in polite
forms, 'Pooh, pooh; you may go your way!' Upon which the Messenger is
blindfolded again; and Schmettau sets himself in hot earnest to clearing
out his goods from the Neustadt; building with huge intertwisted
cross-beams and stone and earth-masses a Battery at his own end of the
Bridge, batteries on each side of it, below and above;--locks the Gates;
and is passionately busy all Sunday,--though divine service goes on as
usual.

"Hardly were the Prussian guns got away, when Croat people in quantity
came in, and began building a Battery at their end of the Bridge, the
main defence-work being old Prussian meal-barrels, handily filled with
earth. 'If you fire one cannon-ball across on us,' said Schmettau, 'I
will bombard the Neustadt into flame in few minutes [I have only to aim
at our Hay Magazine yonder]: be warned! 'Nor did they once fire from
that side; Electoral Highness withal and Royal Palace being quite
contiguous behind the Prussian Bridge-Battery. Electoral Highness and
Household are politely treated, make polite answer to everything; intend
going down into the 'APOTHEKE' (Kitchen suite), or vaulted part of the
Palace, and will lodge there when the cannonade begins.

"This same SUNDAY, AUGUST 26th, Maguire arrived; and set instantly to
building his bridge at Pillnitz, a little way above Dresden: at Uebigau,
a little below Dresden, the Reichsfolk have another. Reichsfolk,
Zweibruck in person, come all in on Wednesday; post themselves there,
to north and west of the City. What is more important, the siege-guns,
a superb stock, are steadily floating, through the Pirna regions,
hitherward; get to hand on Friday next, the fifth day hence. [Tempelhof,
p. 210.] Korbitz (half-way out to Kesselsdorf) is Durchlaucht's
head-quarter:--Chief General is Durchlaucht, conspicuously he, at least
in theory, and shall have all the glory; though Maguire, glancing on
these cannon, were it nothing more, has probably a good deal to say.
Maguire too, I observe, takes post on that north or Kesselsdorf side;
contiguous for the Head General. Wehla and Brentano post themselves on
the south or up-stream side; it is they that hand in the siege-guns:
batteries are already everywhere marked out, 13 cannon-batteries and 5
howitzer. In short, from the morrow of that truculent Summons, Monday
morning to Thursday, there is hot stir of multifarious preparation on
Schmettau's part; and continual pouring in of the hostile force, who are
also preparing at the utmost. Thursday, the Siege, if it can be called a
Siege, begins. Gradually, and as follows:--

"THURSDAY MORNING (August 30th), Schmettau, who is, night and day,
'palisading the River,' and much else,--discloses (that is, Break of
Day discloses on his part) to the Dresden public a huge Gallows, black,
huge, of impressive aspect; labelled 'For Plunderers, Mutineers and
their Helpers.' [ANONYMOUS OF HAMBURG, iii. 373.] The Austrian heavy
guns are not yet in battery; but multitudes of loose Croat people go
swarming about everywhere, and there is plentiful firing from such
artilleries as they have. This same Thursday morning, two or three
battalions of them rush into the Pirna Suburb; attack the Prussian
Guard-parties there. Schmettau instantly despatches Captain Kollas and a
Trumpet:--'Durchlaucht, have the goodness to recall these Croat Parties;
otherwise the Suburb goes into flame! And directly on arrival of this
Messenger, may it please Durchlaucht. For we have computed the time; and
will not wait beyond what is reasonable for his return!' Zweibruck is
mere indignation and astonishment; 'will burn Halle,' burn Quedlinburg,
Berlin itself, and utterly ruin the King of Prussia's Dominion in
general:--the rejoinder to which is, burning of Pirna Suburb, as
predicted; seventy houses of it, this evening, at six o'clock.

"Onward from which time there is on both sides, especially on
Schmettau's, diligent artillery practice; cannonade kept up wherever
Schmettau can see the enemy busy; enemy responding with what artillery
he has:--not much damage done, I should think, though a great deal of
noise; and for one day (Saturday, September 1st), our Diarist notes,
'Not safe to walk the streets this day.' But, in effect, the Siege,
as they call it,--which fell dead on the fifth day, and was never well
alive--consists mainly of menace and counter-menace, in the way of
bargain-making and negotiation;--and, so far as I can gather, that
superb Park of Austrian Artillery, though built into batteries, and
talked about in a bullying manner, was not fired from at all.

"Schmettau affects towards the enemy (and towards himself, I dare say)
an air of iron firmness; but internally has no such feeling,--'Calls a
Council of War,' and the like. Council of War, on sight of that King's
Missive, confirms him with one voice: 'Surely, surely, Excellenz; no
defence possible!' Which is a prophecy and a fulfilment, both in one.
Why Schmettau did not shoot forth a spy or two, to ascertain for him
What, or whether Nothing whatever, was passing outside Dresden? I never
understand! Beyond his own Walls, the world is a vacancy and blank to
Schmettau, and he seems content it should be so.

"SUNDAY, SEPTEMBER 2d. Though Schmettau's cannonade was very loud, and
had been so all night, divine service was held as usual, streets safe
again,--Austrians, I suppose, not firing with cannon. About 4 P.M.,
after a great deal of powder spent, General Maguire, stepping out on
Elbe Bridge, blows or beats Appeal, three times; 'wishes a moment's
conversation with his Excellency.' Granted at once; witnesses attending
on both sides. 'Defence is impossible; in the name of humanity,
consider!' urges Maguire. 'Defence to the last man of us is certain,'
answers Schmettau, from the teeth outwards;--but, in the end, engages to
put on paper, in case he, by extremity of ill-luck, have at any time
to accept terms, what his terms will inflexibly be. Upon which there is
'Armistice till To-morrow:' and Maguire, I doubt not, reports joyfully
on this feeling of the enemy's pulse. Zweibruck and Maguire are very
well aware of what is passing in these neighborhoods (General Wunsch
back at Wittenberg by forced marches; blew it open in an hour); and are
growing highly anxious that Dresden on any terms were theirs.

"MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 3d, The death-day of the Siege; an uncommonly busy
day,--though Armistice lasted perfect till 3 P.M., and soon came back
more perfect than ever. A Siege not killed by cannon, but by medical
industry. Let us note with brevity the successive symptoms and
appliances. About seven in the morning Maguire had his Messenger in
Dresden, 'Your Excellency's Paper ready?' 'Nearly ready,' answers
Schmettau; 'we will send it by a Messenger of our own.' And about eleven
of the day Maguire does get it;--the same Captain Kollas (whose name we
recollect) handing it in; and statue-like waiting Answer. 'Pshaw, this
will never do,' ejaculates Maguire; 'terms irrationally high!' Captain
Kollas 'knows nothing of what is IN the Paper; and is charged only to
bring a Written Answer from Excellenz.' Excellenz, before writing, 'will
have to consult with Durchlaucht;' can, however, as if confidentially
and from feelings of friendship, can assure you, Sir, on my honor, That
the Garrison will be delivered to the Croats, and every man of it put
to the sword. 'The Garrison will expect that (WIRD DAS ERWARTEN),' said
Kollas, statue-like; and withdrew, with the proper bow. [Tempelhof, iii.
211.] Something interesting to us in these Military diplomatic passages,
with their square-elbowed fashions, and politeness stiff as iron!

"Not till three of the afternoon does the Written Answer reach
Schmettau: 'Such Terms never could be accepted.'--'Good,' answers
Schmettau: 'To our last breath no others will be offered.' And commences
cannonading again, not very violently, but with the order, 'Go on, then,
night and day!'

"About 10 at night, General Guasco, a truculent kind of man, whom I have
met with up and down, but not admitted to memory, beats Appeal on
the Bridge: 'Inform the Commandant that there will now straightway 13
batteries of cannon, and 5 ditto of howitzers open on him, unless he
bethinks himself!' Which dreadful message is taken to Schmettau. 'Wish
the gentleman good-evening,' orders Schmettau; 'and say we will answer
with 100 guns.' Upon which Guasco vanishes;--but returns in not many
minutes, milder in tone; requests 'a sight of that Written Paper of
Terms again.' 'There it still is,' answers Schmettau, 'not altered, nor
ever shall be.' And there is Armistice again:--and the Siege, as turns
out, has fired its last shot; and is painfully expiring in paroxysms
of negotiation, which continue a good many hours. Schmettau strives
to understand clearly that his terms (of the King's own suggesting, as
Schmettau flatters himself) are accepted: nor does Durchlaucht take
upon him to refuse in any point; but he is strangely slow to sign, still
hoping to mend matters.

"Much hithering and thithering there was, till 4 next morning
(Durchlaucht has important news from Torgau, at that moment); till 11
next day; till 4 in the afternoon and later,--Guasco and others coming
with message after message, hasty and conciliatory: (Durchlaucht at such
a distance, his signature not yet come; but be patient; all is right,
upon my honor!' Very great hurry evident on the part of Guasco and
Company; but, nothing suspected by Schmettau. Till, dusk or darkness
threatening now to supervene, Maguire and Schmettau with respective
suites have a Conference on the Bridge,--'rain falling very heavy.'
Durchlaucht's signature, Maguire is astonished to say, has not yet come;
hut Maguire pledges his honor 'that all shall be kept without chicane;'
and adds 'what to some of us seemed not superfluous afterwards), 'I am
incapable of acting falsely or with chicane.' In fact, till 9 in the
evening there was no signature by Durchlaucht; but about 6, on such
pledge by Maguire of his hand and his honor, the Siege entirely gave
up the ghost; and Dresden belonged to Austria. Tuesday Evening, 4th
September, 1759; Sun just setting, could anybody see him for the rain.

"Schmettau had been over-hasty; what need had Schmettau of haste? The
terms had not yet got signature, perfection of settlement on every
point; nor were they at all well kept, when they did! Considerable
flurry, temporary blindness, needless hurry, and neglect of symptoms
and precautions, must be imputed to poor Schmettau; whose troubles began
from this moment, and went on increasing. The Austrians are already
besetting Elbe Bridge, rooting up the herring-bone balks; and
approaching our Block-house,--sooner than was expected. But that is
nothing. On opening the Pirna Gate to share it with the Austrians,
Friedrich's Spy (sooner had not been possible to the man) was waiting;
who handed Schmettau that Second Letter of Friedrich's, 'Courage; there
is relief on the road!' Poor Schmettau!"

What Captain Kollas and the Prussian Garrison thought of all this,
THEY were perhaps shy of saying, and we at such distance are not
informed,--except by one symptom: that, of Colonel Hoffman, Schmettau's
Second, whose indignation does become tragically evident. Hoffman, a
rugged Prussian veteran, is indignant at the Capitulation itself; doubly
and trebly indignant to find the Austrians on Elbe Bridge, busy raising
our Balks and Battery: "How is this Sir?" inquires he of Captain Sydow,
who is on guard at the Prussian end; "How dared you make this change,
without acquainting the Second in Command? Order out your men, and come
along with me to clear the Bridge again!" Sydow hesitates, haggles;
indignant Hoffman, growing loud as thunder, pulls out a pistol,
fatal-looking to disobedient Sydow; who calls to his men, or whose men
spring out uncalled; and shoot Hoffman down,--send two balls through
him, so that he died at 8 that night. With noise enough, then and
afterwards. Was drunk, said Schmettau's people. Friedrich answered, on
report of it: "I think as Hoffman did. If he was 'drunk,' it is pity the
Governor and all the Garrison had not been so, to have come to the same
judgment, as he." [P.S. in Autograph of Letter to Schmettau, "Waldau,
11th September, 1759" (Preuss, ii.; _Urkundenbuch,_ p. 45).] Friedrich's
unbearable feelings, of grief and indignation, in regard to all this
Dresden matter,--which are not expressed except coldly in business
form,--can be fancied by all readers. One of the most tragical bits
of ill-luck that ever befell him. A very sore stroke, in his present
condition; a signal loss and affront. And most of all, unbearable
to think how narrowly it has missed being a signal triumph;--missed
actually by a single hair's-breadth, which is as good as by a mile, or
by a thousand miles!

Soon after 9 o'clock that evening, Durchlaucht in person came rolling
through our battery and the herring-bone balks, to visit Electoral
Highness,--which was not quite the legal time either, Durchlaucht had
not been half an hour with Electoral Highness, when a breathless Courier
came in: "General Wunsch within ten miles [took Torgau in no time, as
Durchlaucht well knows, for a week past]; and will be here before we
sleep!" Durchlaucht plunged out, over the herring-bone balks again
(which many carpenters are busy lifting); and the Electoral Highnesses,
in like manner, hurry off to Toplitz that same night, about an hour
after. What a Tuesday Night! Poor Hoffman is dead at 8 o'clock; the
Saxon Royalties, since 11, are galloping for Pirna, for Toplitz;
Durchlaucht of Zweibruck we saw hurry off an hour before
them,--Capitulation signature not yet dry, and terms of it beginning to
be broken; and Wunsch reported to be within ten miles!

The Wunsch report is perfectly correct. Wunsch is at Grossenhayn this
evening; all in a fiery mood of swiftness, his people and he;--and
indeed it is, by chance, one of Wolfersdorf's impetuosities that has
sent the news so fast. Wunsch had been as swift with Torgau as he was
with Wittenberg: he blew out the poor Reichs Garrison there by instant
storm, and packed it off to Leipzig, under charge of "an Officer and
Trumpet:"--he had, greatly against his will, to rest two days there for
a few indispensable cannon from Magdeburg. Cannon once come, Wunsch,
burning for deliverance of Dresden, had again started at his swiftest,
"Monday, 3d September [death day of the Siege], very early."

"He is under 8,000; but he is determined to do it;--and would have done
it, think judges, half thinks Zweibruck himself: such a fire in that
Wunsch and his Corps as is very dangerous indeed. At 4 this morning,
Zweibruck heard of his being on march: 'numbers uncertain'--(numbers
seemingly not the important point,--blows any number of us about our
business!)--and since that moment Zweibruck has driven the capitulation
at such a pace; though the flurried Schmettau suspected nothing.

"Afternoon of TUESDAY, 4th, Wunsch, approaching Grossenhayn, had
detached Wolfersdorf with 100 light horse rightwards to Grodel, a
boating Village on Elbe shore, To seek news of Dresden; also to see if
boats are procurable for carrying our artillery up thither. At Grodel,
Wolfersdorf finds no boats that will avail: but certain boat-people, new
from Dresden, report that no capitulation had been published when they
left, but that it was understood to be going on. New spur to Wolfersdorf
and Wunsch. Wolfersdorf hears farther in this Village, That there are
some thirty Austrian horse in Grossenhayn:--'Possible these may escape
General Wunsch!' thinks Wolfersdorf; and decides to have them. Takes
thirty men of his own; orders the other seventy to hold rightward,
gather what intelligence is going, and follow more leisurely; and breaks
off for the Grossenhayn-Dresden Highway, to intercept those fellows.

"Getting to the highway, Wolfersdorf does see the fellows; sees
also,--with what degree of horror I do not know,--that there are
at least 100 of them against his 30! Horror will do nothing for
Wolfersdorf, nor are his other 70 now within reach. Putting a bold face
on the matter, he commands, Stentor-like, as if it were all a fact:
'Grenadiers, march; Dragoons, to right forwards, WHEEL; Hussars,
FORWARD: MARCH!'--and does terrifically dash forward with the thirty
Hussars, or last item of the invoice; leaving the others to follow. The
Austrians draw bridle with amazement; fire off their carbines; take to
their heels, and do not stop for more. Wolfersdorf captures 68 of them,
for behoof of Grossenhayn; and sends the remaining 32 galloping home.
[Tempelhof, iii. 214.] Who bring the above news to Durchlaucht of
Zweibruck: '12,000 of them, may it please your Durchlaucht; such the
accounts we had!'--Fancy poor Schmettau's feelings!

"On the morrow Dresden was roused from its sleep by loud firing and
battle, audible on the north side of the River: 'before daybreak, and
all day.' It is Wunsch impetuously busy in the woody countries there.
Durchlaucht had shot out Generals and Divisions, Brentano, Wehla,
this General and then that, to intercept Wunsch: these the fiery
Wunsch--almost as if they had been combustible material coming to quench
fire--repels and dashes back, in a wonderful manner, General after
General of them. And is lord of the field all day:--but cannot hear the
least word from Dresden; which is a surprising circumstance.

"In the afternoon Wunsch summons Maguire in the Neustadt: 'Will answer
you in two hours,' said Maguire. Wunsch thereupon is for attacking
their two Pontoon Elbe-Bridges; still resolute for Dresden,--and orders
Wolfersdorf on one of them, the Uebigau Bridge, who finds the enemy
lifting it at any rate, and makes them do it faster. But night is now
sinking; from Schmettau not a word or sign. 'Silence over there, all
day; not a single cannon to or from,' say Wunsch and Wolfersdorf to one
another. 'Schmettau must have capitulated!' conclude they, and withdraw
in the night-time, still thunderous if molested; bivouac at Grossenhayn,
after twenty-four hours of continual march and battle, not time even for
a snatch of food. [BERICHT VON DER ACTION DES GENERAL-MAJORS VON WUNSCH,
BEY REICHENBERG, DEN 5 SEPTEMBER, 1759 in Seyfarth, _Beylagen,_ ii.
606-608.]

"Resting at Grossenhayn, express reaches Wunsch from his Commandant at
Torgau: 'Kleefeld is come on me from Leipzig with 14,000; I cannot long
hold out, unless relieved.' Wunsch takes the road again; two marches,
each of twenty miles. Reaches Torgau late; takes post in the ruins of
the North Suburb, finds he must fight Kleefeld. Refreshes his men
'with a keg of wine per Company,' surely a judicious step; and sends to
Wolfersdorf, who has the rear-guard, 'Be here with me to-morrow at
10.' Wolfersdorf starts at 4, is here at 10: and Wunsch, having scanned
Kleefeld and his Position [a Position strong IF you are dexterous to
manoeuvre in it; capable of being ruinous if you are not,--part of
the Position of a bigger BATTLE OF TORGAU, which is coming],--flies at
Kleefeld and his 14,000 like a cat-o'-mountain; takes him on the left
flank:--Kleefeld and such overplus of thousands are standing a little to
west-and-south of Torgau, with the ENTEFANG [a desolate big reedy mere,
or PLACE OF DUCKS, still offering the idle Torgauer a melancholy sport
there] as a protection to their right; but with no evolution-talent, or
none in comparison to Wunsch's;--and accordingly are cut to pieces
by Wunsch, and blown to the winds, as their fellows have all been."
[HOFBERCHT VON DER AM 8 SEPTEMBER, 1759, BEY TORGAU, VORGEFALLENEN
ACTION: in Seyfarth, _ Beylagen,_ ii. 609, 610. Tempelhof, iii.
219-222.]

Wunsch, absolute Fate forbidding, could not save Dresden: but he is
here lord of the Northern regions again,--nothing but Leipzig now in
the enemy's hand;--and can await Finck, who is on march with a stronger
party to begin business here. It is reckoned, there are few more
brilliant little bits of Soldiering than this of Wunsch's. All the more,
as his men, for most part, were not Prussian, but miscellaneous Foreign
spirits of uncertain fealty: roving fellows, of a fighting turn,
attracted by Friedrich's fame, and under a Captain who had the art of
keeping them in tune. Wunsch has been soldiering, in a diligent though
dim miscellaneous way, these five-and-twenty years; fought in the old
Turk Wars, under disastrous Seckendorf,--Wunsch a poor young Wurtemberg
ensign, visibly busy there (1737-1739)) as was this same Schmettau, in
the character of staff-officer, far enough apart from Wunsch at that
time!--fought afterwards, in the Bavarian service, in the Dutch, at
Roucoux, at Lauffeld, again under disastrous people. Could never, under
such, find anything but subaltern work all this while; was glad to
serve, under the eye of Friedrich, as Colonel of a Free Corps; which he
has done with much diligence and growing distinction: till now, at the
long last, his chance does come; and he shows himself as a real General.
Possibly a high career lying ahead;--a man that may be very valuable
to Friedrich, who has now so few such left? Fate had again decided
otherwise for Wunsch; in what way will be seen before this Campaign
ends: "an infernal Campaign," according to Friedrich, "CETTE CAMPAGNE
INFERNALE."

Finck, whom Friedrich had just detached from Waldau (September 6th) with
a new 8 or 6,000, to command in chief in those parts, and, along with
Wunsch, put Dresden out of risk, as it were,--Finck does at least
join Wunsch, as we shall mention in a little. And these Two, with such
Wolfersdorfs and people under them, did prove capable of making front
against Reichsfolk in great overplus of number. Nor are farther SIEGES
of those Northern Garrisons, but recaptures of them, the news one
hears from Saxony henceforth;--only that Dresden is fatally gone.
Irrecoverably, as turned out, and in that unbearable manner. Here is the
concluding scene:--

DRESDEN, SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 8th; EXIT SCHMETTAU. "A thousand times
over, Schmettau must have asked himself, 'Why was I in such a hurry?
Without cause for it I, only Maguire having cause!'--The Capitulation
had been ended in a huddle, without signature: an unwise Capitulation;
and it was scandalously ill kept. Schmettau was not to have marched
till Monday, 10th,--six clear days for packing and preparing;--but,
practically, he has to make three serve him; and to go half-packed, or
not packed at all. Endless chicanes do arise, 'upon my honor!'--not
even the 800 wagons are ready for us; 'Can't your baggages go in boats,
then?' 'No, nor shall!' answers Schmettau, with blazing eyes, and heart
ready to burst; a Schmettau living all this while as in Purgatory, or
worse. Such bullyings from truculent Guasco, who is now without muzzle.
Capitulation, most imperfect in itself, is avowedly infringed: King's
Artillery,--which we had haggled for, and ended by 'hoping for,' to
Maguire that rainy evening: why were we in such a hurry, too, and blind
to Maguire's hurry!--King's Artillery, according to Durchlaucht of
Zweibruck, when he actually signed within the walls, is 'NICHT ACCORDIRT
(Not granted), except the Field part.' King's regimental furnishings,
all and sundry, were 'ACCORDIRT, and without visitation,'--but on second
thoughts, the Austrian Officials are of opinion there must really be
visitation, must be inspection. 'May not some of them belong to Polish
Majesty?' In which sad process of inspection there was incredible waste,
Schmettau protesting; and above half of the new uniforms were lost to
us. Our 80 pontoons, which were expressly bargained for, are brazenly
denied us: '20 of them are Saxon,' cry the Austrians: 'who knows if they
are not almost all Saxon,'--upon my honor! At this rate, only wait a day
or two, and fewer wagons than 800 will be needed! thinks Schmettau; and
consents to 18 river-boats; Boats in part, then; and let us march at
once. Accordingly,

"SATURDAY, 8th, at 5 in the morning, Schmettau, with goods and people,
does at last file out: across Elbe Bridge through the Neustadt;
Prussians five deep; a double rank of Austrians, ranged on each side, in
'espalier' they call it,--espalier with gaps in it every here and there,
to what purpose is soon evident. The march was so disposed (likewise for
a purpose) that, all along, there were one or two Companies of Prussian
Foot; and then in the interval, carriages, cannon, cavalry and hussars.
Schmettau's carriage is with the rear-guard, Madam Schmettau's well
in the van:--in two other carriages are two Prussian War-and-Domain
Ministers. [ANONYMOUS OF HAMBURG, III. 376.] 'Managers of Saxon
Finance,' these Two;--who will have to manage elsewhere than in
Dresden henceforth. Zinnow, Borck, they sit veritably there, with their
multiform Account Papers: of whom I know absolutely nothing,--except (if
anybody cared) that Zinnow, who 'died of apoplexy in June following,'
is probably of pursy red-nosed type; and that Borck, for certain, has
a very fine face and figure; delicacy, cheerful dignity, perfect
gentlemanhood in short, written on every feature of him; as painted by
Pesne, and engraved by Schmidt, for my accidental behoof. [_Fredericus
Wilhelmus Borck (Pesne pinxit,_ 1732; _Schmidt, sculptur Regis,
sculpsit, Berolini,_ 1764): an excellent Print and Portrait.] Curious
to think of that elaborate court-coat and flowing periwig, with this
specific Borck, 'old as the Devil' (whom I have had much trouble to
identify), forming visible part of this dismal Procession: the bright
eye of Borck not smiling as usual, but clouded, though impassive! But
that of Borck or his Limners is not the point.

"The Prussians have been divided into small sections, with a mass of
baggage-wagons and cavalry between every two. And no sooner is the mass
got in movement, than there rises from the Austrian part, and continues
all the way, loud invitation, 'Whosoever is a brave Saxon, a brave
Austrian, Reichsman, come to us! Gaps in the espalier, don't you
see!' And Schmettau, in the rear, with baggage and cavalry
intervening,--nobody can reach Schmettau. Here is a way of keeping your
bargain! The Prussian Officers struggle stoutly: but are bellowed at,
struck at, menaced by bayonet and bullet,--none of them shot, I think,
but a good several of them cut and wounded;--the Austrian Officers
themselves in passionate points behaving shamefully, 'Yes, shoot them
down, the (were it nothing else) heretic dogs;' and being throughout
evidently in a hot shivery frame of mind, forgetful of the laws. Seldom
was such a Procession; spite, rage and lawless revenge blazing out
more and more. On the whole, there deserted, through those gaps of
the espalier, about half of the whole Garrison. On Madam Schmettau's
hammercloth there sat, in the Schmettau livery, a hard-featured man,
recognizable by keen eyes as lately a Nailer, of the Nailer Guild here;
who had been a spy for Schmettau, and brought many persons into trouble:
him they tear down, and trample hither and thither,--at last, into some
Guard-house near by." [The Schmettau DIARIUM in ANONYMOUS OF HAMBURG,
iii. 364-376 (corrected chiefly from TEMPELHOF): Protest, and
Correspondence in consequence, is in Seyfarth, _Beylagen,_ ii. 611-621;
in _ Helden-Geschichte,_ &c. &c.]

Schmettau's protest against all this is vehement, solemnly
circumstantial: but, except in regard to the trampled Nailer (Zweibruck
on that point "heartily sorry for the insult to your Excellency's
livery; and here the man is, with a thousand apologies"), Schmettau got
no redress. Nor had Friedrich any, now or henceforth. Friedrich did at
once, more to testify his disgust than for any benefit, order Schmettau:
"Halt at Wittenberg, not at Magdeburg as was pretended to be bargained.
Dismiss your Escort of Austrians there; bid them home at once, and out
of your sight." Schmettau himself he ordered to Berlin, to idle waiting.
Never again employed Schmettau: for sixteen years that they lived
together, never saw his face more.

Schmettau's ill-fortune was much pitied, as surely it deserved to be,
by all men. About Friedrich's severity there was, and still occasionally
is, controversy held. Into which we shall not enter for Yes or for No.
"You are like the rest of them!" writes Friedrich to him; "when the
moment comes for showing firmness, you fail in it." ["Waldau, 10th
September, 1759:" in Preuss, ii. URKUNDEN. p. 44.] Friedrich expects of
others what all Soldiers profess,--and what is in fact the soul of all
nobleness in their trade,--but what only Friedrich himself, and a select
few, are in the habit of actually performing. Tried by the standard
of common practice, Schmettau is clearly absolvable; a broken veteran,
deserving almost tears. But that is not the standard which it will
be safe for a King of men to go by. Friedrich, I should say, would be
ordered by his Office, if Nature herself did not order him, to pitch
his ideal very high; and to be rather Rhadamanthine in judging about it.
Friedrich was never accused of over-generosity to the unfortunate among
his Captains.

After the War, Schmettau, his conduct still a theme of argument, was
reduced to the Invalid List: age now sixty-seven, but health and heart
still very fresh, as he pleaded; complaining that he could not live on
his retiring Pension of 300 pounds a year. "Be thankful you have not had
your head struck off by sentence of Court-Martial," answered Friedrich.
Schmettau, after some farther troubles from Court quarters, retired
to Brandenburg, and there lived silent, poor but honorable, for his
remaining fifteen years. Madam Schmettau came out very beautiful in
those bad circumstances: cheery, thrifty, full of loyal patience; a
constant sunshine to her poor man, whom she had preceded out of Dresden
in the way we saw. Schmettau was very quiet, still studious of War
matters; [See _Leben_ (by his Son, "Captain Schmettau;" a modest
intelligent Book), pp. 440-447.] "sent the King" once,--in 1772, while
Polish Prussia, and How it could be fortified, were the interesting
subject,--"a JOURNAL," which he had elaborated for himself, "OF THE
MARCHES OF KARL TWELFTH IN WEST PREUSSEN;" which was well received:
"Apparently the King not angry with me farther?" thought Schmettau. A
completely retired old man; studious, social,--the best men of the
Army still his friends and familiars:--nor, in his own mind, any mutiny
against his Chief; this also has its beauty in a human life, my friend.
So long as Madam Schmettau lived, it was well; after her death,
not well, dark rather, and growing darker: and in about three years
Schmettau followed (27th October, 1775), whither that good soul had
gone. The elder Brother--who was a distinguished Academician, as well
as Feldmarschall and Negotiator--had died at Berlin, in Voltaire's time,
1751. Each of those Schmettaus had a Son, in the Prussian Army, who
wrote Books, or each a short Book, still worth reading. [_Bavarian War
of 1778,_ by the Feldmarschall's Son; ad this _Leben_ we have just been
citing, by the Lieutenant-General's.] But we must return.

On the very morrow, September 5th, Daun heard of the glorious success
at Dresden; had not expected it till about the 10th at soonest. From
Triebel he sends the news at gallop to Lieberose and Soltikof: "Rejoice
with us, Excellenz: did not I predict it? Silesia and Saxony both are
ours; fruits chiefly of your noble successes. Oh, continue them a very
little!" "Umph!" answers Soltikof, not with much enthusiasm: "Send us
meal steadily; and gain you, Excellenz's self, some noble success!"
Friedrich did not hear of it for almost a week later; not till Monday,
10th,--as a certain small Anecdote would of itself indicate.

Sunday Evening, 9th September, General Finck, with his new 6,000,
hastening on to join Wunsch for relief of Dresden, had got to
Grossenhayn; and was putting up his tents, when the Outposts brought him
in an Austrian Officer, who had come with a Trumpeter inquiring for
the General. The Austrian Officer "is in quest of proper lodgings for
General Schmettau and Garrison [fancy Finck's sudden stare!];--last
night they lodged at Gross-Dobritz, tolerably to their mind: but
the question for the Escort is, Where to lodge this night, if your
Excellency could advise me?" "Herr, I will advise you to go back to
Gross-Dobritz on the instant," answers Finck grimly; "I shall be obliged
to make you and your Trumpet prisoners, otherwise!" Exit Austrian
Officer. That same evening, too, Captain Kollas, carrying Schmettau's
sad news to the King, calls on Finck in passing; gives dismal details
of the Capitulation and the Austrian way of keeping it; filling Finck's
mind with sorrowful indignation. [Tempelhof, iii. 237.]

Finck--let us add here, though in date it belongs a little
elsewhere--pushes on, not the less, to join Wunsch at Torgau; joins
Wunsch, straightway recaptures Leipzig, garrison prisoners (September
13th): recaptures all those northwestern garrisons,--multitudinous
Reichsfolk trying, once, to fight him, in an amazingly loud, but
otherwise helpless way ("ACTION OF KORBITZ" they call it); cannonading
far and wide all day, and manoeuvring about, here bitten in upon,
there trying to bite, over many leagues of Country; principally under
Haddick's leading; [HOFBERICHT VON DER AM 21 SEPTEMBER BEY KORBITZ
(in Meissen Country, south of Elbe; Krogis too is a Village in this
wide-spread "Action") VORGEFALLENEN ACTION (Seyfarth, _Beylagen,_
ii. 621-630). Tempelhof, iii. 248, 258.] who saw good to draw off
Dresden-ward next day, and leave Finck master in those regions. To
Daun's sad astonishment,--in a moment of crisis,--as we shall hear
farther on! So that Saxony is not yet conquered to Daun; Saxony, no, nor
indeed will be:--but Dresden is. Friedrich never could recover Dresden;
though he hoped, and at intervals tried hard, for a long while to come.




Chapter VI.--PRINCE HENRI MAKES A MARCH OF FIFTY HOURS; THE RUSSIANS
CANNOT FIND LODGING IN SILESIA.

The eyes of all had been bent on Dresden latterly; and there had
occurred a great deal of detaching thitherward, and of marching there
and thence, as we have partly seen. And the end is, Dresden, and to
appearance Saxony along with it, is Daun's. Has not Daun good reason now
to be proud of the cunctatory method? Never did his game stand better;
and all has been gained at other people's expense. Daun has not played
one trump card; it is those obliging Russians that have played all
the trumps, and reduced the Enemy to nothing. Only continue that wise
course,--and cart meal, with your whole strength, for the Russians!--

Safe behind the pools of Lieberose, Friedrich between them and Berlin,
lie those dear Russians; extending, Daun and they, like an impassable
military dike, with spurs of Outposts and cunningly devised Detachments,
far and wide,--from beyond Bober or utmost Crossen on the east, to
Hoyerswerda in Elbe Country on the west;--dike of eighty miles long,
and in some eastern parts of almost eighty broad; so elaborate is Daun's
detaching quality, in cases of moment. "The King's broken Army on
one side of us," calculates Daun; "Prince Henri's on the other;
incommunicative they; reduced to isolation, powerless either or both
of them against such odds. They shall wait there, please Heaven, till
Saxony be quite finished. Zweibruck, and our Detachments and Maguires,
let them finish Saxony, while Soltikof keeps the King busy. Saxony
finished, how will either Prince or King attempt to recover it! After
which, Silesia for us;--and we shall then be near our Magazines withal,
and this severe stress of carting will abate or cease." In fact, these
seem sound calculations: Friedrich is 24,000; Henri 38,000; the military
dike is, of Austrians 75,000, of Russians and Austrians together
120,000. Daun may fairly calculate on succeeding beautifully this Year:
Saxony his altogether; and in Silesia some Glogau or strong Town taken,
and Russians and Austrians wintering together in that Country.

If only Daun do not TOO much spare his trump cards! But there is such
a thing as excess on that side too: and perhaps it is even the more
ruinous kind,--and is certainly the more despised by good judges,
though the multitude of bad may notice it less. Daun is unwearied in
his vigilantes, in his infinite cartings of provision for himself
and Soltikof,--long chains of Magazines, big and little, at Guben,
at Gorlitz, at Bautzen, Zittau, Friedland; and does, aided by French
Montalembert, all that man can to keep those dear stupid Russians in
tune.

Daun's problem of carting provisions, and guarding his multifarious
posts, and sources of meal and defence, is not without its difficulties.
Especially with a Prince Henri opposite; who has a superlative
manoeuvring talent of his own, and an industry not inferior to Daun's
in that way. Accordingly, ever since August 11th-13th, when Daun moved
northward to Triebel, and Henri shot out detachments parallel to
him, "to secure the Bober and our right flank, and try to regain
communication with the King,"--still more, ever since August 22d, when
Daun undertook that onerous cartage of meal for Soltikof as well as
self, the manoeuvring and mutual fencing and parrying, between Henri and
him, has been getting livelier and livelier. Fain would Daun secure his
numerous Roads and Magazines; assiduously does Henri threaten him
in these points, and try all means to regain communication with
his Brother. Daun has Magazines and interests everywhere; Henri is
everywhere diligent to act on them.

Daun in person, ever since Kunersdorf time, has been at Triebel; Henri
moved to Sagan after him, but has left a lieutenant at Schmottseifen,
as Daun has at Mark-Lissa:--here are still new planets, and secondary
ditto, with revolving moons. In short, it is two interpenetrating solar
systems, gyrating, osculating and colliding, over a space of
several thousand square miles,--with an intricacy, with an embroiled
abstruseness Ptolemean or more! Which indeed the soldier who would know
his business--(and not knowing it, is not he of all solecisms in this
world the most flagrant?)--ought to study, out of Tempelhof and the
Books; but which, except in its results, no other reader could endure.
The result we will make a point of gathering: carefully riddled down,
there are withal in the details five or six little passages which have
some shadow of interest to us; these let us note, and carefully omit the
rest:--

OF FOUQUET AT LANDSHUT. "Fouquet was twice attacked at Landshut; but
made a lucky figure both times. Attack first was by Deville: attack
second by Harsch. Early in July, not long after Friedrich had left for
Schmottseifen, rash Deville (a rash creature, and then again a laggard,
swift where he should be slow, and VICE VERSA) again made trial on
Landshut and Fouquet; but was beautifully dealt with; taken in rear,
in flank, or I forget how taken, but sent galloping through the Passes
again, with a loss of many Prisoners, most of his furnitures, and all
his presence of mind: whom Daun thereupon summoned out of those parts,
'Hitherward to Mark-Lissa with your Corps; leave Fouquet alone!'
[HOFBERICHT VON DEN UNTERNEHMUNGEN DES FOUQUETSCHEN CORPS, IM JULIUS
1759: in Seyfarth, Beylagen, ii. 582-586.]

"After which, Fouquet, things being altogether quiet round him, was
summoned, with most part of his force, to Schmottseifen; left General
Goltz (a man we have met before) to guard Landshut; and was in fair
hopes of proving helpful to Prince Henri,--when Harsch [Harsch by
himself this time, not Harsch and Deville as usual] thought here was his
opportunity; and came with a great apparatus, as if to swallow Landshut
whole. So that Fouquet had to hurry off reinforcements thither; and at
length to go himself, leaving Stutterheim in his stead at Schmottseifen.
Goltz, however, with his small handful, stood well to his work. And
there fell out sharp fencings at Landshut:--especially one violent
attack on our outposts; the Austrians quite triumphant; till 'a couple
of cannon open on them from the next Hill,'--till some violent Werner
or other charge in upon them with Prussian Hussars;--a desperate tussle,
that special one of Werner's; not only sabres flashing furiously on both
sides, but butts of pistols and blows on the face: [Tempelhof, iii. 233:
31st August.] till, in short, Harsch finds he can make nothing of it,
and has taken himself away, before Fouquet come." This Goltz, here
playing Anti-Harsch, is the Goltz who, with Winterfeld, Schmettau and
others, was in that melancholy Zittau march, of the Prince of Prussia's,
in 1757: it was Goltz by whom the King sent his finishing compliment,
"You deserve, all of you, to be tried by Court-Martial, and to lose
your heads!" Goltz is mainly concerned with Fouquet and Silesia, in late
times; and we shall hear of him once again. Fouquet did not return to
Schmottseifen; nor was molested again in Landshut this year, though he
soon had to detach, for the King's use, part of his Landshut force, and
had other Silesian business which fell to him.

FORTRESS OF PEITZ. The poor Fortress of Peitz was taken again;--do
readers remember it, "on the day of Zorndorf," last year? "This year,
a fortnight after Kunersdorf, the same old Half-pay Gentleman with his
Five-and-forty Invalids have again been set adrift, 'with the honors
of war,' poor old creatures; lest by possibility they afflict the
dear Russians and our meal-carts up yonder. [Tempelhof, iii. 231: 27th
August.] I will forget who took Peitz: perhaps Haddick, of whom we have
lately heard so much? He was captor of Berlin in 1757, did the Inroad on
Berlin that year,--and produced Rossbach shortly after. Peitz, if he did
Peitz, was Haddick's last success in the world. Haddick has been most
industrious, 'guarding the Russian flank,'--standing between the King
and it, during that Soltikof march to Mullrose, to Lieberose; but
that once done, and the King settled at Waldau, Haddick was ordered to
Saxony, against Wunsch and Finck:--and readers know already what he made
of these Two in the 'Action at Korbitz, September 21st,'--and shall hear
soon what befell Haddick himself in consequence."

COLONEL HORDT IS CAPTURED. "It was in that final marching of Soltikof
to Lieberose that a distinguished Ex-Swede, Colonel Hordt, of the Free
Corps HORDT, was taken prisoner. At Trebatsch; hanging on Soltikof's
right flank on that occasion. It was not Haddick, it was a swarm of
Cossacks who laid Hordt fast; his horse having gone to the girths in
a bog. [_Memoires du Comte de Hordt_ (a Berlin, 1789), ii. 53-58
(not dated or intelligible there): in Tempelhof (iii. 235, 236)
clear account, "Trebatsch, September 4th."] Hordt, an Ex-Swede of
distinction,--a Royalist Exile, on whose head the Swedes have set a
price (had gone into 'Brahe's Plot,' years since, Plot on behalf of the
poor Swedish King, which cost Brahe his life),--Hordt now might have
fared ill, had not Friedrich been emphatic, 'Touch a hair of him,
retaliation follows on the instant!' He was carried to Petersburg; 'lay
twenty-six months and three days' in solitary durance there; and we may
hear a word from him again."

ZIETHEN ALMOST CAPTURED. "Prince Henri, in the last days of August,
marched to Sagan in person; [Tempelhof, iii. 231: 29th August.] Ziethen
along with him; multifariously manoeuvring 'to regain communication with
the King.' Of course, with no want of counter-manoeuvring, of vigilant
outposts, cunningly devised detachments and assiduous small measures on
the part of Daun. Who, one day, had determined on a more considerable
thing; that of cutting out Ziethen from the Sagan neighborhood. And
would have done it, they say,--had not he been too cunctatory. September
2d, Ziethen, who is posted in the little town of Sorau, had very nearly
been cut off. In Sorau, westward, Daun-ward, of Sagan a short day's
march: there sat Ziethen, conscious of nothing particular,--with Daun
secretly marching on him; Daun in person, from the west, and two others
from the north and from the south, who are to be simultaneous on Sorau
and the Zietheners. A well-laid scheme; likely to have finished Ziethen
satisfactorily, who sat there aware of nothing. But it all miswent:
Daun, on the road, noticed some trifling phenomenon (Prussian party
of horse, or the like), which convinced his cautious mind that all was
found out; that probably a whole Prussian Army, instead of a Ziethen
only, was waiting at Sorau; upon which Daun turned home again, sorry
that he could not turn the other two as well. The other two were
stronger than Ziethen, could they have come upon him by surprise; or
have caught him before he got through a certain Pass, or bit of bad
ground, with his baggage. But Ziethen, by some accident, or by his own
patrols, got notice; loaded his baggage instantly; and was through the
Pass, or half through it, and in a condition to give stroke for stroke
with interest, when his enemies came up. Nothing could be done upon
Ziethen; who marched on, he and all his properties, safe to Sagan that
night,--owing to Daun's over-caution, and to Ziethen's own activity and
luck." [Tempelhof, iii. 233.]

All this was prior to the loss of Dresden. During the crisis of that,
when everybody was bestirring himself, Prince Henri made extraordinary
exertions: "Much depends on me; all on me!" sighed Henri. A cautious
little man; but not incapable of risking, in the crisis of a game for
life and death. Friedrich and he are wedged asunder by that dike of
Russians and Austrians, which goes from Bober river eastward, post
after post, to Hoyerswerda westward, eighty miles along the
Lausitz-Brandenburg Frontier, rooting itself through the Lausitz
into Bohemia, and the sources of its meal. Friedrich and he cannot
communicate except by spies ("the first JAGER," or regular express "from
the King, arrived September 13th" [Ib. iii. 207.]): but both are of one
mind; both are on one problem, "What is to be done with that impassable
dike?"--and co-operate sympathetically without communicating. What
follows bears date AFTER the loss of Dresden, but while Henri still knew
only of the siege,--that JAGER of the 13th first brought him news of the
loss.

"A day or two after Ziethen's adventure, Henri quits Sagan, to move
southward for a stroke at the Bohemian-Lausitz magazines; a stroke, and
series of strokes. SEPTEMBER 8th, Ziethen and (in Fouquet's absence at
Landshut) Stutterheim are pushed forward into the Zittau Country; first
of all upon Friedland,--the Zittau Friedland, for there are Friedlands
many! SEPTEMBER 9th, Stutterheim summons Friedland, gets it; gets the
bit of magazine there; and next day hastens on to Zittau. Is refused
surrender of Zittau; learns, however, that the magazine has been mostly
set on wheels again, and is a stage forward on the road to Bohemia;
whitherward Stutterheim, quitting Zittau as too tedious, hastens after
it, and next day catches it, or the unburnt remains of it. A successful
Stutterheim. Nor is Ziethen idle in the mean while; Ziethen and others;
whom no Deville or Austrian Party thinks itself strong enough to meddle
with, Prince Henri being so near.

"Here is a pretty tempest in the heart of our Bohemian meal-conduit!
Continue that, and what becomes of Soltikof and me? Daun is off from
Triebel Country to this dangerous scene; indignantly cashiers Deville,
'Why did not you attack these Ziethen people? Had not you 10,000, Sir?'
Cashiers poor Deville for not attacking;--does not himself attack: but
carts away the important Gorlitz magazine, to Bautzen, which is the
still more important one; sits down on the lid of that (according to
wont); shoots out O'Donnell (an Irish gentleman, Deville's successor),
and takes every precaution. Prince Henri, in presence of O'Donnell,
coalesces again; walks into Gorlitz; encamps there, on the Landskron
and other Heights (Moys Hill one of them, poor Winterfeld's Hill!),--and
watches a little how matters will turn, and whether Daun, severely
vigilant from Bautzen, seated on the lid of his magazine, will not
perhaps rise."

First and last, Daun in this business has tried several things; but
there was pretty much always, and emphatically there now is, only one
thing that could be effectual: To attack Prince Henri, and abolish him
from those countries;--as surely might have been possible, with twice
his strength at your disposal?--This, though sometimes he seemed to be
thinking of such a thing, Daun never would try: for which the subsequent
FACTS, and all good judges, were and are inexorably severe on Daun.
Certain it is, no rashness could have better spilt Daun's game than did
this extreme caution.




DAUN, SOLTIKOF AND COMPANY AGAIN HAVE A COLLOQUY (Bautzen, September
15th); AFTER WHICH EVERYBODY STARTS ON HIS SPECIAL COURSE OF ACTION.

Soltikof's disgust at this new movement of Daun's was great and
indignant. "Instead of going at the King, and getting some victory for
himself, he has gone to Bautzen, and sat down on his meal-bags! Meal?
Is it to be a mere fighting for meal? I will march to-morrow for Poland,
for Preussen, and find plenty of meal!" And would have gone, they say,
had not Mercury, in the shape of Montalembert with his most zealous
rhetoric, intervened; and prevailed with difficulty. "One hour of
personal interview with Excellency Daun," urges Montalembert; "one
more!" "No," answers Soltikof.--"Alas, then, send your messenger!" To
which last expedient Soltikof does assent, and despatches Romanzof on
the errand.

SEPTEMBER 15th, at Bautzen, at an early hour, there is meeting
accordingly; not Romanzof, Soltikof's messenger, alone, but Zweibruck
in person, Daun in person; and most earnest council is held. "A noble
Russian gentleman sees how my hands are bound," pleads Daun. "Will not
Excellency Soltikof, who disdains idleness, go himself upon Silesia,
upon Glogau for instance, and grant me a few days?" "No," answers
Romanzof; "Excellency Soltikof by himself will not. Let Austria
furnish Siege-Artillery; daily meal I need not speak of; 10,000 fresh
Auxiliaries beyond those we have: on these terms Excellency Soltikof
will perhaps try it; on lower terms, positively not." "Well then, yes!"
answers Daun, not without qualms of mind. Daun has a horror at weakening
himself to that extent; but what can he do? "General Campitelli, with the
10,000, let him march this night, then; join with General Loudon where
you please to order: Excellency Soltikof shall see that in every point
I conform." [Tempelhof, iii. 247-249.]--An important meeting to us, this
at Bautzen; and breaks up the dead-lock into three or more divergent
courses of activity; which it will now behoove us to follow, with the
best brevity attainable. "Bautzen, Saturday, 15th September, early in
the morning," that is the date of the important Colloquy. And precisely
eight-and-forty hours before, "on Thursday, 13th, about 10 A.M.", in
the western Environs of Quebec, there has fallen out an Event, quite
otherwise important in the History of Mankind! Of which readers shall
have some notice at a time more convenient.--

Romanzof returning with such answer, Soltikof straightway gathers
himself, September 15th-16th, and gets on march. To Friedrich's joy; who
hopes it may be homeward; waits two days at Waldau, for the Yes or
No. On the second day, alas, it is No: "Going for Silesia, I perceive;
thither, by a wide sweep northward, which they think will be safer!"
Upon which Friedrich also rises; follows, with another kind of speed
than Soltikof's; and, by one of his swift clutchings, lays hold of
Sagan, which he, if Soltikof has not, sees to be a key-point in this
operation. Easy for Soltikof to have seized this key-point, key of
the real road to Glogau; easy for Loudon and the new 10,000 to have
rendezvoused there: but nobody has thought of doing it. A few Croats
were in the place, who could make no debate.

From Sagan Friedrich and Henri are at length in free communication;
Sagan to the Landskron at Gorlitz is some fifty miles of country, now
fallen vacant. From Henri, from Fouquet (the dangers of Landshut being
over), Friedrich is getting what reinforcement they can spare (September
20th-24th); will then push forward again, industriously sticking to the
flanks of Soltikof, thrusting out stumbling-blocks, making his march
very uncomfortable.

Strange to say, from Sagan, while waiting two days for these
reinforcements, there starts suddenly to view, suddenly for Friedrich
and us, an incipient Negotiation about Peace! Actual Proposal that way
(or as good as actual, so Voltaire thinks it), on the part of Choiseul
and France; but as yet in Voltaire's name only, by a sure though a
backstairs channel, of his discovering. Of which, and of the much
farther corresponding that did actually follow on it, we purpose to say
something elsewhere, at a better time. Meanwhile Voltaire's announcement
of it to the King has just come in, through a fair and high Hand: how
Friedrich receives it, what Friedrich's inner feeling is, and has been
for a fortnight past--Here are some private utterances of his, throwing
a straggle of light on those points:--


FOUR LETTERS OF FRIEDRICH'S (10th-24th September).

No. 1. TO PRINCE FERDINAND (at Berlin). Poor little Ferdinand, the
King's Brother, fallen into bad health, has retired from the Wars, and
gone to Berlin; much an object of anxiety to the King, who diligently
corresponds with the dear little man,--giving earnest medical advices,
and getting Berlin news in return.

"WALDAU, 10th September, 1759.

"Since my last Letter, Dresden has capitulated,--the very day while
Wunsch was beating Maguire at The Barns (north side of Dresden,
September 5th) day AFTER the capitulation]. Wunsch went back to Torgau,
which St. Andre, with 14,000 Reichs-people under him, was for retaking;
him too Wunsch beat, took all his tents, kettles, haversacks and
utensils, 300 prisoners, six cannon and some standards. Finck is uniting
with Wunsch; they will march on the Prince of Zweibruck, and retake
Dresden [hopes always, for a year and more, to have Dresden back very
soon]. I trust before long to get all these people gathered round
Dresden, and our own Country rid of them: that, I take it, will be the
end of the Campaign.

"Many compliments to the Prince of Wurtemberg [wounded at Kunersdorf],
and to all our wounded Generals: I hope Seidlitz is now out of danger:
that bleeding fit (EBULLITION DE SANG) will cure him of the cramp in his
jaw, and of his colics; and as he is in bed, he won't take cold. I hope
the viper-broth will do you infinite good; be assiduous in patching your
constitution, while there is yet some fine weather left: I dread the
winter for you; take a great deal of care against cold. I have still a
couple of cruel months ahead of me before ending this Campaign.
Within that time, there will be, God knows what upshot." [_OEuvres de
Frederic,_ xxvi. 544.]--This is "September 10th:" the day of Captain
Kollas's arrival with his bad Dresden news; Daun and Soltikof profoundly
quiet for three days more.

No. 2. TO THE DUCHESS OF SACHSEN-GOTHA (at Gotha). Voltaire has enclosed
his Peace-Proposal to that Serene Lady, always a friend of Friedrich's
and his; to whom Friedrich, directly on receipt of it, makes answer:--

"SAGAN, 22d September, 1759.

"MADAM,--I receive on all occasions proofs of your goodness, to which I
am as sensible as a chivalrous man can be. Certainly it is not through
your hands, Madam, that my Correspondence with V. [with Voltaire, if
one durst write it in full] ought to be made to pass! Nevertheless, in
present circumstances, I will presume to beg that you would forward to
him the Answer here enclosed, on which I put no Address. The difficulty
of transmitting Letters has made me choose my Brother," Ferdinand, at
Berlin, "to have this conveyed to your hand.

"If I gave bridle to my feelings, now would be the moment for developing
them; but in these critical times I judge it better not; and will
restrict myself to simple assurances of--" F.

No. 3. TO VOLTAIRE, at the Delices (so her Serene Highness will address
it). Here is part of the Enclosure to "V." Friedrich is all for Peace;
but keeps on his guard with such an Ambassador, and writes in a proud,
light, only half-believing style:--

"SAGAN, 22d September, 1759.

"The Duchess of Sachsen-Gotha sends me your Letter. I never received
your packet of the 29th: communications all interrupted here; with much
trouble I get this passed on to you, if it is happy enough to pass.

"My position is not so desperate as my enemies give out. I expect to
finish my Campaign tolerably; my courage is not sunk:--it appears,
however, there is talk of Peace. All I can say of positive on this
article is, That I have honor for ten; and that, whatever misfortune
befall me, I feel myself incapable of doing anything to wound, the least
in the world, this principle,--which is so sensitive and delicate for
one who thinks like a gentleman (PENSE EN PREUX CHEVALIER); and so
little regarded by rascally politicians, who think like tradesmen.

"I know nothing of what you have been telling me about [your backstairs
channels, your Duc de Choiseul and his humors]: but for making Peace
there are two conditions which I never will depart from: 1. To make
it conjointly with my faithful Allies [Hessen and England; I have no
other]; 2. To make it honorable and glorious. Observe you, I have still
honor remaining; I will preserve that, at the price of my blood.

"If your people want Peace, let them propose nothing to me which
contradicts the delicacy of my sentiments. I am in the convulsions
of military operations; I do as the gamblers who are in ill-luck, and
obstinately set themselves against Fortune. I have forced her to return
to me, more than once, like a fickle mistress, when she had run away. My
opponents are such foolish people, in the end I bid fair to catch some
advantage over them: but, happen whatsoever his Sacred Majesty Chance
may please, I don't disturb myself about it. Up to this point, I have a
clear conscience in regard to the misfortunes that have come to me.
As to you, the Battle of Minden, that of Cadiz" (Boscawen VERSUS De la
Clue; Toulon Fleet running out, and caught by the English, as we saw),
these things perhaps, "and the loss of Canada, are arguments capable
of restoring reason to the French, who had got confused by the Austrian
hellebore.

"This is my way of thinking. You do not find me made of rose-water: but
Henri Quatre, Louis Quatorze,--my present enemies even, whom I could
cite [Maria Theresa, twenty years ago, when your Belleisle set out to
cut her in Four],--were of no softer temper either. Had I been born a
private man, I would yield everything for the love of Peace; but one
has to take the tone of one's position. This is all I can tell you
at present. In three or four weeks the ways of correspondence will be
freer.--F." [_OEuvres de Frederic,_ xxiii. 60, 61.]

No. 4. TO PRINCE FERDINAND. Two days later: has got on foot again,--end
of his first march upon Soltikof again:--

"BAUNAU, 24th September, 1759.

"Thank you for the news you send of the wounded Officers," Wurtemberg,
Seidlitz and the others. "You may well suppose that in the pass things
are at, I am not without cares, inquietudes, anxieties; it is the
frightfulest crisis I have had in my life. This is the moment for dying
unless one conquer. Daun and my Brother Henri are marching side by side
[not exactly!]. It is possible enough all these Armies may assemble
hereabouts, and that a general Battle may decide our fortune and
the Peace. Take care of your health, dear Brother.--F." [_OEuvres de
Frederic,_ xxvi. 545.]

Baunau is on Silesian ground, as indeed Sagan itself is; at Baunau
Friedrich already, just on arriving, has done a fine move on Soltikof,
and surprisingly flung the toll-gate in Soltikof's face. As we shall
see by and by;--and likewise that Prince Henri, who emerges to-morrow
morning (September 25th), has not been "marching side by side with
Daun," but at a pretty distance from that gentleman!--

Soltikof is a man of his word; otherwise one suspects he already saw his
Siege of Glogau to be impossible. Russians are not very skilful at the
War-minuet: fancy what it will be dancing to such a partner! Friedrich,
finding they are for Glogau, whisks across the Oder, gets there before
them: "No Glogau for you!" They stand agape for some time; then think
"Well then Breslau!" Friedrich again whisks across from them, farther
up, and is again ahead of them when they cross: "No Breslau either!" In
effect, it is hopeless; and we may leave the two manoeuvring in those
waste parts, astride of Oder, or on the eastern bank of it, till a
fitter opportunity; and attend to Henri, who is now the article in risk.

Zweibruck's report of himself, on that day of the general Colloquy, was
not in the way of complaint, like that of the Russians, though there did
remain difficulties. "Dresden gloriously ours; Maguire Governor there,
and everything secure; upon my honor. But in the northwest part, those
Fincks and Wunsches, Excellenz?"--And the actual truth is, Wunsch
has taken Leipzig, day before yesterday (September 13th), as Daun
sorrowfully knows, by news come in overnight. And six days hence
(September 21st), Finck and Wunsch together will do their "ACTION OF
KORBITZ," and be sending Haddick a bad road! These things Zweibruck
knows only in part; but past experience gives him ominous presentiment,
as it may well do; and he thinks decidedly: "Excellenz, more Austrian
troops are indispensable there; in fact, your Excellenz's self, were
that possible; which one feels it is not, in the presence of these
Russians!"

Russians and Reichsfolk, these are a pair of thumbscrews on both thumbs
of Daun; screwing the cunctation out of him; painfully intimating: "Get
rid of this Prince Henri; you must, you must!" And, in the course of the
next eight days Daun has actually girt himself to this great enterprise.
Goaded on, I could guess, by the "Action of Korbitz" (done on Friday,
thirty hours ago); the news of which, and that Haddick, instead of
extinguishing Finck, is retreating from him upon Dresden,--what a piece
of news! thinks Daun: "You, Zweibruck, Haddick, Maguire and Company,
you are 36,000 in Saxony; Finck has not 12,000 in the field: How is
this?"--and indignantly dismisses Haddick altogether: "Go, Sir, and
attend to your health!" [Tempelhof, iii. 276, 258-261.] News poignantly
astonishing to Daun, as would seem;--like an ox-goad in the lazy rear of
Daun. Certain it is, Daun had marched out to Gorlitz in collected form;
and, on Saturday afternoon, SEPTEMBER 22d is personally on the Heights
(not Moys Hill, I should judge, but other points of vision), taking
earnest survey of Prince Henri's position on the Landskron there.
"To-morrow morning we attack that Camp," thinks Daun; "storm Prince
Henri and it: be rid of him, at any price!" [Ib. iii. 253-256 (for
the March now ensuing): iii. 228-234, 241-247 (for Henri's anterior
movements).]

"To-morrow morning," yes:--but this afternoon, and earlier, Prince
Henri has formed a great resolution, his plans all laid, everything in
readiness; and it is not here you will find Prince Henri to-morrow. This
is his famous March of Fifty Hours, this that we are now come to; which
deserves all our attention,--and all Daun's much more! Prince Henri was
habitually a man cautious in War; not aggressive, like his Brother, but
defensive, frugal of risks, and averse to the lion-springs usual with
some people; though capable of them, too, in the hour of need. Military
men are full of wonder at the bold scheme he now fell upon; and at his
style of executing it. Hardly was Daun gone home to his meditations
on the storm of the Landskron to-morrow, and tattoo beaten in Prince
Henri's Camp there, when, at 8 that Saturday evening, issuing
softly, with a minimum of noise, in the proper marching columns,
baggage-columns, Henri altogether quitted this Camp; and vanished like
a dream. Into the Night; men and goods, every item:--who shall say
whitherward? Leaving only a few light people to keep up the watch-fires
and sentry-cries, for behoof of Daun! Let readers here, who are in the
secret, watch him a little from afar.

Straight northward goes Prince Henri, down Neisse Valley, 20 miles
or so, to Rothenburg; in columns several-fold, with much delicate
arranging, which was punctually followed: and in the course of to-morrow
Prince Henri is bivouacked, for a short rest of three hours,--hidden in
unknown space, 20 miles from Daun, when Daun comes marching up to storm
him on the Landskron! Gone veritably; but whitherward Daun cannot form
the least guess. Daun can only keep his men under arms there, all day;
while his scouts gallop far and wide,--bringing in this false guess and
the other; and at length returning with the eminently false one, misled
by some of Henri's baggage-columns, which have to go many routes, That
the Prince is on march for Glogau:--"Gone northeast; that way went his
wagons; these we saw with our eyes." "Northeast? Yes, to Glogau possibly
enough," thinks Daun: "Or may not he, cunning as he is and full of
feints, intend a stroke on Bautzen, in my absence?"--and hastens thither
again, and sits down on the Magazine-lid, glad to find nothing wrong
there.

This is all that Daun hears of Henri for the next four days. Plenty of
bad news from Saxony in these four days: the Finck-Haddick Action of
Korbitz, a dismal certainty before one started,--and Haddick on his
road to some Watering Place by this time! But no trace of Henri farther;
since that of the wagons wending northeast. "Gone to Glogau, to his
Brother: no use in pushing him, or trying to molest him there!" thinks
Daun; and waits, in stagnant humor, chewing the cud of bitter enough
thoughts, till confirmation of that guess arrive:--as it never will in
this world! Read an important Note:--

"To northward of Bautzen forty miles, and to westward forty miles,
the country is all Daun's; only towards Glogau, with the Russians and
Friedrich thereabouts, does it become disputable, or offer Prince Henri
any chance. Nevertheless it is not to Glogau, it is far the reverse,
that the nimble Henri has gone. Resting himself at Rothenburg 'three
hours' (speed is of all things the vitalest), Prince Henri starts again,
SUNDAY afternoon, straight westward this time. Marches, with his best
swiftness, with his best arrangements, through many sleeping
Villages, to Klitten, not a wakeful one: a march of 18 miles from
Rothenburg;--direct for the Saxon side of things, instead of the
Silesian, as Daun had made sure.

"At Klitten, MONDAY morning, bivouac again, for a few hours,--'has no
Camp, only waits three hours,' is Archenholtz's phrase: but I suppose
the meaning is, Waits till the several Columns, by their calculated
routes, have all got together; and till the latest in arriving has had
'three hours' of rest,--the earliest having perhaps gone on march again,
in the interim? There are 20 miles farther, still straight west, to
Hoyerswerda, where the outmost Austrian Division is: 'Forward towards
that; let us astonish General Wehla and his 3,000, and our March
is over!' All this too Prince Henri manages; never anything more
consummate, more astonishing to Wehla and his Master.

"Wehla and Brentano, readers perhaps remember them busy, from the Pirna
side, at the late Siege of Dresden. Siege gloriously done, Wehla
was ordered to Hoyerswerda, on the northwest frontier; Brentano to a
different point in that neighborhood; where Brentano escaped ruin, and
shall not be mentioned; but Wehla suddenly found it, and will require
a word. Wehla, of all people on the War-theatre, had been the least
expecting disturbance. He is on the remotest western flank; to westward
of him nothing but Torgau and the Finck-Wunsch people, from whom is
small likelihood of danger: from the eastern what danger can there be? A
Letter of Dauns, some days ago, had expressly informed him that, to all
appearance, there was none.

"And now suddenly, on the Tuesday morning, What is this? Prussians
reported to be visible in the Woods! 'Impossible!' answered Wehla;--did
get ready, however, what he could; Croat Regiments, pieces of Artillery
behind the Elster River and on good points; laboring more and more
diligently, as the news proved true. But all his efforts were to no
purpose. General Lentulus with his Prussians (the mute Swiss Lentulus,
whom we sometimes meet), who has the Vanguard this day, comes streaming
out of the woods across the obstacles; cannonades Wehla both in front
and rear; entirely swallows Wehla and Corps: 600 killed; the General
himself, with 28 Field-Officers, and of subalterns and privates 1,785,
falling prisoners to us; and the remainder scattered on the winds,
galloping each his own road towards covert and a new form of life.
Wehla is eaten, in this manner, Tuesday, September 25th:--metaphorically
speaking, the March of Fifty Hours ends in a comfortable twofold
meal (military-cannibal, as well as of common culinary meat), and in
well-deserved rest." [Tempelhof, iii. 255, 256; Seyfarth, _Beylagen;_
&c.]

The turning-point of the Campaign is reckoned to be this March of
Henri's; one of the most extraordinary on record. Prince Henri had a
very fast March INTO these Silesian-Lausitz Countries, early in July,
[Seyfarth, ii. 545.] and another very fast, from Bautzen, to intersect
with Schmottseifen, in the end of July: but these were as nothing
compared with the present. Tempelhof, the excellent solid man,--but who
puts all things, big and little, on the same level of detail, and has
unparalleled methods of arranging (what he reckons to be "arranging"),
and no vestige of index,--is distressingly obscure on this grand
Incident; but at length, on compulsion, does yield clear account.
[Tempelhof, iii. 253-258.] In Archenholtz it is not DATED at all;
who merely says as follows: "Most extraordinary march ever made; went
through 50 miles of Country wholly in the Enemy's possession; lasted 56
hours, in which long period there was no camp pitched, and only twice a
rest of three hours allowed the troops. During the other fifty hours the
march, day and night, continually proceeded. Ended (NO date) in surprise
of General Wehla at Hoyerswerda, cutting up 600 of his soldiers,
and taking 1,800 prisoners. Kalkreuth, since so famous," in the
Anti-Napoleon Wars, "was the Prince's Adjutant." [Archenholtz, i. 426.]

This is probably Prince Henri's cleverest feat,--though he did a great
many of clever; and his Brother used to say, glancing towards him,
"There is but one of us that never committed a mistake." A highly
ingenious dexterous little man in affairs of War, sharp as needles,
vehement but cautious; though of abstruse temper, thin-skinned,
capricious, and giving his Brother a great deal of trouble with his
jealousies and shrewish whims. By this last consummate little operation
he has astonished Daun as much as anybody ever did; shorn his elaborate
tissue of cunctations into ruin and collapse at one stroke; and in
effect, as turns out, wrecked his campaign for this Year.

Daun finds there is now no hope of Saxony, unless he himself at once
proceed thither. At once thither;--and leave Glogau and the Russians
to their luck,--which in such case, what is it like to be? Probably, to
Daun's own view, ominous enough; but he has no alternative. To this pass
has the March of Fifty Hours brought us. There is such a thing as being
too cunctatory, is not there, your Excellency? Every mortal, and more
especially every Feldmarschall, ought to strike the iron while it
is hot. The remainder of this Campaign, we will hope, can be made
intelligible in a more summary manner.




FRIEDRICH MANAGES (September 24th-October 24th) TO GET THE RUSSIANS SENT
HOME; AND HIMSELF FALLS LAMED WITH GOUT.

Friedrich's manoeuvres against Soltikof,--every reader is prepared to
hear that Soltikof was rendered futile by them: and none but military
readers could take delight in the details. Two beautiful short-cuts he
made upon Soltikof; pulled him up both times in mid career, as with hard
check-bit. The first time was at Zobelwitz: September 24th, Friedrich
cut across from Sagan, which is string to bow of the Russian march;
posted himself on the Heights of Zobelwitz, of Baunau, Milkau (at Baunau
Friedrich will write a LETTER this night, if readers bethink themselves;
Milkau is a place he may remember for rain-deluges, in the First
Silesian War [Supra, p. 323; ib. vol. vii. p. 311.]): "Let the Russians,
if they now dare, try the Pass of Neustadtel here!" A fortunate hour,
when he got upon this ground. Quartermaster-General Stoffel, our old
Custrin acquaintance, is found marking out a Camp with a view to that
Pass of Neustadtel; [Tempelhof, iii. 293; Retzow, ii. 163.] is, greatly
astonished to find the Prussian Army emerge on him there; and at once
vanishes, with his Hussar-Cossack retinues. "September 24th," it is
while Prince Henri was on the last moiety of his March of Fifty Hours.
This severe twitch flung Soltikof quite out from Glogau,--was like
to fling him home altogether, had it not been for Montalembert's
eloquence;--did fling him across the Oder. Where, again thanks to
Montalembert, he was circling on with an eye to Breslau, when Friedrich,
by the diameter, suddenly laid bridges, crossed at Koben, and again
brought Soltikof to halt, as by turnpike suddenly shut: "Must pay first;
must beat us first!"

These things had raised Friedrich's spirits not a little. Getting on
the Heights of Zobelwitz, he was heard to exclaim, "This is a lucky
day; worth more to me than a battle with victory." [Retzow, ii. 163.]
Astonishing how he blazed out again, quite into his old pride and
effulgence, after this, says Retzow. Had been so meek, so humbled,
and even condescended to ask advice or opinion from some about him.
Especially "from two Captains," says the Opposition Retzow, whose heads
were nearly turned by this sunburst from on high. Captain Marquart and
another,--I believe, he did employ them about Routes and marking of
Camps, which Retzow calls consulting: a King fallen tragically scarce of
persons to consult; all his Winterfelds, Schwerins, Keiths and Council
of Peers now vanished, and nothing but some intelligent-looking Captain
Marquart, or the like, to consult:--of which Retzow, in his splenetic
Opposition humor, does not see the tragedy, but rather the comedy: how
the poor Captains found their favor to be temporary, conditional, and
had to collapse again. One of them wrote an "ESSAY on the COUP-D'OEIL
MILITAIRE," over which Retzow pretends to weep. This was Friedrich's
marginal Note upon the MS., when submitted to his gracious perusal: "You
(ER) will do better to acquire the Art of marking Camps than to write
upon the Military Stroke of Eye." Beautifully written too, says Retzow;
but what, in the eyes of this King, is beautiful writing, to knowing
your business well? No friend he to writing, unless you have got
something really special, and urgent to be written.

Friedrich crassed the Oder twice. Took Soltikof on both sides of the
Oder, cut him out of this fond expectation, then of that; led him,
we perceive, a bad life. Latterly the scene was on the right bank;
Sophienthal, Koben, Herrnstadt and other poor places,--on that big
eastern elbow, where Oder takes his final bend, or farewell of Poland.
Ground, naturally, of some interest to Friedrich: ground to us unknown;
but known to Friedrich as the ground where Karl XII. gave Schulenburg
his beating, ["Near Guhrau" (while chasing August the Strong and him out
of Poland), "12th October, 1704:" vague account of it, dateless, and as
good as placeless, in Voltaire (_Charles Douse,_ liv. iii.), _OEuvres,_
xxx. 142-145.] which produced the "beautiful retreat" of Schulenburg.
The old Feldmarschall Schulenburg whom we used to hear of once,--whose
Nephew, a pipeclayed little gentleman, was well known to Friedrich and
us.

For the rest, I do not think he feels this out-manoeuvring of the
Russians very hard work. Already, from Zobelwitz Country, 25th
September, day of Henri at Hoyerswerda, Friedrich had written to
Fouquet: "With 21,000 your beaten and maltreated Servant has hindered
an Army of 50,000 from attacking him, and compelled them to retire on
Neusatz!" Evidently much risen in hope; and Henri's fine news not yet
come to hand. By degrees, Soltikof, rendered futile, got very
angry; especially when Daun had to go for Saxony. "Meal was becoming
impossible, at any rate," whimpers Daun: "O Excellency, do but consider,
with the nobleness natural to you! Our Court will cheerfully furnish
money, instead of meal."--"Money? My people cannot eat money!" growled
Soltikof, getting more and more angry; threatening daily to march for
Posen and his own meal-stores. What a time of it has Montalembert, has
the melancholy Loudon, with temper so hot!

At Sophienthal, October 10th, Friedrich falls ill of gout;--absolutely
lamed; for three weeks cannot stir from his room. Happily the outer
problem is becoming easier and easier; almost bringing its own solution.
At Sophienthal the lame Friedrich takes to writing about CHARLES XII.
AND HIS MILITARY CHARACTER,--not a very illuminative Piece, on the
first perusal, but I intend to read it again; [REFLEXIONS SUR LES TALENS
MILITAIRES ET SUR LE CARACTERE DE CHARLES XII. (_OEuvres de Frederic,_
vii. 69-88).]--which at least helps him to pass the time. Soltikof, more
and more straitened, meal itself running low, gets angrier and angrier.
His treatment of the Country, Montalembert rather encouraging, is
described as "horrible." One day he takes the whim, whim or little more,
of seizing Herrnstadt; a small Town, between the Two Armies, where the
Prussians have a Free Battalion. The Prussian Battalion resists;
drives Soltikof's people back. "Never mind," think they: "a place of no
importance to us; and Excellency Soltikof has ridden else-whither." By
ill-luck, in the afternoon, Excellency Soltikof happened to mention the
place again. Hearing that the Prussians still have it, Soltikof mounts
into a rage; summons the place, with answer still No; thereupon orders
instant bombardment of it, fiery storms of grenadoes for it; and has the
satisfaction of utterly burning poor Herrnstadt; the Prussian Free-Corps
still continuing obstinate. It was Soltikof's last act in those parts,
and betokens a sulphurous state of humor.

Next morning (October 24th), he took the road for Posen, and marched
bodily home. [Tempelhof, iii. 299, 291-300 (general account, abundantly
minute).] Home verily, in spite of Montalembert and all men. "And for
me, what orders has Excellency?" Loudon had anxiously inquired, on the
eve of that event. "None whatever!" answered Excellency: "Do your own
pleasure; go whithersoever seems good to you." And Loudon had to take
a wide sweep round, by Kalish, through the western parts of Poland; and
get home to the Troppau-Teschen Country as he best could.

By Kalish, by Czenstochow, Cracow, poor Loudon had to go: a dismal march
of 300 miles or more,--waited on latterly by Fouquet, with Werner, Goltz
and others, on the Silesian Border; whom Friedrich had ordered thither
for such end. Whom Loudon skilfully avoided to fight; having already, by
desertion and by hardships, lost half his men on the road. Glad enough
to get home and under roof, with his 20,000 gone to 10,000; and to make
bargain with Fouquet: "Truce, then, through Winter; neither of us
to meddle with the other, unless after a fortnight's warning given."
[Tempelhof, iii. 328-331.] NOVEMBER 1st, a month before this, the King,
carried on a litter by his soldiers, had quitted Sophienthal; and,
crossing the River by Koben, got to Glogau. [Rodenbeck, i. 396.] The
greater part of his force, 13,000 under Hulsen, he had immediately sent
on for Saxony; he himself intending to wait recovery in Glogau, with
this Silesian wing of the business happily brought to finis for the
present.

On the Saxon side, too, affairs are in such a course that the King
can be patient at Glogau till he get well. Everything is prosperous
in Saxony since that March on Hoyerswerda; Henri, with his Fincks and
Wunsches, beautifully posted in the Meissen-Torgau region; no dislodging
of him, let Daun, with his big mass of forces, try as he may. Daun,
through the month of October, is in various Camps, in Schilda last of
all: Henri successively in two; in Strehla for some ten days; then in
Torgau for about three weeks, carefully intrenched, [Tempelhof. iii.
276, 281, 284 (Henri in Strehla, October 4th-17th; thence to Torgau: 22d
October, Daun "quits his Camp of Belgern" for that of Schilda, which was
his last in those parts).]--where traces of him will turn up (not too
opportunely) next year. Daun, from whatever Camp, goes laboring on this
side and on that; on every side the deft Henri is as sharp as needles;
nothing to be made of him by the cunning movements and contrivances of
Daun. Very fine manoeuvring it was, especially on Henri's part; a charm
to the soldier mind;--given minutely in Tempelhof, and capable of
being followed (if you have Maps and Patience) into the last details.
Instructive really to the soldier;--but must be, almost all, omitted
here. One beautiful slap to Duke d'Ahremberg (a poor old friend of
Daun's and ours) we will remember: "Action of Pretsch" they call
it; defeat, almost capture of poor D'Ahremberg; who had been sent to
dislodge the Prince, by threatening his supplies, and had wheeled,
accordingly, eastward, wide away; but, to his astonishment, found, after
a march or two, Three select Prussian Corps emerging on him, by front,
by rear, by flank, with Horse-artillery (quasi-miraculous) bursting out
on hill-tops, too,--and, in short, nothing for it but to retreat,
or indeed to run, in a considerably ruinous style: poor D'Ahremberg!
[Seyfarth (_Beylagen,_ ii. 634-637), "HOFBERICHT VON DER AM 29 OCTOBER,
1759, BEY MEURO [chiefly BEY PRETSCH] VORGEFALLENEN ACTION;" ib. ii. 543
n.] On the whole, Daun is reduced to a panting condition; and knows not
what to do. His plans were intrinsically bad, says Tempelhof; without
beating Henri in battle, which he cannot bring himself to attempt,
he, in all probability, will, were it only for difficulties of the
commissariat kind, have to fall back Dresden-ward, and altogether take
himself away. [Tempelhof, iii. 287-289.]

After this sad slap at Pretsch, Daun paused for consideration; took
to palisading himself to an extraordinary degree, slashing the Schilda
Forests almost into ruin for this end; and otherwise sat absolutely
quiet. Little to be done but take care of oneself. Daun knows withal of
Hulsen's impending advent with the Silesian 13,000;--November 2d, Hulsen
is actually at Muskau, and his 13,000 magnified by rumor to 20,000.
Hearing of which, Daun takes the road (November 4th); quits his
gloriously palisaded Camp of Schilda; feels that retreat on Dresden, or
even home to Bohemia altogether, is the one course left.

And now, the important Bautzen Colloquy of SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER
15th, having here brought its three or more Courses of Activity to a
pause,--we will glance at the far more important THURSDAY, 13th, other
side the Ocean:--

ABOVE QUEBEC, NIGHT OF SEPTEMBER 12th-13th, In profound silence, on the
stream of the St. Lawrence far away, a notable adventure is going on.
Wolfe, from two points well above Quebec ("As a last shift, we will try
that way"), with about 5,000 men, is silently descending in boats; with
purpose to climb the Heights somewhere on this side the City, and be
in upon it, if Fate will. An enterprise of almost sublime nature;
very great, if it can succeed. The cliffs all beset to his left hand,
Montcalm in person guarding Quebec with his main strength.

Wolfe silently descends; mind made up; thoughts hushed quiet into one
great thought; in the ripple of the perpetual waters, under the grim
cliffs and the eternal stars. Conversing with his people, he was heard
to recite some passages of Gray's ELEGY, lately come out to those
parts; of which, says an ear-witness, he expressed his admiration to an
enthusiastic degree: "Ah, these are tones of the Eternal Melodies, are
not they? A man might thank Heaven had he such a gift; almost as WE
might for succeeding here, Gentlemen!" [Professor Robison, then a Naval
Junior, in the boat along with Wolfe, afterwards a well-known Professor
of Natural Philosophy at Edinburgh, was often heard, by persons whom I
have heard again, to repeat this Anecdote. See Playfair, BIOGRAPHICAL
ACCOUNT OF PROFESSOR ROBISON,--in _Transactions_ of Royal Society of
Edinburgh, vii. 495 et seq.] Next morning (Thursday, 13th September,
1759), Wolfe, with his 5,000, is found to have scrambled up by some
woody Neck in the heights, which was not quite precipitous; has trailed
one cannon with him, the seamen busy bringing up another; and by 10 of
the clock stands ranked (really somewhat in the Friedrich way, though
on a small scale); ready at all points for Montcalm, but refusing to be
over-ready.

Montcalm, on first hearing of him, had made haste: "OUI, JE LES VOIS OU
ILS NE DOIVENT PAS ETRE; JE VAIS LES E'CRASER (to smash them)!" said
he, by way of keeping his people in heart. And marches up, beautifully
skilful, neglecting none of his advantages. Has numerous Canadian
sharpshooters, preliminary Indians in the bushes, with a provoking fire:
"Steady!" orders Wolfe; "from you not one shot till they are within
thirty yards." And Montcalm, volleying and advancing, can get no
response, more than from Druidic stones; till at thirty yards the stones
become vocal,--and continue so at a dreadful rate; and, in a space
of seventeen minutes, have blown Montcalm's regulars, and the gallant
Montcalm himself, and their second in command, and their third, into
ruin and destruction. In about seven minutes more the agony was done;
"English falling on with the bayonet, Highlanders with the claymore;"
fierce pursuit, rout total:--and Quebec and Canada as good as finished.
The thing is yet well known to every Englishman; [The military details
of it seem to be very ill known (witness Colonel Beatson's otherwise
rather careful Pamphlet, THE PLAINS OF ABRAHAM, written quite lately,
which we are soon to cite farther); and they would well deserve
describing in the SEYFARTH-BEYLAGEN, or even in the TEMPELHOF
way,--could an English Officer, on the spot as this Colonel was, be
found to do it!--Details are in Beatson (quite another "Beatson"),
_Naval and Military History,_ ii. 300-308; in _Gentleman's Magazine_
for 1759, the Despatches and particulars: see also Walpole, _George the
Second,_ iii. 217-222.] and how Wolfe himself died in it, his beautiful
death.

Truly a bit of right soldierhood, this Wolfe. Manages his small
resources in a consummate manner; invents, contrives, attempts and
re-attempts, irrepressible by difficulty or discouragement, How could a
Friedrich himself have managed this Quebec in a more artistic way? The
small Battle itself, 5,000 to a side, and such odds of Savagery and
Canadians, reminds you of one of Friedrich's: wise arrangements; exact
foresight, preparation corresponding; caution with audacity; inflexible
discipline, silent till its time come, and then blazing out as we see.
The prettiest soldiering I have heard of among the English for several
generations. Amherst, Commander-in-chief, is diligently noosing, and
tying up, the French military settlements, Niagara, Ticonderoga; Canada
all round: but this is the heart or windpipe of it; keep this firm, and,
in the circumstances, Canada is yours.

Colonel Reatson, in his recent Pamphlet, THE PLAINS OF ABRAHAM,--which,
especially on the military side, is distressingly ignorant and shallow,
though NOT intentionally incorrect anywhere,--gives Extracts from a
Letter of Montcalm's ("Quebec, 24th August, 1759"), which is highly
worth reading, had we room. It predicts to a hair's-breadth, not only
the way "M. Wolfe, if he understands his trade, will take to beat and
ruin me if we meet in fight;" but also,--with a sagacity singular to
look at, in the years 1775-1777, and perhaps still more in the years
1860-1863,--what will be the consequences to those unruly English,
Colonial and other. "If he beat me here, France has lost America
utterly," thinks Montcalm: "Yes;--and one's only consolation is, In ten
years farther, America will be in revolt against England!" Montcalm's
style of writing is not exemplary; but his power of faithful
observation, his sagacity, and talent of prophecy are so considerable,
we are tempted to give the IPSISSIMA VERBA of his long Letter in regard
to those two points,--the rather as it seems to have fallen much out of
sight in our day:--

MONTCALM TO A COUSIN IN FRANCE.

"CAMP BEFORE QUEBEC, 24th August, 1759.

"MONSIEUR ET CHER COUSIN,--Here I am, for more than three months past,
at handgrips with M. Wolfe; who ceases not day or night to bombard
Quebec, with a fury which is almost unexampled in the Siege of a Place
one intends to retain after taking it."... Will never take it in that
way, however, by attacking from the River or south shore; only ruins us,
but does not enrich himself. Not an inch nearer his object than he was
three months ago; and in one month more the equinoctial storms will
blow his Fleet and him away.--Quebec, then, and the preservation of
the Colony, you think, must be as good as safe?" Alas, the fact is
far otherwise. The capture of Quebec depends on what we call a
stroke-of-hand--[But let us take to the Original now, for Prediction
First]:--

"La prise de Quebec depend d'un coup de main. Les Anglais sont maitres
de la riviere: ils n'ont qu'a effectuer une descente sur la rive ou
cette Ville, sans fortifications et sans defense, est situee. Les voila
en etat de me presenter la bataille; que je ne pourrais plus refuser,
et que je ne devrais pas gagner. M. Wolfe, en effet, s'il entend son
metier, n'a qu'a essuyer le premier feu, venir ensuite a grands pas
sur mon armee, faire a bout portant sa decharge; mes Canadiens, sans
discipline, sourds a la voix du tambour et des instrumens militaires,
deranges pa cette escarre, ne sauront plus reprendre leurs rangs. Ils
sont d'ailleurs sans baionettes pour repondre a celles de l'ennemi: il
ne leur reste qu'a fuir,--et me voila battu sans ressource. [This is a
curiously exact Prediction! I won't survive, however; defeat here, in
this stage of our affairs, means loss of America altogether:] il est
des situations ou il ne reste plus a un General que de perir avec
honneur.... Mes sentimens sont francais, et ils le seront jusque dans le
tombeau, si dans le tombeau on est encore quelque chose.

"Je me consolerai du moins de ma defaite, et de la perte de la Colonie,
par l'intime persuasion ou je suis [Prediction Second, which is still
more curious], que cette defaite vaudra, un jour, a ma Patrie plus
qu'une victoire; et que le vainqueur, en s'agrandissant, trouvera un
tombeau dans son agrandissement meme.

"Ce que j'avance ici, mon cher Cousin, vous paraitra un paradoxe: mais
un moment de reflexion politique, un coup d'oeil sur la situation des
choses en Amerique, et la verite de mon opinion brillera dans tout son
jour. [Nobody will obey, unless necessity compel him: VOILA LES HOMMES;
GENE of any kind a nuisance to them; and of all men in the world LES
ANGLAIS are the most impatient of obeying anybody.] Mais si ce sont-la
les Anglais de l'Europe, c'est encore plus les Anglais d'Amerique.
Une grande partie de ces Colons sont les enfans de ces hommes qui
s'expatrierent dans ces temps de trouble ou l'ancienne Angleterre, en
proie aux divisions, etait attaquee dans ses privileges et droits; et
allerent chercher en Amerique une terre ou ils pussent vivre et mourir
libres et presque independants:--et ces enfans n'ont pas degenere des
sentimens republicains de leurs peres. D'autres sont des hommes
ennemis de tout frein, de tout assujetissement, que le gouvernement y
a transportes pour leurs crimes, D'autres, enfin, sont un ramas de
differentes nations de l'Europe, qui tiennent tres-peu a l'ancienne
Angleterre par le coeur et le sentiment; tous, en general, ne ce
soucient gueres du Roi ni du Parlement d'Angleterre.

"Je les connais bien,--non sur des rapports etrangers, mais sur
des correspondances et des informations secretes, que j'ai moi-meme
menagees; et dont, un jour, si Dieu me prete vie, je pourrai faire usage
a l'avantage de ma Patrie. Pour surcroit de bonheur pour eux, tous ces
Colons sont parvenues, dans un etat tres-florissant; ils sont nombreux
et riches:--ils recueillent dans le sein de leur patrie toutes les
necessites de la vie. L'ancienne Angleterre a ete assez sotte, et assez
dupe, pour leur laisser etablir chez eux les arts, les metiers, les
manufactures:--c'est a dire, qu'elle leur a laisse briser la chaine
de besoins qui les liait, qui les attachait a elle, et qui les fait
dependants. Aussi toutes ces Colonies Anglaises auraient-elles depuis
longtemps secoue le joug, chaque province aurait forme une petite
republique independante, si la crainte de voir les Francais a leur Porte
n'avait ete un frein qui les avait retenu. Maitres pour maitres, ils ont
pefere leurs compatriotes aux etrangers; prenant cependant pour maxime
de n'obeir que le moins qu'ils pourraient. Mais que le Canada vint a
etre conquis, et que les Canadiens et ces Colons ne fussent plus
qu'une seul peuple,--et la premiere occasion ou l'ancienne Angleterre
semblerait toucher a leurs interets, croyez-vous, mon cher Cousin, que
ces Colons obeiront? Et qu'auraient-ils a craindre en se revoltant?...
Je suis si sur de ce que j'ecris, que je ne donnerais pas dix ans apres
la conquete du Canada pour en voir l'accomplissement.

"Voila ce que, comme Francais, me console aujourd'hui du danger
imminent, que court ma Patrie, de voir cette Colonie perdue pour elle."
[In Beatson, Lieutenant-Colonel R.E., _The Plains of Abraham; Notes
original and selected_ (Gibraltar, Garrison Library Press, 1858), pp.
38 et seq.] Extract from _"Lettres de M. le Marquis de Montcalm a MM. De
Berryer et De la Mole:_ 1757-1759 (Londres, 1777),"--which is not in the
British-Museum Library, on applying; and seems to be a forgotten Book.
(NOTE OF FIRST EDITION, 1865.)

"A Copy is in the BOSTON ATHENAEUM LIBRARY, New-England: it is a
Pamphlet rather than a Book; contains Two Letters to Berryer MINISTRE
DE LA MARINE, besides this to Mole the Cousin: Publisher is the noted J.
Almon,--in French and English." (From _Boston Sunday Courier,_ of 19th
April, 1868, where this Letter is reproduced.)

In the Temple Library, London, I have since found a Copy: and, on
strict survey, am obliged to pronounce the whole Pamphlet a
FORGERY,--especially the Two Letters to "Berryer MINISTER OF MARINE;"
who was not yet Minister of anything, nor thought of as likely to be,
for many months after the date of these Letters addressed to him as
such! Internal evidence too, were such at all wanted, is abundant in
these BERRYER Letters; which are of gross and almost stupid structure in
comparison to the MOLE one. As this latter has already got into various
Books, and been argued of in Parliaments and high places (Lord Shelburne
asserting it to be spurious, Lord Mansfield to be genuine: REPORT OF
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES in _Gentleman's Magazine_ for NOVEMBER and for
DECEMBER, 1777, pp. 515, 560),--it may be allowed to continue here
in the CONDEMNED state. Forger, probably, some Ex-Canadian, or other
American ROYALIST, anxious to do the Insurgent Party and their British
Apologists an ill turn, in that critical year;--had shot off his
Pamphlet to voracious Almon; who prints without preface or criticism,
and even without correcting the press. (NOTE OF JULY, 1868.)

Montcalm had been in the Belleisle RETREAT FROM PRAG (December, 1742);
in the terrible EXILLES Business (July, 1747), where the Chevalier de
Belleisle and 4 or 5,000 lost their lives in about an hour. Captain
Cook was at Quebec, Master in the Royal Navy; "sounding the River,
and putting down buoys." Bougainville, another famous Navigator, was
Aide-de-Camp of Montcalm. There have been far-sounding Epics built
together on less basis than lies ready here, in this CAPTURE OF
QUEBEC;--which itself, as the Decision that America is to be English and
not French, is surely an Epoch in World-History! Montcalm was 48 when
he perished; Wolfe 33. Montcalm's skull is in the Ursulines Convent
at Quebec,--shown to the idly curious to this day. [Lieutenant-Colonel
Beatson, pp. 28, 15.]

It was on October 17th,--while Friedrich lay at Sophienthal, lamed
of gout, and Soltikof had privately fixed for home (went that day
week),--that this glorious bit of news reached England. It was only
three days after that other, bad and almost hopeless news, from the same
quarter; news of poor Wolfe's Repulse, on the other or eastern side
of Quebec, July 31st, known to us already, not known in England till
October 14th. Heightened by such contrast, the news filled all men with
a strange mixture of emotions. "The incidents of Dramatic Fiction,"
says one who was sharer in it, "could not have been conducted with more
address to lead an audience from despondency to sudden exultation, than
Accident had here prepared to excite the passions of a whole People.
They despaired; they triumphed; and they wept,--for Wolfe had fallen in
the hour of victory! Joy, grief, curiosity, astonishment, were
painted in every countenance: the more they inquired, the higher
their admiration rose. Not an incident but was heroic and affecting."
[Walpole, iii. 219.] America ours; but the noble Wolfe now not!

What Pitt himself said of these things, we do not much hear. On the
meeting of his Parliament, about a month hence, his Speech, somebody
having risen to congratulate and eulogize him, is still recognizably of
royal quality, if we evoke it from the Walpole Notes. Very modest, very
noble, true; and with fine pieties and magnanimities delicately audible
in it: "Not a week all Summer but has been a crisis, in which I have
not known whether I should not be torn to pieces, instead of being
commended, as now by the Honorable Member. The hand of Divine
Providence; the more a man is versed in business, the more he everywhere
traces that!... Success has given us unanimity, not unanimity success.
For my own poor share, I could not have dared as I have done, except in
these times. Other Ministers have hoped as well, but have not been so
circumstanced to dare so much.... I think the stone almost rolled to the
top of the hill; but let us have a care; it may rebound, and hideously
drag us down with it again." [Ib. iii. 225; Thackeray, i. 446.]

The essential truth, moreover, is, Pitt has become King of England;
so lucky has poor England, in its hour of crisis, again been. And
the difference between an England guided by some kind of Friedrich
(temporary Friedrich, absolute, though of insecure tenure), and by a
Newcastle and the Clack of Tongues, is very great! But for Pitt,
there had been no Wolfe, no Amherst; Duke Ferdinand had been the Royal
Highness of Cumberland,--and all things going round him in St. Vitus, at
their old rate. This man is a King, for the time being,--King really of
the Friedrich type;--and rules, Friedrich himself not more despotically,
where need is. Pitt's War-Offices, Admiralties, were not of themselves
quick-going entities; but Pitt made them go. Slow-paced Lords in Office
have remonstrated, on more than one occasion: "Impossible, Sir; these
things cannot be got ready at the time you order!" "My Lord, they
indispensably must," Pitt would answer (a man always reverent of coming
facts, knowing how inexorable they are); and if the Negative continued
obstinate in argument, he has been known to add: "My Lord, to the King's
service, it is a fixed necessity of time. Unless the time is kept, I
will impeach your Lordship!" Your Lordship's head will come to lie at
your Lordship's feet! Figure a poor Duke of Newcastle, listening to such
a thing;--and knowing that Pitt will do it; and that he can, such is his
favor with universal England;--and trembling and obeying. War-requisites
for land and for sea are got ready with a Prussian punctuality,--at what
multiple of the Prussian expense, is a smaller question for Pitt.

It is about eighteen months ago that Pownal, Governor of New England,
a kind of half-military person, not without sound sense, though sadly
intricate of utterance,--of whom Pitt, just entering on Office, has, I
suppose, asked an opinion on America, as men do of Learned Counsel on
an impending Lawsuit of magnitude,--had answered, in his long-winded,
intertwisted, nearly inextricable way, to the effect, "Sir, I incline to
fear, on the whole, that the Action will NOT lie,--that, on the
whole, the French will eat America from us in spite of our teeth." [In
THACKERAY, ii. 421-452, Pownal's intricate REPORT (his "DISCOURSE," or
whatever he calls it, "ON THE DEFENCE OF THE INLAND FRONTIERS," his &c.
&c.), of date "15th January, 1758."] January 15th, 1758, that is the
Pownal Opinion-of-Counsel;--and on September 13th, 1759, this is what
we have practically come to. And on September 7th, 1760: within twelve
months more,--Amherst, descending the Rapids from Ticonderoga side, and
two other little Armies, ascending from Quebec and Louisburg, to meet
him at Montreal, have proved punctual almost to an hour; and are in
condition to extinguish, by triple pressure (or what we call noosing),
the French Governor-General in Montreal, a Monsieur de Vaudreuil, and
his Montreal and his Canada altogether; and send the French bodily home
out of those Continents. [Capitulation between Amherst and Vaudreuil
("Montreal, 8th September, 1760"), in 55 Articles: in BEATSON, iii.
274-283.] Which may dispense us from speaking farther on the subject.

From the Madras region, too, from India and outrageous Lally, the news
are good. Early in Spring last, poor Lally,--a man of endless talent and
courage, but of dreadfully emphatic loose tongue, in fact of a blazing
ungoverned Irish turn of mind,--had instantly, on sight of some small
Succors from Pitt, to raise his siege of Madras, retire to Pondicherry;
and, in fact, go plunging and tumbling downhill, he and his India with
him, at an ever-faster rate, till they also had got to the Abyss. "My
policy is in these five words, NO ENGLISHMAN IN THIS PENINSULA," wrote
he, a year ago, on landing in India; and now it is to be No FRENCHMAN,
and there is one word in the five to be altered!--Of poor Lally, zealous
and furious over-much, and nearly the most unfortunate and worst-used
"man of genius" I ever read of, whose lion-like struggles against French
Official people, and against Pitt's Captains and their sea-fights and
siegings, would deserve a volume to themselves, we have said, and can
here say, as good as nothing,--except that they all ended, for Lally and
French India, in total surrender, 16th January, 1761; and that Lally,
some years afterwards, for toils undergone and for services done, got,
when accounts came to be liquidated, death on the scaffold. Dates I give
below. [28th April, 1758, Lands at Pondicherry; instantly proceeds
upon Fort St. David. 2d June, 1758, Takes it: meant to have gone now
on Madras; but finds he has no money;--goes extorting money from
Black Potentates about, Rajah of Travancore, &c., in a violent and
extraordinary style; and can get little. Nevertheless, 14th December,
1758, Lays Siege to Madras.]

16th February, 1759, Is obliged to quit trenches at Madras, and retire
dismally upon Pondicherry,--to mere indigence, mutiny ("ten mutinies"),
Official conspiracy, and chaos come again.

22d January, 1760, Makes outrush on Wandewash, and the English posted
there; is beaten, driven back into Pondicherry. April, 1760, Is besieged
in Pondicherry. 16th January, 1761, Is taken, Pondicherry, French India
and he;--to Madras he, lest the French Official party kill him, as they
attempt to do.

23d September, 1761, arrives, prisoner, in England: thence, on parole,
to France and Paris, 21st October. November, 1762, To Bastille; waits
trial nineteen months; trial lasts two years. 6th May, 1766, To be
BEHEADED,--9th May was. [See BEATSON, ii. 369-372, 96-110, &c.; Voltaire
(FRAGMENTS SUR L'INDE) in _OEuvres,_ xxix. 183-253; BIOGRAPHIC
UNIVERSELLE, Lally.]

"Gained Fontenoy for us," said many persons;--undoubtedly gained various
things for us, fought for us Berserkir-like on all occasions; hoped,
in the end, to be Marechal de France, and undertook a Championship of
India, which issues in this way! America and India, it is written,
are both to be Pitt's. Let both, if possible, remain silent to us
henceforth.

As to the Invasion-of-England Scheme, Pitt says he does not expect
the French will invade us; but if they do, he is ready. [Speech, 4th
November, supra.]




Chapter VII.--FRIEDRICH REAPPEARS ON THE FIELD, AND IN SEVEN DAYS AFTER
COMES THE CATASTROPHE OF MAXEN.

November 6th-8th, Daun had gone to Meissen Country: fairly ebbing
homeward; Henri following, with Hulsen joined,--not vehemently attacking
the rhinoceros, but judiciously pricking him forward. Daun goes at his
slowest step: in many divisions, covering a wide circuit; sticking
to all the strong posts, till his own time for quitting them: slow,
sullenly cautious; like a man descending dangerous precipices back
foremost, and will not be hurried. So it had lasted about a week; Daun
for the last four days sitting restive, obstinate, but Henri pricking
into him more and more, till the rhinoceros seemed actually about
lifting himself,--when Friedrich in person arrived in his Brother's
Camp. [Tempelhof, iii. 301-305.]

At the Schloss of Herschstein, a mile or two behind Lommatsch, which
is Henri's head-quarter (still to westward of Meissen; Daun hanging on,
seven or eight miles to southeastward ahead; loath to go, but actually
obliged),--it was there, Tuesday, November 13th, that the King met his
Brother again. A King free of his gout; in joyful spirits; and high of
humor,--like a man risen indignant, once more got to his feet, after
three months' oppressions and miseries from the unworthy. "Too high,"
mourns Retzow, in a gloomy tone, as others do in perhaps a more
indulgent one. Beyond doubt, Friedrich's farther procedures in this
grave and weighty Daun business were more or less imprudent; of a too
rapid and rash nature; and turned out bitterly unlucky to him. "Had
he left the management to Henri!" sighed everybody, after the unlucky
event.

Friedrich had not arrived above four-and-twenty hours, when news came
in: "The Austrians in movement again; actually rolling off Dresden-ward
again." "Haha, do they smell me already!" laughed he: "Well, I will send
Daun to the Devil,"--not adding, "if I can." And instantly ordered sharp
pursuit,--and sheer stabbing with the ox-goad, not soft and delicate
pricking, as Henri's lately. [Retzow, ii. 168; Tempelhof, iii. 306.]
Friedrich, in fact; was in a fiery condition against Daun: "You
trampled on me, you heavy buffalo, these three months; but that is over
now!"--and took personally the vanguard in this pursuit. And had a bit
of hot fighting in the Village of Korbitz (scene of that Finck-Haddick
"Action," 21st September last, and of poor Haddick's ruin, and
retirement to the Waters);--where the Austrians now prove very fierce
and obstinate; and will not go, till well slashed into, and torn out by
sheer beating:--which was visibly a kind of comfort to the King's humor.
"Our Prussians do still fight, then, much as formerly! And it was all
a hideous Nightmare, all that, and Daylight and Fact are come, and
Friedrich is himself again!"

They say Prince Henri took the liberty of counselling him, even of
entreating him: "Leave well alone; why run risks?" said Henri. Daun,
it was pretty apparent, had no outlook at the present but that of
sauntering home to Bohmen; leaving Dresden to be an easy prey again, and
his whole Campaign to fall futile, as the last had. Under Henri's gentle
driving he would have gone slower; but how salutary, if he only went!
These were Henri's views: but Friedrich was not in the slow humor;
impatient to be in Dresden; "will be quartered there in a week," writes
he, "and more at leisure than now." ["Wilsdruf, 17th November, 1759,"
and still more "19th November," Friedrich to Voltaire in high spirits
that way (_OEuvres de Frederic,_ xxiii. 66).] He is thinking of Leuthen,
of Rossbach, of Campaign 1757, so gloriously restored after ruin; and,
in the fire of his soul, is hoping to do something similar a second
time. That is Retzow's notion: who knows but there may be truth in it? A
proud Friedrich, got on his feet again after such usage;--nay, who knows
whether it was quite so unwise to be impressive on the slow rhinoceros,
and try to fix some thorn in his snout, or say (figuratively), to hobble
his hind-feet; which, I am told, would have been beautifully ruinous;
and, though riskish, was not impossible? [Tempelhof, iii. 311, &c.] Ill
it indisputably turned out; and we have, with brevity, to say how, and
leave readers to their judgment of it.

It was in the Village of Krogis, about six miles forward, on the
Meissen-Freyberg road, a mile or two on from Korbitz, and directly after
the fierce little tussle in that Village,--that Friedrich, his blood
still up, gave the Order for Maxen, which proved so unlucky to him.
Wunsch had been shot off in pursuit of the beaten Austrians; but they
ran too fast; and Wunsch came back without farther result, still early
in the day. Back as far as Krogis, where the next head-quarter is to
be;--and finds the King still in a fulminant condition; none the milder,
it is likely, by Wunsch's returning without result. "Go straight to
General Finck; bid him march at once!" orders the King; and rapidly
gives Wunsch the instructions Finck is to follow. Finck and his Corps
are near Nossen, some ten miles ahead of Krogis, some twenty west from
Dresden. There, since yesterday, stands Finck, infesting the left or
western flank of the Austrians,--what was their left, and will be again,
when they call halt and face round on us:--Let Finck now march at once,
quite round that western flank; by Freyberg, Dippoldiswalde, thence east
to Maxen; plant himself at Maxen (a dozen miles south of Dresden, among
the rocky hills), and stick diligently in the rear of those Austrians,
cutting off, or threatening to cut off, their communications with
Bohemia, and block the Pirna Country for them.

Friedrich calculates that, if Daun is for retreating by Pirna Country,
this will, at lowest, be a method to quicken him in that movement; or
perhaps it may prove a method to cut off such retreat altogether, and
force Daun to go circling by the Lausitz Hills and Wildernesses, exposed
to tribulations which may go nigh to ruin him. That is Friedrich's proud
thought: "an unfortunate Campaign; winding up, nevertheless, as 1757
did, in blazes of success!" And truly, if Friedrich could have made
himself into Two; and, while flashing and charging in Daun's front, have
been in command at Maxen in Daun's rear,--Friedrich could have made
a pretty thing of this waxen Enterprise; and might in good part have
realized his proud program. But there is no getting two Friedrichs.
Finck, a General of approved quality, he is the nearest approach we can
make to a second Friedrich;--and he, ill-luck too super-adding itself,
proves tragically inadequate. And sets all the world, and Opposition
Retzow, exclaiming, "See: Pride goes before a fall!"--

At 3 in the afternoon, Friedrich, intensely surveying from the heights
of Krogis the new Austrian movements and positions, is astonished, not
agreeably ("What, still only here, Herr General!"), by a personal visit
from Finck. Finck finds the Maxen business intricate, precarious; wishes
farther instructions, brings forward this objection and that. Friedrich
at last answers, impatiently: "You know I can't stand making of
difficulties (ER WEISS DASS ICH DIE DIFFICULTATEN NICHT LEIDEN KANN;
MACHE DASS ER FORT KOMMT); contrive to get it done!" With which
poor comfort Finck has to ride back to Nossen; and scheme out his
dispositions overnight.

Next morning, Thursday, 15th, Finck gets on march; drives the Reichsfolk
out of Freyberg; reaches Dippoldiswalde:--"Freyberg is to be my
Magazine," considers Finck; "Dippoldiswalde my half-way house; Four
Battalions of my poor Eighteen shall stand there, and secure the
meal-carts." Friday, 16th, Finck has his Vanguard, Wunsch leading it, in
possession of Maxen and the Heights; and on Saturday gets there himself,
with all his people and equipments. I should think about 12,000 men: in
a most intersected, intertwisted Hill Country; full of gullets, dells
and winding brooks;--it is forecourt of the Pirna rocks, our celebrated
Camp of Gahmig lies visible to north, Dohna and the Rothwasser
bounding us to east;--in grim November weather, some snow falling, or
snow-powder, alternating with sleet and glazing frosts: by no means a
beautiful enterprise to Finck. Nor one of his own choosing, had one a
choice in such cases.

To Daun nothing could be more unwelcome than this news of Finck,
embattled there at Maxen in the inextricable Hill Country, direct on
the road of Daun's meal-carts and Bohemian communications. And truly
withal,--what Daun does not yet hear, but can guess,--there is gone, in
supplement or as auxiliary to Finck, a fierce Hussar party, under GRUNE
Kleist, their fiercest Hussar since Mayer died; who this very day, at
Aussig, burns Daun's first considerable Magazine; and has others in view
for the same fate. [Friedrich's second Letter to Voltaire, Wilsdruf,
"19th November, 1759."] An evident thing to Daun, that Finck being
there, meal has ceased.

On the instant, Daun falls back on Dresden; Saturday, 17th, takes post
in the Dell of Plauen (PLAUEN'SCHE GRUND); an impassable Chasm, with
sheer steeps on both sides, stretching southward from Dresden in front
of the Hill Country: thither Daun marches, there to consider what is
to be done with Finck. Amply safe this position is; none better in the
world: a Village, Plauen, and a Brook, Weistritz, in the bottom of this
exquisite Chasm; sheer rock-walls on each side,--high especially on the
Daun, or south side;--head-quarters can be in Dresden itself; room for
your cavalry on the plain ground between Dresden and the Chasm. A post
both safe and comfortable; only you must not loiter in making up your
mind as to Finck; for Friedrich has followed on the instant. Friedrich's
head-quarter is already Wilsdruf, which an hour or two ago was Daun's:
at Kesselsdorf vigilant Ziethen is vanguard. So that Friedrich looks
over on you from the northern brow of your Chasm; delays are not good
near such a neighbor.

Daun--urged on by Lacy, they say--is not long in deciding that, in this
strait, the short way out will be to attack Finck in the Hills. Daun is
in the Hills, as well as Finck (this Plauen Chasm is the boundary-ditch
of the Hills): Daun with 27,000 horse and foot, moving on from this
western part; 3,000 light people (one Sincere the leader of them)
moving simultaneously from Dresden itself, that is, from northward or
northwestward; 12,000 Reichsfolk, horse and foot, part of them already
to southeastward of Finck, other part stealing on by the Elbe bank
thitherward: here, from three different points of the compass, are
42,000. These simultaneously dashing in, from west, north, south, upon
Finck, may surely give account of his 12,000 and him! If only we can
keep Friedrich dark upon it; which surely our Pandours will contrive to
do.

Finck, directly on arriving at Maxen, had reported himself to the King;
and got answer before next morning: "Very well; but draw in those Four
Battalions you have left in Dippoldiswalde; hit with the whole of your
strength, when a chance offers." Which order Finck, literally and not
too willingly, obeys; leaves only some light remnant in Dippoldiswalde,
and reinforcement to linger within reach, till a certain Bread-convoy
come to him, which will be due next morning (Monday, 19th); and which
does then safely get home, though under annoyances from cannonading in
the distance.

SUNDAY, 18th, Finck fails not to reconnoitre from the highest Hill-top;
to inquire by every method: he finds, for certain, that the enemy are
coming in upon him. With his own eyes he sees Reichsfolk marching, in
quantity, southeastward by the Elbe shore: "Intending towards Dohna, as
is like?"--and despatched Wunsch, who, accordingly, drove them out of
Dohna. Of all this Finck, at once, sent word to Friedrich. Who probably
enough received the message; but who would get no new knowledge from
it,--vigilant Ziethen having, by Austrian deserters and otherwise,
discovered this of the Reichsfolk; and furthermore that Sincere with
3,000 was in motion, from the north, upon Finck. Sunday evening,
Friedrich despatches Ziethen's Report; which punctually came to Finck's
hand; but was the last thing he received from Friedrich, or Friedrich
from him. The intervening Pandours picked up all the rest. The Ziethen
REPORT, of two or three lines, most succinct but sufficient, like a
cutting of hard iron, is to be read in many Books: we may as well give
the Letter and it:--

FRIEDRICH'S LETTER (WILSDRUF, 18th NOVEMBER, 1759). "My dear
General-Lieutenant von Finck,--I send you the enclosed Report from
General Ziethen, showing what is the lie of matters as seen from this
side; and leave the whole to your disposition and necessary measures. I
am your well-affectioned King,--F." The Enclosure is as follows:--

GENERAL ZIETHEN'S REPORT (KESSELSDORF, 18th NOVEMBER, 1759). "To your
Royal Majesty, send [no pronoun "I" allowed] herewith a Corporal, who
has deserted from the Austrians. He says, Sincere with the Reserve did
march with the Reichs Army; but a league behind it, and turned towards
Dippoldiswalde. General Brentano [Wehla's old comrade, luckier than
Wehla], as this Deserter heard last night in Daun's head-quarter,--which
is in the southern Suburb of Dresden, in the Countess Moschinska's
Garden,--was yesterday to have been in Dohlen [looking into our outposts
from the hither side of their Plauen Dell], but was not there any
longer," as our Deserter passed, "and it was said that he had gone to
Maxen at three in the afternoon." [Tempelhof, iii. 309.]

Thus curtly is Finck authorized to judge for himself in the new
circumstances. Marginally is added, in Friedrich's own hand: "ER WIRD
ENTWEDER MIT DEN REICHERN ODER MIT SICEREN EINEN GANG HABEN,--Either
with the Reichers or with Sincere you will have a bout, I suppose."

MAP FACING PAGE 350, BOOK XIX GOES HERE----

Finck, from his own Hill-top, on Sunday and Monday, sees all this of
Ziethen, and much more. Sees the vanguard of Daun himself approaching
Dippoldiswalde, cannonading his meal-carts as they issue there; on all
sides his enemies encompassing him like bees;--and has a sphinx-riddle
on his mind, such as soldier seldom had. Shall he manoeuvre himself out,
and march away, bread-carts, baggages and all entire? There is still
time, and perfect possibility, by Dippoldiswalde there, or by other
routes and methods. But again, did not his Majesty expect, do not these
words "a bout" still seem to expect, a bit of fighting with somebody or
other? Finck was an able soldier, and his skill and courage well known;
but probably another kind of courage was wanted this day, of which Finck
had not enough. Finck was not king of this matter; Finck was under a
King who perhaps misjudged the matter. If Finck saw no method of doing
other than hurt and bad service to his King by staying here, Finck
should have had the courage to come away, and front the King's
unreasonable anger, expecting redress one day, or never any redress.
That was Finck's duty: but everybody sees how hard it was for flesh and
blood.

Finck, truer to the letter than to the spirit, determined to remain.
Did, all that Monday, his best to prepare himself; called in his
outposts ("Was not I ordered?" thinks Finck, too literally); and sees
his multitudes of enemies settle round him;--Daun alone has 27,000 men,
who take camp at Dippoldiswalde; and in sum-total they are as 4 to 1 of
Finck:--a Finck still resolute of face, though internally his thoughts
may be haggard enough. Doubtless he hopes, too, that Friedrich will do
something:--unaware that none of his messages reach Friedrich. As for
Daun, having seen his people safely encamped here, he returns to Dresden
for the night, to see that Friedrich is quiet. Friedrich is quiet
enough: Daun, at seven next morning (TUESDAY, 20th), appeared on the
ground again; and from all sides Finck is assaulted,--from Daun's side
nearest and soonest, with Daun's best vigor.

Dippoldiswalde is some seven miles from Maxen. Difficult hill-road
all the way: but the steepest, straitest and worst place is
at Reinhartsgrimma, the very first Hamlet after you are out of
Dippoldiswalde. There is a narrow gullet there, overhung with heights
all round. The roads are slippery, glazed with sleet and frost; Cavalry,
unroughened, make sad sliding and sprawling; hardly the Infantry
are secure on their feet: a terrible business getting masses of
artillery-wagons, horse and man, through such a Pass! It is thought, had
Finck garnished this Pass of Reinhartsgrimma, with the proper batteries,
the proper musketries, Daun never would have got through. Finck had not
a gun or a man in it: "Had not I order?" said he,--again too literally.
As it was, Daun, sliding and sprawling in the narrow steeps, had
difficulties almost too great; and, they say, would have given it up,
had it not been that a certain Major urged, "Can be done, Excellenz, and
shall!" and that the temper of his soldiers was everywhere excellent.
Unfortunate Finck had no artillery to bear on Daun's transit through the
Pass. Nothing but some weak body of hussars and infantry stood looking
into it, from the Hill of Hausdorf: even these might have given him
some slight hindrance; but these were played upon by endless Pandours,
"issuing from a wood near by," with musketries, and at length with
cannon batteries, one and another;--and had to fall back, or to be
called back, to Maxen Hill, where the main force is.

In the course of yesterday, by continual reconnoitring, by Austrian
deserters, and intense comparison of symptoms, Finck had completely
ascertained where the Enemy's Three Attacks were to be,--"on Maxen,
from Dippoldiswalde, Trohnitz, Dohna, simultaneously three attacks,"
it appears;--and had with all his skill arranged himself on the Maxen
summits to meet these. He stands now elaborately divided into Three
groups against those Three simultaneities; forming (sadly wide apart,
one would say, for such a force as Finck's) a very obtuse-angled
triangle:--the obtuse vertex of which (if readers care to look on their
Map) is Trohnitz, the road Brentano and Sincere are coming. On the
base-angles, Maxen and Dohna, Finck expects Daun and the Reich. From
Trohnitz to Maxen is near two miles; from Maxen to Dohna above four. At
Dohna stands Wunsch against the Reich; Finck himself at Maxen, expecting
Daun, as the pith of the whole affair. In this triangular way stands
Finck at the topmost heights of the country,--"Maxen highest, but
Hausdorf only a little lower,"--and has not thought of disputing the
climb upwards. Too literal an eye to his orders: alas, he was not
himself king, but only king's deputy!

The result is, about 11 A.M., as I obscurely gather, Daun has conquered
the climb; Daun's musketries begin to glitter on the top of Hausdorf;
and 26 or 32 heavy cannon open their throats there; and the Three
Attacks break loose. Finck's Maxen batteries (scarcely higher than
Daun's, and far inferior in weight) respond with all diligence, the poor
regimental fieldpieces helping what they can. Mutual cannonade, very
loud for an hour and half; terrific, but doing little mischief; after
which Daun's musketries (the ground now sufficiently clear to Daun),
which are the practical thing, begin opening, first from one point, then
from another: and there ensues, for five hours coming, at Maxen and at
the other two points of Finck's triangle, such a series of explosive
chargings, wheelings, worryings and intricate death-wrestlings, as it
would provoke every reader to attempt describing to him. Except indeed
he were a soldier, bound to know the defence of posts; in which case
I could fairly promise him that there are means of understanding the
affair, and that he might find benefit in it. [Tempelhof, iii. 307-317.
JOURNAL UND NACHRICHT VON DER GEFANGENNEHMUNG DES FINCK'SCHEN CORPS BEY
MAXEN, IM JAHRE 1759 (Seyfarth, _Beylagen,_ ii. 637-654).]

Daun's Grenadiers, and Infantry generally, are in triumphant spirits;
confident of victory, as they may reasonably be. Finck's people, too,
behave well, some of them conspicuously well, though in gloomier mood;
and make stubborn fight, successful here and there, but, as a whole, not
capable of succeeding. By 3 in the afternoon, the Austrians have forced
the Maxen Post; they "enter Maxen with great shoutings;" extrude the
obstinate Prussian remnants; and, before long, have the poor Village "on
fire in every part." Finck retreating northward to Schmorsdorf, towards
the obtuse angle of his triangle, if haply there may be help in that
quarter for him. Daun does not push him much; has Maxen safely burning
in every part.

From Schmorsdorf Finck pushes out a Cavalry charge on Brentano. "Could
we but repulse Brentano yonder," thinks he, "I might have those Four
Battalions to hand, and try again!" But Brentano makes such cannonading,
the Cavalry swerve to a Hollow on their right; then find they have not
ground, and retire quite fruitless. Finck's Cavalry, and the Cavalry
generally, with their horses all sliding on the frosty mountain-gnarls,
appear to be good for little this day. Brentano, victorious over the
Cavalry, comes on with such storm, he sweeps through the obtuse
angle, home upon Finck; and sweeps him out of Schmorsdorf Village to
Schmorsdorf Hill, there to take refuge, as the night sinks,--and to see
himself, if his wild heart will permit him to be candid, a ruined man.
Of the Three Attacks, Two have completely succeeded on him; only Wunsch,
at Dohna, stands victorious; he has held back the Reich all day,
and even chased it home to its posts on the Rothwasser (RED WATER),
multitudinous as it was.

Finck's mood, as the November shadows gathered on him,--the equal heart
may at least pity poor Finck! His resolution is fixed: "Cut ourselves
through, this night: Dohna is ours: other side that Red Water there are
roads;--perish or get through!" And the Generals (who are rallied now
"on the Heights of Falkenhain and Bloschwitz," midway between Maxen and
Dohna) get that Order from him. And proceed to arrange for executing
it,--though with outlook more and more desperate, as their scouts
report that every pass and post on the Red Water is beset by Reichsfolk.
"Wunsch, with the Cavalry, he at least may thread his way out, under
cloud of night, by the opposite or Daun side," calculates Finck. And
Wunsch sets out accordingly: a very questionable, winding, subterranean
march; difficult in the extreme,--the wearied SLIPshod horses going at
a snail's pace; and, in the difficult passes, needing to be dragged
through with bridle and even to be left altogether:--in which, withal,
it will prove of no use for Wunsch to succeed! Finck's Generals
endeavoring to rank and rearrange through the night, find that their
very cartridges are nearly spent, and that of men, such wounding, such
deserting has there been, they have, at this time, by precise count,
2,836 rank and file. Evidently desperate.

At daylight, Daun's cannon beginning again from the Maxen side, Finck
sends to capitulate. "Absolute surrender," answers Daun: "prisoners of
war, and you shall keep your private baggage. General Wunsch with the
Cavalry, he too must turn back and surrender!" Finck pleaded hard, on
this last score: "General Wunsch, as head of the Cavalry, is not under
me; is himself chief in that department." But it was of no use: Wunsch
had to return (not quite got through Daun's Lines, after such a night),
and to surrender, like everybody else. Like Eight other Generals; like
Wolfersdorf of Torgau, and many a brave Officer and man. Wednesday
morning, 21st November, 1769: it is Finck's fourth day on Maxen; his
last in the Prussian Service.

That same Wednesday Afternoon there were ranked in the GROSSE GARTEN at
Dresden, of dejected Prussian Prisoners from Maxen, what exact number
was never known: the Austrians said 15,000; but nobody well believed
them; their last certain instalment being only, in correct numbers,
2,836. Besides the killed, wounded and already captured, many had
deserted, many had glided clear off. It is judged that Friedrich
lost, by all these causes, about 12,000 men. Gone wholly,--with their
equipments and appurtenances wholly, which are not worth counting
in comparison. Finck and the other Generals, 8 of them, and 529
Officers,--Finck, Wunsch, Wolfersdorf, Mosel (of the Olmutz Convoy),
not to mention others of known worth, this is itself a sore loss to
Friedrich, and in present circumstances an irreparable. [Seyfarth, ii.
576; in _Helden-Geschichte,_ (v. 1115), the Vienna Account.]

The outburst and paroxysm of Gazetteer rumor, which arose in Europe
over this, must be left to the imagination; still more the whirlwind of
astonishment, grief, remorse and indignation that raged in the heart of
Friedrich on first hearing of it. "The Caudine Forks;" "Scene of Pirna
over again, in reverse form;" "Is not your King at last over with it?"
said and sang multifariously the Gazetteers. As counter-chorus to which,
in a certain Royal Heart: "That miserable purblind Finck, unequal to his
task;--that overhasty I, who drove him upon it! This disgrace, loss nigh
ruinous; in fine, this infernal Campaign (CETTE CAMPAGNE INFEMALE)!"
The Anecdote-Books abound in details of Friedrich's behavior at Wilsdruf
that day; mythical all, or in good part, but symbolizing a case that is
conceivable to everybody. Or would readers care to glance into the very
fact with their own eyes? As happens to be possible.


1. BEFORE MAXEN: FRIEDRICH TO D'ARGENS AND OTHERS.

TO D'ARGENS (Krogis, 15th November, order for Maxen just given).
"Yesterday I joined the Army [day before yesterday, but took the field
yesterday], and Daun decamped. I have followed him thus far, and will
continue it to the frontiers of Bohemia. Our measures are so taken
[Finck, to wit], that he will not get out of Saxony without considerable
losses. Yesterday cost him 500 men taken at Korgis here. Every movement
he makes will cost him as many." [_OEuvres de Frederic,_ xix. 101.]

TO VOLTAIRE (Wilsdruf, 17th November). "We are verging on the end of our
Campaign: and I will write to you in eight days from Dresden, with more
composure and coherency than now." [Ib. xxiii. 66.]

TO THE SAME (Wilsdruf, 19th November). "The Austrians are packing off
to Bohemia,--where, in reprisal for the incendiary operations they have
done in my countries, I have burnt them two big magazines. I render the
beatified Hero's retreat as difficult as possible; and I hope he
will come upon some bad adventures within a few days." [_OEuvres de
Frederic,_ xxiii. 66.]

SAME DAY AND PLACE, TO D'ARGENS. A volley of most rough-paced off-hand
Rhyming, direct from the heart; "Ode [as he afterwards terms it, or
irrepressible extempore LILT] TO FORTUNE:"

"MARQUIS, QUEL CHANGEMENT, what a change! I, a poor heretic creature,
never blessed by the Holy Father; indeed, little frequenting Church, nor
serving either Baal or the God of Israel; held down these many months,
and reported by more than one shaven scoundrel [priest-pamphleteer at
Vienna] to be quite extinct, and gone vagabond over the world,--see
how capricious Fortune, after all her hundred preferences of my rivals,
lifts me with helpful hand from the deep, and packs this Hero of the Hat
and Sword,--whom Popes have blessed what they could, and who has walked
in Pilgrimage before now [to Marienzell once, I believe, publicly at
Vienna],--out of Saxony; panting, harassed goes he, like a stranger
dog from some kitchen where the cook had flogged him out!" [Ib. xix.
103-106.]... (A very exultant Lilt, and with a good deal more of the
chanticleer in it than we are used to in this King!)


2. AFTER MAXEN.

TO D'ARGENS (Wilsdruf, 22d November). "Do with that [some small piece
of business] whatever you like, my dear Marquis. I am so stupefied
(E'TOURDI) with the misfortune which has befallen General Finck, that
I cannot recover from my astonishment. It deranges all my measures;
it cuts me to the quick. Ill-luck, which persecutes my old age, has
followed me from the Mark [Kunersdorf, in the Mark of Brandenburg]
to Saxony. I will still strive what I can. The little ODE I sent you,
addressed TO FORTUNE, had been written too soon! One should not sing
victory till the battle is over. I am so crushed down by these incessant
reverses and disasters, that I wish a thousand times I were dead;
and from day to day I grow wearier of dwelling in a body worn out and
condemned to suffer. I am writing to you in the first moment of my
grief. Astonishment, sorrow, indignation, scorn, all blended together,
lacerate my soul. Let us get to the end, then, of this execrable
Campaign; I will then write to you what is to become of me; and we will
arrange the rest. Pity me;--ad make no noise about me; bad news go fast
enough of themselves. Adieu, dear Marquis." [_OEuvres de Frederic, _
xix. 107.]

All this, of course, under such pressing call of actualities, had
very soon to transform itself into silence; into new resolution, and
determinate despatch of business. But the King retained a bitter memory
of it all his days. To Finck he was inexorable:--ordered him, the first
thing on his return from Austrian Captivity, Trial by Court-Martial;
which (Ziethen presiding, June, 1763) censured Finck in various
points, and gave him, in supplement to the Austrian detention, a
Year's Imprisonment in Spandau. No ray of pity visible for him, then
or afterwards, in the Royal mind. So that the poor man had to beg
his dismissal; get it, and go to Denmark for new promotion and
appreciation.--"Far too severe!" grumbled the Opposition voices, with
secret counter-severity. And truly it would have been more beautiful to
everybody, for the moment, to have made matters soft to poor Finck,--had
Friedrich ever gone on that score with his Generals and Delegates;
which, though the reverse of a cruel man, he never did. And truly, as
we often observe, the Laws of Fact are still severer than Friedrich
was:--so that, in the long-run, perhaps it is beautifulest of all for a
King, who is just, to be rhadamanthine in important cases.

Exulting Daun, instead of Bohemia for winter-quarters, pushes out now
for the prize of Saxony itself. Daun orders Beck to attack suddenly
another Outpost of Friedrich's, which stands rearward of him at Meissen,
under a General Dierecke,--the same whom, as Colonel Dierecke, we
saw march out of flamy Zittau, summer gone two years. Beck goes in
accordingly, 3d December; attacks Dierecke, not by surprise, but with
overwhelming superiority; no reinforcement possible: Dierecke is on
the wrong side of the Elbe, no retreat or reinforcement for him; has to
fight fiercely all day, Meissen Bridge being in a broken state; then, at
night, to ship his people across in Elbe boats, which are much delayed
by the floating ice, so that daylight found 1,500 of them still on that
northern side; all of whom, with General Dierecke himself, were made
prisoners by Beck. [Tempelhof, iii. 321: "3d-4th December, 1759."] A
comfortable supplement to Maxen, though not of the same magnificence.

After which, Daun himself issued minatory from the Plauen Chasm;
expecting, as all the world did, that Friedrich, who is 36,000 of
Unfortunate against, say, 72,000 of Triumphant, will, under penalty,
take himself away. But it proved otherwise. "If you beat us, Excellency
Feldmarschall, yes; but till then--!" Friedrich draws out in battalia;
Leo in wild ragged state and temper, VERSUS Bos in the reverse: "Come
on; then!" Rhinoceros Bos, though in a high frame of mind, dare not, on
cool survey; but retires behind the Plauen Chasm again. Will at least
protect Dresden from recapture; and wait here, in the interim; carting
his provision out of Bohemia,--which is a rough business, with Elbe
frozen, and the passes in such a choked wintry state. Upon whom
Friedrich, too, has to wait under arms, in grim neighborhood, for six
weeks to come: such a time as poor young Archenholtz never had before
or after. [Archenholtz, ii. 11-13.] It was well beyond New-year's day
before Friedrich could report of himself, and then only in a sense, as
will be seen: "We retired to this poor cottage [cottage still standing,
in the little Town of Freyberg]; Daun did the like; and this unfortunate
Campaign, as all things do, came actually to an end."

Daun holds Dresden and the Dell of Plauen; but Saxony, to the world's
amazement, he is as far as ever from holding. "Daun's front is a small
arc of a circle, bending round from Dresden to Dippoldiswalde; Friedrich
is at Freyberg in a bigger concave arc, concentric to Daun, well
overlapping Daun on that southward or landward side, and ready for him,
should he stir out; Kesselsdorf is his nearest post to Daun; and the
Plauen Chasm for boundary, which was not overpassed by either." In
Dresden, and the patch of hill-country to the southeastward of it by
Elbe side, which is instep or glacis of the Pirna rock-country, seventy
square miles or so, there rules Daun; and this--with its heights of
Gahmig, valuable as a defence for Dresden against Austria, but not
otherwise of considerable value--was all that Daun this year, or pretty
much in any coming year, could realize of conquest in Saxony.

Fabius Cunctator has not succeeded, as the public expected. In fact,
ever since that of Hochkirch and the Papal Hat, he has been a waning
man, more and more questionable to the undiscerning public. Maxen was
his last gleam upwards; a round of applause rose again on Maxen, feeble
in comparison with Hochkirch, but still arguing hope,--which, after
this, more and more died out; so that in two years more, poor Madam
Daun, going to Imperial Levee, "had her state-carriage half filled
with nightcaps, thrown into it by the Vienna people, in token of her
husband's great talent for sleep." [Archenholtz (Anno 1762, "last Siege
of Schweidnitz").]




Chapter VIII.--MISCELLANEA IN WINTER-QUARTERS, 1759-1760.

Friedrich was very loath to quit the field this Winter. In spite of
Maxen and ill-luck and the unfavorablest weather, it still was, for
about two months, his fixed purpose to recapture Dresden first, and
drive Daun home. "Had I but a 12,000 of Auxiliaries to guard my right
flank, while trying it!" said he. Ferdinand magnanimously sent him
the Hereditary Prince with 12,000, who stayed above two months; ["Till
February 15th;" List of the Regiments (German all), in SEYFARTH, ii.
578 n.] and Friedrich did march about, attempting that way, [_OEuvres de
Frederic,_ v. 32. Old Newspaper rumors: in _Gentleman's Magazine,_
xxix. 605, "29th December," &c.]--pushed forward to Maguire and
Dippoldiswalde, looked passionately into Maguire on all sides; but
found him, in those frozen chasms, and rock-labyrinths choked with snow,
plainly unattackable; him and everybody, in such frost-element;--and
renounced the passionate hope.

It was not till the middle of January that Friedrich put his troops into
partial cantonments, Head-quarter Freyberg; troops still mainly in the
Villages from Wilsdruf and southward, close by their old Camp there.
Camp still left standing, guarded by Six Battalions; six after six,
alternating week about: one of the grimmest camps in Nature; the canvas
roofs grown mere ice-plates, the tents mere sanctuaries of frost:--never
did poor young Archenholtz see such industry in dragging wood-fuel, such
boiling of biscuits in broken ice, such crowding round the embers to
roast one side of you, while the other was freezing. [Archenholtz (UT
SUPRA), ii. 11-15.] But Daun's people, on the opposite side of Plauen
Dell, did the like; their tents also were left standing in the frozen
state, guarded by alternating battalions, no better off than their
Prussian neighbors. This of the Tents, and Six frost-bitten Battalions
guarding them, lasted till April. An extraordinary obstinacy on the part
both of Daun and of Friedrich; alike jealous of even seeming to yield
one inch more of ground.

The Hereditary Prince, with his 12,000, marched home again in February;
indeed, ever after the going into cantonments, all use of the Prince
and his Force here visibly ceased; and, on the whole, no result whatever
followed those strenuous antagonisms, and frozen tents left standing for
three months; and things remained practically what they were. So that,
as the grand "Peace Negotiations" also came to nothing, we might omit
this of Winter-quarters altogether; and go forward to the opening of
Campaign Fifth;--were it not that characteristic features do otherwise
occur in it, curious little unveilings of the secret hopes and
industries of Friedrich:--besides which, there have minor private events
fallen out, not without interest to human readers. For whose behoof
mainly a loose intercalary Chapter may be thrown together here.




SERENE HIGHNESS OF WURTEMBERG, AT FULDA (November 30th, 1759), IS JUST
ABOUT "FIRING VICTORIA," AND GIVING A BALL TO BEAUTY AND FASHION, IN
HONOR OF A CERTAIN EVENT;--BUT IS UNPLEASANTLY INTERRUPTED.

November 21st, the very day while Finck was capitulating in the Hills of
Maxen, Duke Ferdinand, busy ever since his Victory at Minden, did, after
a difficult Siege of Munster, Siege by Imhof, with Ferdinand protecting
him, get Munster into hand again, which was reckoned a fine success to
him. Very busy has the Duke been: industriously reaping the fruits
of his Victory at Minden; and this, the conclusive rooting out of the
French from that Westphalian region, is a very joyful thing; and puts
Ferdinand in hopes of driving them over the Mayn altogether. Which some
think he would have done; had not he, with magnanimous oblivion of self
and wishes, agreed to send the Hereditary Prince and those 12,000 to
assist in Friedrich's affairs, looking upon that as the vital point in
these Allied Interests. Friedrich's attempts, we have said, turned out
impossible; nor would the Hereditary Prince and his 12,000, though
a good deal talked about in England and elsewhere, [Walpole, _George
Second,_ iii. 248 (in a sour Opposition tone); &c. &c.] require more
than mention; were it not that on the road thither, at Fulda ("Fulda is
half-way house to Saxony," thinks Ferdinand, "should Pitt and Britannic
Majesty be pleased to consent, as I dare presume they will"), the
Hereditary Prince had, in his swift way, done a thing useful for
Ferdinand himself, and which caused a great emotion, chiefly of
laughter, over the world, in those weeks.

"No Enemy of Friedrich's," says my Note, "is of feller humor than the
Serenity of Wurtemberg, Karl Eugen, Reigning Duke of that unfortunate
Country; for whom, in past days, Friedrich had been so fatherly, and
really took such pains. 'Fatherly? STEP-fatherly, you mean; and for his
own vile uses!' growled the Serenity of Wurtemberg:--always an ominous
streak of gloom in that poor man; streak which is spread now to whole
skies of boiling darkness, owing to deliriums there have been! Enough,
Karl Eugen, after divorcing his poor Wife, had distinguished himself
by a zeal without knowledge, beyond almost all the enemies of
Friedrich;--and still continues in that bad line of industry. His poor
Wife he has made miserable in some measure; also himself; and, in a
degree, his poor soldiers and subjects, who are with him by compulsion
in this Enterprise. The Wurtembergers are Protestants of old type; and
want no fighting against 'the Protestant Hero,' but much the reverse!
Serene Karl had to shoot a good few of these poor people, before they
would march at all; and his procedures were indeed, and continued to be,
of a very crying nature, though his poor Populations took them silently.
Always something of perverse in this Serene Highness; has it, I think,
by kind.

"Besides his quota to the Reich, Karl Eugen has 12,000 more on
foot,--and it is of them we are treating at present. In 1757 he had lent
these troops to the Empress Queen, for a consideration; it was they
that stood on the Austrian left, at Leuthen; and were the first that
got beaten, and had to cease standing,--as the Austrians were abundantly
loud in proclaiming. To the disgust of Serene Highness: 'Which of you
did stand, then? Was it their blame, led as they were?' argued he.
And next year, 1758, after Crefeld, he took his 12,000 to the French
('subsidy,' or consideration, 'to be paid in SALT,' it appears [_OEuvres
de Frederic,_ v. 10.]); with whom they marched about, and did nothing
considerable. The Serenity had pleaded, 'I must command them myself!'
'You?' said Belleisle, and would not hear of it. Next year again,
however, that is 1759, the Duke was positive, 'I must;' Belleisle not
less so, 'You cannot;'--till Minden fell out; and then, in the wreck of
Contades, Belleisle had to consent. Serenity of Wurtemberg, at that late
season, took the field accordingly; and Broglio now has him at Fulda,
'To cut off Ferdinand from Cassel;' to threaten Ferdinand's left flank
and his provision-carts in that quarter. May really become unpleasant
there to Ferdinand;--and ought to be cut out by the Hereditary Prince.
'To Fulda, then, and cut him out!'

"FULDA, FRIDAY, 30th NOVEMBER, 1759. Serene Highness is lying here for a
week past; abundantly strong for the task on hand,--has his own 12,000,
supplemented by 1,000 French Light Horse;--but is widely scattered
withal, posted in a kind of triangular form; his main posts being Fulda
itself, and a couple of others, each thirty miles from Fulda, and five
miles from one another,--with 'patrols to connect them,' better or
worse. Abundantly strong for the task, and in perfect security; and
indeed intends this day to 'fire VICTORIA' for the Catastrophe at Maxen,
and in the evening will give a Ball in farther honor of so salutary an
event:--when, about 9 A.M., news arrives at the gallop, 'Brunswickers
in full march; are within an hour of the Town-Bridge!' Figure to what
flurry of Serene Highness; of the victoria-shooting apparatus; of busy
man-milliner people, and the Beauty and Fashion of Fulda in general!

"The night before, a rumor of the French Post being driven in by
somebody had reached Serene Highness; who gave some vague order, not
thinking it of consequence. Here, however, is the Fact come to hand in
a most urgent and undeniable manner! Serene Highness gets on horseback;
but what can that help? One cannon (has nothing but light cannon) he
does plant on the Bridge; but see, here come premonitory bomb-shells
one and another, terrifying to the mind;--and a single Hessian dragoon,
plunging forward on the one unready cannon, and in the air making horrid
circles,--the gunners leave said cannon to him, take to their heels; and
the Bridge is open. The rest of the affair can be imagined. Retreat at
our swiftest, 'running fight,' we would fain call it, by various roads;
lost two flags, two cannon; prisoners were above 1,200, many of them
Officers. 'A merciful Providence saved the Duke's Serene Person from
hurt,' say the Stuttgard Gazetteers: which was true,--Serene Highness
having been inspired to gallop instantly to rearward and landward,
leaving an order to somebody, 'Do the best you can!'

"So that the Ball is up; dress-pumps and millineries getting all locked
into their drawers again,--with abundance of te-hee-ing (I hope, mostly
in a light vein) from the fair creatures disappointed of their dance
for this time. Next day Serene Highness drew farther back, and next day
again farther,--towards Frankenland and home, as the surest place;--and
was no more heard of in those localities." [Buchholz, ii. 332;
Mauvillon, ii. 80; _Helden-Geschichte,_ v. 1184-1193; Old Newspapers,
in _Gentleman's Magazine,_ xxix. 603.]

Making his first exit, not yet quite his final, from the War-Theatre,
amid such tempests of haha-ing and te-hee-ing. With what thoughts in his
own lofty opaque mind;--like a crowned mule, of such pace and carriage,
who had unexpectedly stepped upon galvanic wires!--

As to those poor Wurtembergers, and their notion of the "Protestant
Hero," I remark farther, that there is a something of real truth in it.
Friedrich's Creed, or Theory of the Universe, differed extremely, in
many important points, from that of Dr. Martin Luther: but in the vital
all-essential point, what we may call the heart's core of all Creeds
which are human, human and not simious or diabolic, the King and the
Doctor were with their whole heart at one: That it is not allowable,
that it is dangerous and abominable, to attempt believing what is
not true. In that sense, Friedrich, by nature and position, was a
Protestant, and even the chief Protestant in the world. What kind of
"Hero," in this big War of his, we are gradually learning;--in which
too, if you investigate, there is not wanting something of "PROTESTANT
Heroism," even in the narrow sense. For it does appear,--Maria Theresa
having a real fear of God, and poor Louis a real fear of the Devil,
whom he may well feel to be getting dangerous purchase over him,--some
hope-gleams of acting upon Schism, and so meriting Heaven, did mingle
with their high terrestrial combinations, on this unique opportunity,
more than are now supposed in careless History-Books.




WHAT IS PERPETUAL PRESIDENT MAUPERTUIS DOING, ALL THIS WHILE? IS HE
STILL IN BERLIN; OR WHERE IN THE UNIVERSE IS HE? ALAS, POOR MAUPERTUIS!

In the heat of this Campaign, "July 27th,"--some four days after the
Battle of Zullichau, just while Friedrich was hurrying off for that
Intersection at Sagan, and breathless Hunt of Loudon and Haddick,--poor
Maupertuis had quitted this world. July 27th, 1759; at Basel, on the
Swiss Borders, in his friend Bernouilli's house, after long months of
sickness painfully spent there. And our poor Perpetual President, at
rest now from all his Akakia burns, and pains and labors in flattening
the Earth and otherwise, is gone.

Many beautifuler men have gone within the Year, of whom we can say
nothing. But this is one whose grandly silent, and then occasionally
fulminant procedures, Akakia controversies, Olympian solemnities and
flamy pirouettings under the contradiction of sinners, we once saw; and
think with a kind of human pathos that we shall see no more. From his
goose of an adorer, La Beaumelle, I have riddled out the following
particulars, chiefly chronological,--and offer them to susceptible
readers. La Beaumelle is, in a sort, to be considered the speaker; or La
Beaumelle and this Editor in concert.

FINAL PILGRIMAGE OF THE PERPETUAL PRESIDENT. "Maupertuis had quitted
Berlin soon after Voltaire. That threat of visiting Voltaire with
pistols,--to be met by 'my syringe and vessel of dishonor' on Voltaire's
part,--was his last memorability in Berlin. His last at that time; or
indeed altogether, for he saw little of Berlin farther.

"End of April, 1753, he got leave of absence; set out homewards,
for recovery of health. Was at Paris through summer and autumn: very
taciturn in society; 'preferred pretty women to any man of science;'
would sententiously say a strong thing now and then, 'bitter but not
without BONHOMIE,' shaking slightly his yellow wig. Disdainful, to how
high a degree, of AKAKIA brabbles, and Voltaire gossip for or against!
In winter went to St. Malo; found his good Father gone; but a loving
Sister still there.

"June, 1754, the King wrote to him, 'VENEZ VITE, Come quickly:' July,
1754, he came accordingly, [_OEuvres de Frederic,_ xx. 49.] saw Berlin
again; did nothing noticeable there, except get worse in health; and
after eleven months, June, 1756, withdrew again on leave,--never to
return this time, though he well intended otherwise. But at St. Malo,
when, after a month or two of Paris, he got thither (Autumn, 1756),
and still more, next summer, 1757, when he thought of leaving St.
Malo,--what wars, and rumors of war, all over the world!

"June, 1757, he went to Bordeaux, intending to take ship for Hamburg,
and return; but the sea was full of English cruisers [Pitt's Descents
lying in store for St. Malo itself]. No getting to Berlin by the Hamburg
or sea route! 'Never mind, then,' wrote the King: 'Improve your health;
go to Italy, if you can.'

"Summer, 1757, Maupertuis made for Italy; got as far as
Toulouse;--stayed there till May following; sad, tragically stoical;
saying, sparingly, and rather to women than men, strong things, admired
by the worthier sort. Renounced thoughts of Italy: 'Europe bleeding, and
especially France and Prussia, how go idly touring?'

"May, 1758, Maupertuis left Toulouse: turned towards Berlin; slow, sad,
circuitous;--never to arrive. Saw Narbonne, Montpellier, Nimes; with
what meditations! At Lyons, under honors sky-high, health getting worse,
stays two months; vomits clots of blood there. Thence, July 24th, to
Neufchatel and the Lord Marischal; happy there for three months. Hears
there of Professor Konig's death (AKAKIA Konig): 'One scoundrel less in
the world,' ejaculated he; 'but what is one!'--October 16th, to the
road again, to Basel; stays perforce, in Bernouilli's house there, all
Winter; health falling lower and lower.

"April, 1759, one day he has his carriage at the door ('Homeward, at
all rates!'): but takes violent spasms in the carriage; can't; can no
farther in this world. Lingers here, under kind care, for above three
months more: dying slowly, most painfully. With much real stoicism; not
without a stiff-jointed algebraic kind of piety, almost pathetic in
its sort. 'Two Capuchins from a neighboring Convent daily gave him
consolations,' not entirely satisfactory; for daily withal, 'unknown to
the Capuchins, he made his Valet, who was a Protestant, read to him from
the Geneva Bible;'--and finds many things hard to the human mind. July
27th, 1759, he died." [La Beaumelle, _Vie de Maupertuis,_ pp. 196-216.]

Poor Maupertuis; a man of rugged stalwart type; honest; of an ardor, an
intelligence, not to be forgotten for La Beaumelle's pulings over them.
A man of good and even of high talent; unlucky in mistaking it for the
highest! His poor Wife, a born Borck,--hastening from Berlin, but again
and again delayed by industry of kind friends, and at last driving on
in spite of everything,--met, in the last miles, his Hearse and Funeral
Company. Adieu, a pitying adieu to him forever,--and even to his adoring
La Beaumelle, who is rather less a blockhead than he generally seems.

This of the Two Capuchins, the last consummation of collapse in man, is
what Voltaire cannot forget, but crows over with his shrillest
mockery; and seldom mentions Maupertuis without that last touch to his
life-drama.




GRAND FRENCH INVASION-SCHEME COMES ENTIRELY TO WRECK (Quiberon Bay, 20th
November, 1759): OF CONTROLLER-GENERAL SILHOUETTE, AND THE OUTLOOKS OF
FRANCE, FINANCIAL AND OTHER.

On the very day of Maxen, Tuesday, November 20th, the grand French
Invasion found its terminus,--not on the shores of Britain, but
of Brittany, to its surprise. We saw Rodney burn the Flat-bottom
manufactory at Havre; Boscawen chase the Toulon Squadron, till it ended
on the rocks of Lagos. From January onwards, as was then mentioned,
Hawke had been keeping watch, off Brest Harbor, on Admiral Conflans,
who presides there over multifarious preparations, with the last Fleet
France now has. At Vannes, where Hawke likewise has ships watching,
are multifarious preparations; new Flat-bottoms, 18,000 troops,--could
Conflans and they only get to sea. At the long last, they did get;--in
manner following:--

"November 9th, a wild gale of wind had blown Hawke out of sight; away
home to Torbay, for the moment. 'Now is the time!' thought Conflans, and
put to sea (November 14th); met by Hawke, who had weighed from Torbay
to his duty; and who, of course, crowded every sail, after hearing that
Conflans was out. At break of day, November 20th [in the very hours when
poor Finck was embattling himself round Maxen, and Daun sprawling up
upon him through the Passes], Hawke had had signal, 'A Fleet in sight;'
and soon after, 'Conflans in sight,'--and the day of trial come.

"Conflans is about the strength of Hawke, and France expects much of
him; but he is not expecting Hawke. Conflans is busy, at this moment,
in the mouth of Quiberon Bay, opening the road for Vannes and the
18,000;--in hot chase, at the moment, of a Commodore Duff and his small
Squadron, who have been keeping watch there, and are now running all
they can. On a sudden, to the astonishment of Conflans, this little
Squadron whirls round, every ship of it (with a sky-rending cheer, could
he hear it), and commences chasing! Conflans, taking survey, sees that
it is Hawke; he, sure enough, coming down from windward yonder at his
highest speed; and that chasing will not now be one's business!--

"About 11 A.M. Hawke is here; eight of his vanward ships are sweeping on
for action. Conflans, at first, had determined to fight Hawke; and drew
up accordingly, and did try a little: but gradually thought better
of it; and decided to take shelter in the shoaly coasts and nooks
thereabouts, which were unknown to Hawke, and might ruin him if he
should pursue, the day being short, and the weather extremely bad.
Weather itself almost to be called a storm. 'Shoreward, then; eastward,
every ship!' became, ultimately, Conflans's plan. On the whole, it was
2 in the afternoon before Hawke, with those vanward Eight, could get
clutch of Conflans. And truly he did then strike his claws into him in
a thunderously fervid manner, he and all hands, in spite of the roaring
weather:--a man of falcon, or accipitral, nature as well as name.

"Conflans himself fought well; as did certain of the others,--all, more
or less, so long as their plan continued steady:--thunderous miscellany
of cannon and tempest; Conflans with his plan steady, or Conflans with
his plan wavering, VERSUS those vanward Eight, for two hours or more.
But the scene was too dreadful; this ship sinking, that obliged to
strike; things all going awry for Conflans. Hawke, in his own Flagship,
bore down specially on Conflans in his,--who did wait, and exchange a
couple of broadsides; but then sheered off, finding it so heavy. French
Vice-Admiral next likewise gave Hawke a broadside; one only, and sheered
off, satisfied with the return. Some Four others, in succession, did
the like; 'One blast, as we hurry by' (making for the shore, mostly)! So
that Hawke seemed swallowed in volcanoes (though, indeed, their firing
was very bad, such a flurry among them), and his Blue Flag was invisible
for some time, and various ships were hastening to help him,--till a
Fifth French ship coming up with her broadside, Hawke answered her in
particular (LA SUPERBE, a Seventy-four) with all his guns together;
which sent the poor ship to the bottom, in a hideously sudden manner.
One other (the THESEE) had already sunk in fighting; two (the SOLEIL and
the HEROS) were already running for it,--the HEROS in a very unheroic
manner! But on this terrible plunge-home of the SUPERBE, the rest all
made for the shore;--and escaped into the rocky intricacies and the
darkness. Four of Conflans's ships were already gone,--struck, sunk,
or otherwise extinct,--when darkness fell, and veiled Conflans and his
distresses. 'Country people, to the number of 10,000,' crowded on the
shore, had been seen watching the Battle; and, 'as sad witnesses of the
White Flag's disgrace,' disappeared into the interior." [Beatson, ii.
327-345: and Ib. iii. 244-250. In _Gentleman's Magazine,_ (xxix. 557),
"A Chaplain's Letter," &c.]

It was such a night as men never witnessed before. Walpole says: "The
roaring of the elements was redoubled by the thunder from our ships; and
both concurred in that scene of horror to put a period to the Navy and
hopes of France. Seven ships of the line got into the River Vilaine
[lay there fourteen months, under strict watching, till their backs
were broken, "thumping against the shallow bottom every tide," and only
"three, with three frigates," ever got out again]; eight more escaped
to different ports," into the River Charente ultimately. "Conflans's own
ship and another were run on shore, and burnt. One we took." Two, with
their crews, had gone to the bottom; one under Hawke's cannon; one
partly by its own mismanagement. "Two of ours were lost in the storm
[chasing that SOLEIL and HEROS], but the crews saved. Lord Howe, who
attacked LA FORMIDABLE, bore down on her with such violence, that her
prow forced in his lower tier of guns. Captain Digby, in the DUNKIRK,
received the fire of twelve of the enemy's ships, and lost not a man.
Keppel's was full of water, and he thought it sinking: a sudden squall
emptied his ship; but he was informed all his powder was wet; 'Then,'
said he, 'I am sorry I am safe.' They came and told him a small quantity
was undamaged; 'Very well,' said he; 'then attack again.' Not above
eight of our ships were engaged in obtaining that decisive victory.
The Invasion was heard of no more." [Walpole, _George Second,_ iii.
232.--Here is the List, accurately riddled out: 1. FORMIDABLE, struck
(about 4 P.M.): 2. THESEE, sunk (by a tumble it made, while in action,
under an unskilful Captain): 3. SUPERBE, sunk: 4. HEROS, struck; could
not he boarded, such weather; and recommenced next day, but had to run
and strand itself, and be burnt by the English;--as did (5.) the SOLEIL
ROYAL (Conflans's Flagship), Conflans and crew (like those of the HEROS)
getting out in time.]

Invasion had been fully intended, and even, in these final days,
considerably expected. In the old London Newspapers we read this notice:
MONDAY, NOVEMBER 19th: "To-day there came Three Expresses,"--Three
Expresses, with what haste in their eyes, testifying successively of
Conflans's whereabouts. But it was believed that Hawke would still
manage. And, at any rate, Pitt wore such a look,--and had, in fact, made
such preparation on the coasts, even in failure of Hawke,--there was no
alarm anywhere. Indignation rather;--and naturally, when the news did
come, what an outburst of Illumination in the windows and the hearts of
men!

"Hawke continued watching the mouths of the Vilaine and Charente Rivers
for a good while after, and without interruption henceforth,--till the
storms of Winter had plainly closed them for one season. Supplies of
fresh provisions had come to him from England all Summer; but were
stopped latterly by the wild weather. Upon which, in the Fleet, arose
this gravely pathetic Stave of Sea-Poetry, with a wrinkle of briny humor
grinning in it:--

     Till Hawke did bang Monsieur Conflans [CONGFLANG],
     You sent us beef and beer;
     Now Monsieur's beat, we've nought to eat,
     Since you have nought to fear." [Beatson, ii. 342 n.]

The French mode of taking this catastrophe was rather peculiar. Hear
Barbier, an Eye-witness; dating PARIS, DECEMBER, 1759: "Since the first
days of December, there has been cried, and sold in the streets, a
Printed Detail of all that concerns the GRAND INVASION projected this
long while: to wit, the number of Ships of the Line, of Frigates,
Galiots,--among others 500 Flat-bottomed Boats, which are to carry over,
and land in England, more than 54,000 men;--with list of the Regiments,
and number of the King's Guards, that are also to go: there are
announced for Generals-in-Chief, M. le Prince de Conti [do readers
remember him since the Broglio-Maillebois time, and how King Louis
prophesied in autograph that he would be "the Grand Conti" one
day?]--Prince de Conti, Prince de Soubise [left his Conquest of
Frankfurt for this greater Enterprise], and Milord Thomont [Irish
Jacobite, whom I don't know]. As sequel to this Detail, there is a
lengthy Song on the DISEMBARKMENT IN ENGLAND, and the fear the English
must have of it!" Calculated to astonish the practical forensic mind.

"It is inconceivable", continues he, "how they have permitted such
a Piece to be printed; still more to be cried, and sold price one
halfpenny (DEUX LIARDS). This Song is indecent, in the circumstances of
the actual news from our Fleet at Brest (20th of last month);--in regard
to which bad adventure M. le Marquis de Conflans has come to Versailles,
to justify himself, and throw the blame on M. le Marquis de Beauffremont
[his Rear-Admiral, now safe in the Charente, with eight of our poor
ships]. Such things are the more out of place, as we are in a bad enough
position,--no Flat-bottoms stirring from the ports, no Troops of the
MAISON DU ROI setting out; and have reason to believe that we are now to
make no such attempt." [Barbier, iv. 336.]

Silhouette, the Controller-General, was thought to have a creative
genius in finance: but in the eighth month of his gestation, what
phenomena are these? October 26th, there came out Four Decrees of
Council, setting forth, That, "as the expenses of the War exceed not
only the King's ordinary revenues, but the extraordinaries he has had to
lay on his people, there is nothing for it but," in fact, Suspension of
Payment; actual Temporary Bankruptcy:--"Cannot pay you; part of you not
for a year, others of you not till the War end; will give you 5 per cent
interest instead." Coupled with which, by the same creative genius, is a
Declaration in the King's name, "That the King compels nobody, but does
invite all and sundry of loyal mind to send their Plate (on loan, of
course, and with due receipt for it) to the Mint to be coined, lest
Majesty come to have otherwise no money,"--his very valets, as is
privately known, having had no wages from him for ten months past.

Whereupon the rich Princes of the Blood, Due d'Orleans foremost, and
Official persons, Pompadour, Belleisle, Choiseul, do make an effort; and
everybody that has Plate feels uneasily that he cannot use it, and that
he ought to send it. And, November 5th, the King's own Plate, packed
ostentatiously in carts, went to the Mint;--the Dauphiness, noble
Saxon Lady, had already volunteered with a silver toilet-table of hers,
brand-new and of exquisite costly pattern; but the King forbade her. On
such examples, everybody had to make an effort, or uneasily try to make
one. King Friedrich, eight days after Maxen, is somewhat amused at these
proceedings in the distance:--

"The kettles and spoons of the French seem to me a pleasant resource,
for carrying on War!" writes he to D'Argens. ["Wilsdruf, 28th November,
1759," _OEuvres de Frederic,_ xix. 108.] "A bit of mummery to act on the
public feeling, I suppose. The result of it will be small: but as
the Belleisle LETTERS [taken in Contades's baggage, after Minden, and
printed by Duke Ferdinand for public edification] make always such
an outcry about poverty, those people are trying to impose on their
enemies, and persuade them that the carved and chiselled silver of the
Kingdom will suffice for making a vigorous Campaign. I see nothing else
that can have set them on imagining the farce they are now at. There is
Munster taken from them by the English-Hanoverian people; it is affirmed
that the French, on the 25th, quitted Giessen, to march on Friedberg
and repass the Rhine [might possibly have done so;--but the Hereditary
Prince and his 12,000 come to be needed elsewhere!]--Poor we are
opposite our enemies here, cantoned in the Villages about; the last
truss of straw, the last loaf of bread will decide which of us is to
remain in Saxony. And as the Austrians are extremely squeezed together,
and can get nothing out of Bohmen,"--one hopes it will not be they!

All through November, this sending of Plate, I never knew with what
net-result of moneys coinable, goes on in Paris; till, at the highest
tables, there is nothing of silver dishes left;--and a new crockery kind
(rather clumsy; "CULS NOIRS," as we derisively call them, pigment of
BOTTOM part being BLACK) has had to be contrived instead. Under what
astonishments abroad and at home, and in the latter region under what
execrations on Silhouette, may be imagined. "TOUT LE MONDE JURE BEAUCOUP
CONTRE M. DE SILHOUETTE, All the world swears much against him," says
Barbier;--but I believe probably he was much to be pitied: "A creative
genius, you; and this is what you come to?"

November 22d, the poor man got dismissed; France swearing at him, I
know not to what depth; but howling and hissing, evidently, with all
its might. The very tailors and milliners took him up,--trousers
without pockets, dresses without flounce or fold, which they called A LA
SILHOUETTE:--and, to this day, in France and Continental Countries,
the old-fashioned Shadow-Profile (mere outline, and vacant black) is
practically called a SILHOUETTE. So that the very Dictionaries have him;
and, like bad Count Reinhart, or REYNARD, of earlier date, he has become
a Noun Appellative, and is immortalized in that way. The first of
that considerable Series of Creative Financiers, Abbe Terray and the
rest,--brought in successively with blessings, and dismissed with
cursings and hissings,--who end in Calonne, Lomenie de Brienne, and
what Mirabeau Pere called "the General Overturn (CULBUTE GENERALE)."
Thitherward, privately, straight towards the General Overturn, is France
bound;--and will arrive in about thirty years.




FRIEDRICH, STRANGE TO SAY, PUBLISHES (March-June, 1760) AN EDITION OF
HIS POEMS. QUESTION, "WHO WROTE Matinees du Roi de Prusse?"--FOR THE
SECOND, AND POSITIVELY THE LAST TIME.

In this avalanche of impending destructions, what can be more surprising
than to hear of the Editing of Poems on his Majesty's part! Actual
publication of that OEuvre de Poesie, for which Voltaire, poor
gentleman, suffered such tribulation seven years ago. Now coming out
from choice: Reprint of it, not now to the extent of twelve copies for
highly special friends, but in copious thousands, for behoof of mankind
at large! The thing cost Friedrich very little meditating, and had
become necessary,--and to be done with speed.

Readers recollect the OEUVRE DE POESIE, and satirical hits said to be
in it. At Paris, about New-year's time 1760, some helpful Hand had
contrived to bring out, under the pretended date "Potsdam," a
cheap edition of that interesting Work. [_"OEuvres du Philosophe de
Sans-Souci:"_ 1 vol. 12 mo, "Potsdam [PARIS, in truth], 1760."] Merely
in the way of theft, as appeared to cursory readers, to D'Argens, for
example: [His Letter to the King, _OEuvres de Frederic,_ xix. 138.]
but, in deeper fact, for the purpose of apprising certain Crowned Heads,
friendly and hostile,--Czarish Majesty and George II. of England the
main two,--what this poetizing King was pleased to think of them in
his private moments. D'Argens declares himself glad of this theft, so
exquisitely clever is the Book. But Friedrich knows better: "March 17th,
when a Copy of it came to him," Friedrich sees well what is meant,--and
what he himself has to do in it. He instantly sets about making a few
suppressions, changes of phrase; sends the thing to D'Argens: "Publish
at once, with a little prefatory word." And, at the top of his speed,
D'Argens has, in three weeks' time, the suitable AVANT-PROPOS, or AVIS
AU LIBRAIRE, "circulating in great quantities, especially in London
and Petersburg" ("Thief Editor has omitted; and, what is far more,
has malignantly interpolated: here is the poor idle Work itself, not a
Counterfeit of it, if anybody care to read it"), and an Orthodox Edition
ready. [Came out April 9th [see MITCHELL, ii. 153], "and a second finer
Edition in June:" in _OEuvres de Frederic,_ x. p. x, xix. 137 n., 138;
especially in PREUSS, i. 467, 468 (if you will compare him with
HIMSELF on these different occasions, and patiently wind out his bit
of meaning), all manner of minutest details.] The diligent Pirate
Booksellers, at Amsterdam, at London, copiously reproduced this
authorized Berlin Edition too,--or added excerpts from it to their
reprints of the Paris one, by way of various-readings. And everybody
read and compared, what nobody will now do; theme, and treatment of
theme, being both now so heartily indifferent to us.

Who the Perpetrator of this Parisian maleficence was, remained
dark;--and would not be worth inquiring into at all, except for two
reasons intrinsically trifling, but not quite without interest to
readers of our time. First, that Voltaire, whom some suspected (some,
never much Friedrich, that I hear of), appears to have been perfectly
innocent;--and indeed had been incapacitated for guilt, by Schmidt and
Freytag, and their dreadful Frankfurt procedures! This is reason FIRST;
poor Voltaire mutely asking us, Not to load him with more sins than his
own. Reason SECOND is, that, by a singular opportunity, there has, in
these very months, [Spring, 1863.] a glimmering of light risen on it to
this Editor; illustrating two other points as well, which readers here
are acquainted with, some time ago, as riddles of the insignificant
sort. The DEMON NEWSWRITER, with his "IDEA" of Friedrich, and the
"MATINEES DU ROI DE PRUSSE:" readers recollect both those Productions;
both enigmatic as to authorship;--but both now become riddles which can
more or less be read.

For the surprising circumstance (though in certain periods, when the
realm of very Chaos re-emerges, fitfully, into upper sunshine now and
then, nothing ought to surprise one as happening there) is, That, only
a few months ago, the incomparable MATINEES (known to my readers five
years since) has found a new Editor and reviver. Editor illuminated "by
the Secretary of the Great Napoleon," "by discovery of manuscripts," "by
the Duc de Rovigo," and I know not what; animated also, it is said, by
religious views. And, in short, the MATINEES is again abroad upon the
world,--"your London Edition twice reprinted in Germany, by the Jesuit
party since" (much good may it do the Jesuit party!)--a MATINEES again
in comfortable circumstances, as would seem. Probably the longest-eared
Platitude now walking the Earth, though there are a good many with ears
long. Unconscious, seemingly, that it has been killed thrice and four
times already; and that indeed, except in the realm of Nightmare, it
never was alive, or needed any killing; belief in it, doubt upon it
(I must grieve to inform the Duc de Rovigo and honorable persons
concerned), being evidence conclusive that you have not yet the faintest
preliminary shadow of correct knowledge about Friedrich or his habits or
affairs, and that you ought first to try and acquire some.

To me argument on this subject would have been too unendurable. But
argument there was on it, by persons capable and willing, more than one:
and in result this surprising brand-new London moon-calf of a MATINEES
was smitten through, and slit in pieces, for the fifth time,--as if
that could have hurt it much! "MIT DER DUMMHEIT," sings Schiller; "Human
Stupidity is stronger than the very Gods." However, in the course of
these new inspections into matters long since obsolete, there did--what
may truly be considered as a kind of profit by this Resuscitating of the
moon-calf MATINEES upon afflicted mankind, and is a net outcome from it,
real, though very small--some light rise as to the origin and genesis of
MATINEES; some twinkles of light, and, in the utterly dark element, did
disclose other monstrous extinct shapes looming to right and left of
said monster: and, in a word, the Authorship of MATINEES, and not of
MATINEES only, becomes now at last faintly visible or guessable. To
one of those industrious Matadors, as we may call them, Slayers of this
moon-calf for the fourth or fifth time, I owe the following Note; which,
on verifying, I can declare to be trustworthy:--

"The Author of MATINEES, it is nearly certain", says my Correspondent,
"is actually a 'M. de Bonneville,'--contrary to what you wrote five
years ago. [A.D. 1858 (SUPRA, v. 165, 166).] Not indeed the Bonneville
who is found in Dictionaries, who is visibly impossible; but a
Bonneville of the preceding generation, who was Marechal de Saxe's
Adjutant or Secretary, old enough to have been the Uncle or the Father
of that revolutionary Bonneville. Marechal de Saxe died November 30th,
1750; this senior Bonneville, still a young man, had been with him to
Potsdam on visit there. Bonneville, conscious of genius, and now out of
employment, naturally went thither again; lived a good deal there, or
went between France and there: and authentic History knows of him, by
direct evidence, and by reflex, the following Three Facts (the SECOND of
them itself threefold), of which I will distinguish the indubitable from
the inferentially credible or as good as certain:--

"1. Indubitable, That Bonneville sold to Friedrich certain Papers,
military Plans, or the like, of the late Marechal and was paid for them;
but by no means met the recognition his genius saw itself to merit.
These things are certain, though not dated, or datable except as of
the year 1750 or 1751. After which, for above twenty years, Bonneville
entered upon a series of adventures, caliginous, underground, for most
part; 'soldiering in America,' 'writing anonymous Pamphlets or Books,'
roaming wide over the world; and led a busy but obscure and uncertain
life, hanging by Berlin as a kind of centre, or by Paris and Berlin
as his two centres; and had a miscellaneous series of adventures,
subterranean many of them, unluminous all of them, not courting
the light; which lie now in naturally a very dark condition. Dimly
discernible, however, in the general dusk of Bonneville, dim and vague
of outline, but definitely steady beyond what could have been expected,
it does appear farther,--what alone entitles Bonneville to the least
memory here, or anywhere in Nature now or henceforth,--

"2. Inferentially credible, That, shortly after that first rebuff in
Potsdam, he, not another, in 1752, was your 'DEMON NEWSWRITER,' whom
we gazed at, some time since, devoutly crossing ourselves, for a little
while!

"Likewise that, in 1759-1760, after or before his American wanderings,
he, the same Bonneville, as was suspected at the time, ["Nicolai, _Ueber
Zimmermanns Fragmente,_ i. 181, 182, ii. 253, 254. Sketch of what is
authentically known about Bonneville: 'suspected both of MATINEES and
of the Stolen EDITION.'"] stole and edited this surreptitious
mischief-making _OEuvres du Philosophe de Sans-Souci_ (Paris or
Lyon, pretending to be 'Potsdam,' January, 1760)," which we are now
considering!" Encouraged, probably enough, by Choiseul himself, who, in
any case, is now known to have been the promoter of this fine bit of
mischief, [Choiseul's own Note, "To M. de Malesherbes, DIRECTEUR DE
LA LIBRAIRE, 10th December, 1759: 'By every method screen the King's
Government from being suspected;--and get the Edition out at once.'"
(Published in the _Constitutionnel, _ 2d December, 1850, by M.
Sainte-Beuve; copied in Preuss, _OEuvres de Frederic,_ xix. 168
n.)]--and who may thereupon [or may as probably, NOT "thereupon," if it
were of the least consequence to gods or men] have opened to Bonneville
a new military career in America? Career which led to as good as
nothing; French soldiering in America being done for, in the course of
1760. Upon which Bonneville would return to his old haunts, to his old
subterranean industries in Paris and Berlin.

"And that, finally, in 1765, he, as was again suspected at the time,
["Nicolai, Ueber Zimmermanns Fragmente, i. 181, 182, ii. 253, 254.
Sketch of what is authentically known about Bonneville: 'suspected both
of MATINEES and of the Stolen EDITION.'"] he and no other, did write
those MATINEES, which appeared next year in print (1766), and many times
since; and have just been reprinted, as a surprising new discovery, at
London, in Spring, 1863.

"3. Again indubitable, That either after or before those Editorial
exploits, Bonneville had sold the Marechal de Saxe's Plans and Papers,
which were already the King's, to some second person, and been a second
time paid for them. And was, in regard to this Swindling exploit, found
out; and by reason of that sale, or for what reason is not known, was
put into Spandau, and, one hopes, ended his life there." ["Nicolai, UBI
SUPRA;--and besides him, only the two following references, out of half
a cart-load: 1. Bachaumont, MEMOIRES SECRETES, '7th February, 1765' (see
Barbier, _Dictionnaire des Anonymes,_  Matinees), who calls MATINEES
'a development of the IDEE DE LA PERSONNE,' &c. (that is, of your 'DEMON
NEWSWRITER;' already known to Bachaumont, this 'IDEE,' it seems, as
well as the MATINEES in Manuscript). 2. LETTER of Grimm to Duchess of
Sachsen-Gotha [OUR Duchess], dated 'Paris, 15th April, 1765:' not in
printed _Correspondance de Grimm,_ but still in the Archives of Gotha,
in company with a MS. of MATINEES, probably the oldest extant (see,--in
the GRENZBOTEN Periodical, Leipzig, 1863, pp. 473-484, 500-519,--K.
SAMWER, who is Chief MALLEUS of this new London moon-calf, and will
inform the curious of every particular)]."

MATINEES was first printed 1766 (no place), and seven or eight times
since, in different Countries; twice or thrice over, as "an interesting
new discovery:"--very wearisome to this Editor; who read MATINEES (in
poor LONDON print, that too) many years ago,--with complete satisfaction
as to Matinees, and sincere wish not to touch it again even with a pair
of tongs;--and has since had three "priceless MSS. of it" offered him,
at low rates, as a guerdon to merit.

Fact No. 2, which alone concerns us here,--and which, in its three
successive stages, does curiously cohere with itself and with other
things,--comes, therefore, not by direct light, which indeed, by the
nature of the case, would be impossible. Not by direct light, but by
various reflex lights, and convergence of probabilities old and new,
which become the stronger the better they are examined; and may be
considered as amounting to what is called a moral certainty,--"certain"
enough for an inquiry of that significance. To a kind of moral
certainty: kind of moral consolation too; only One individual of Adam's
Posterity, not Three or more, having been needed in these multifarious
acts of scoundrelism; and that One receiving payment, or part payment,
so prompt and appropriate, in the shape of a permanent cannon-ball at
his ankle.

This is the one profit my readers or I have yet derived from the late
miraculous Resuscitation of MATINEES ROYALES; the other items of profit
in that Enterprise shall belong, not to us in the least measure, but to
Bonneville, and to his well or ill disposed Coadjutors and Copartners in
the Adventure. Adieu to it, and to him and to them, forever and a day!




PEACE-NEGOTIATIONS HOPEFUL TO FRIEDRICH ALL THROUGH WINTER; BUT THE
FRENCH WON'T. VOLTAIRE, AND HIS STYLE OF CORRESPONDING.

This Winter there was talk of Peace, more specifically than ever.
November 15th, at the Hague, as a neutral place, there had been, by the
two Majesties, Britannic and Prussian, official DECLARATION, "We, for
our part, deeply lament these horrors, and are ready to treat of Peace."
This Declaration was presented November 15th, 1759, by Prince Ludwig of
Brunswick (Head General of the Dutch, and a Brother of Prince Ferdinand
our General's, suitable for such case), to the Austrian-French
Excellencies at the Hague. By whom it had been received with the due
politeness, "Will give it our profoundest consideration;" [DECLARATION
(by the two Majesties) that they are ready to treat of Peace, 15th
November, 1759, presented by, &c. (as above); ANSWER from France, in
stingy terms, and not till 3d April, 1760: are in _London Gazette;_ in
_Gentleman's Magazine,_ xxix. 603, xxx. 188; in &c. &c.]--which indeed
the French, for some time, privately did; though the Austrians privately
had no need to do so, being already fixed for a negative response to the
proposal. But hereby rose actual talk of a "Congress;" and wagging of
Diplomatic wigs as to where it shall be. "In Breda," said some; "Breda
a place used to Congresses." "Why not in Nanci here?" said poor old
Ex-Polish Stanislaus, alive to the calls of benevolence, poor old
Titular soul. Others said "Leipzig;" others "Augsburg;"--and indeed
in Augsburg, according to the Gazetteers, at one time, there were
"upholsterers busy getting ready the apartments." So that, with such
rumor in the Diplomatic circles, the Gazetteer and outer world was full
of speculation upon Peace; and Friedrich had lively hopes of it, and had
been hoping three months before, as we transiently saw, though again it
came to nothing. All to nothing; and is not, in itself, worth the least
attention from us here,--a poor extinct fact, loud in those months and
filling the whole world, now silent and extinct to everybody,--except,
indeed, that it offers physiognomic traits here and there of a certain
King, and of those about him. For which reason we will dwell on it a few
minutes longer.

Nobody, in that Winter 1759-1760, could guess where, or from whom, this
big world-interesting Peace-Negotiation had its birth; as everybody now
can, when nobody now is curious on the question! At Sagan, in September
last, we all saw the small private source of it, its first outspurt into
daylight; and read Friedrich's ANSWERS to Voltaire and the noble
Duchess on it:--for the sake of which Two private Correspondents, and
of Friedrich's relation to them, possibly a few more Excerpts may still
have a kind of interest, now when the thing corresponded on has ceased
to have any. To the Duchess, a noble-minded Lady, beautifully zealous to
help if she could, by whose hand these multifarious Peace-Papers have to
pass, this is always Friedrich's fine style in transmitting them. Out of
many specimens, following that of Sagan which we gave, here are the Next
Three:--


FRIEDRICH TO THE DUCHESS OF SACHSEN-GOTHA (Three other Letters on the
"Peace").

1. "WILSDRUF, 21st November, 1759 [day after Maxen, SURRENDER was THIS
morning--of which he has not heard].

"MADAM,--Nothing but your generosities and your indulgence could justify
my incongruity [INCONGRUITE, in troubling you with the Enclosed]. You
will have it, Madam, that I shall still farther abuse those bounties,
which are so precious to me: at least remember that it is by your order,
if I forward through your hand this Letter, which does not merit such
honor.

"Chance, which so insolently mocks the projects of men, and delights to
build up and then pull down, has led us about, thus far,--to the end of
the Campaign [not quite ended yet, if we knew]. The Austrians are girt
in by the Elbe on this side; I have had two important Magazines of
theirs in Bohemia destroyed [Kleist's doing]. There have been some bits
of fighting (AFFAIRES), that have turned entirely to our advantage:--so
that I am in hopes of forcing M. Daun to repass the Elbe, to abandon
Dresden, and to take the road for Zittau and Bohemia.

"I talk to you, Madam, of what I am surrounded with; of what, being in
your neighborhood, may perhaps have gained your attention. I could go
to much greater length, if my heart dared to explain itself on the
sentiments of admiration, gratitude and esteem, with which I am,--Madam
my Cousin,--Your most faithful Cousin, Friend and Servant,--F."


2.

"FREYBERG, 18th December, 1759.

"MADAM,--You spoil me so by your indulgence, you so accustom me to have
obligations to you, that I reproach myself a hundred times with this
presumption. Certainly I should not continue to enclose these Letters to
your care, had not I the hope that perhaps the Correspondence may be of
some use to England, and even to Europe,--for without doubt Peace is
the desirable, the natural and happy state for all Nations. It is to
accelerate Peace, Madam, that I abuse your generosities. This motive
excuses me to myself for the incongruity of my procedures.

"The goodness you have to take interest in my situation obliges me to
give you some account of it. We have undergone all sorts of misfortune
here [Maxen, what not], at the moment we were least expecting them.
Nevertheless, there remains to us courage and hope; here are Auxiliaries
[Hereditary Prince and 12,000] on the point of arriving; there is reason
to think that the end of our Campaign will be less frightful than seemed
likely three weeks ago. May you, Madam, enjoy all the happiness that I
wish you. May all the world become acquainted with your virtues, imitate
them, and admire you as I do. May you be persuaded that...--F."


3.

"FREYBERG, 16th February, 1760.

"MADAM,--It is to my great regret that I importune Your Highness so
often with my Letters. Your bounties, Madam, have spoiled me;--it
will teach you to be more chary of them to others. I regard you as an
estimable Friend, to whose friendship I have recourse in straits.
The question is still Peace, Madam; and were not the object of my
importunities so beautiful, Madam, I should be inexcusable."--Goes then
into practical considerations, about "Cocceji" (King's Aide-de-Camp,
once Keith's, who carries this Letter), about a "Herr von Edelsheim,"
a "Bailli de Froulay", and the possible "Conditions of Peace,"--not of
consequence to us just now. [_OEuvres de Frederic,_ xviii. 174, 173,
172. Correspondence on this subject lasts from 22d September, 1759, to
8th May, 1760: IB. pp. 170-186. In that final Letter of 8th May is the
phrase, hardly worth restoring to its real ownership, though the context
considerably redeems it there,--"the prejudice I can't get rid of, that,
in war, DIEU EST POUR LES GROS ESCADRONS."]

As to Voltaire again, and the new Friedrich-Voltaire Style of
Correspondence, something more of detail will be requisite. Ever since
the black days of 1757, when poor Wilhelmina, with Rossbach and Leuthen
still hidden from her in a future gloomy as death, desperately brought
Voltaire to bear upon Cardinal Tencin in this matter, without success,
there has been a kind of regular corresponding between Voltaire and
Friedrich; characteristic on both sides. A pair of Lovers hopelessly
estranged and divorced; and yet, in a sense, unique and priceless to one
another. The Past, full of heavenly radiances, which issued, alas, in
flames and sooty conflagrations as of Erebus,--let us forget it, and be
taught by it! The Past is painful, and has been too didactic to some
of us: but here still is the Present with its Future; better than blank
nothing. Pleasant to hear the sound of that divine voice of my loved
one, were it only in commonplace remarks on the weather,--perhaps
intermixed with secret gibings on myself:--let us hear it while we can,
amid those world-wide crashing discords and piping whirlwinds of war.

Friedrich sends his new Verses or light Proses, which he is ever and
anon throwing off; Voltaire sends his, mostly in print, and of more
elaborate turn: they talk on matters that are passing round them, round
this King, the centre of them,--Friedrich usually in a rather swaggering
way (lest his Correspondent think of blabbing), and always with
something of banter audible in him;--as has Voltaire too, but in a finer
TREBLE tone, being always female in this pretty duet of parted lovers.
It rarely comes to any scolding between them; but there is or can be
nothing of cordiality. Nothing, except in the mutual admiration, which
one perceives to be sincere on both sides; and also, in the mutual
practical estrangement: "Nothing more of you,--especially of YOU,
Madam,--as a practical domestic article!"

After long reading, with Historical views, in this final section of the
Friedrich-Voltaire Correspondence, at first so barren otherwise and of
little entertainment, one finds that this too, when once you CAN "read"
it (that is to say, when the scene and its details are visible to
you), becomes highly dramatic, Shakspearean-comic or more, for this
is Nature's self, who far excels even Shakspeare;--and that the
inextricably dark condition of these Letters is a real loss to the
ingenuous reader, and especially to the student of Friedrich. Among the
frequently recurring topics, one that oftenest turns up on Voltaire's
side is that of Peace: Oh, if your Majesty would but make Peace! Does it
depend on me? thinks Friedrich always; and is, at last, once provoked to
say so:--


FRIEDRICH TO VOLTAIRE.

"REICH-HENNERSDORF, 2d July, 1759, [shortly before Schmottseifen, while
waiting Daun's slow movements].

"Asking ME for Peace: there is a bitter joke!--[In verse, this; flings
off a handful of crackers on the BIEN-AIME, whose Chamberlain you are,
on the HONGROISE QUI'IL ADORE, on the Russian QUE J'ABHORRE;--then
continues in prose]:

"It is to him," the Well-beloved Louis, "that you must address
yourself, or to his Amboise in Petticoats [his Pompadour, acting the
Cardinal-Premier on this occasion]. But these people have their heads
filled with ambitious projects: these people are the difficulty; they
wish to be the sovereign arbiters of sovereigns;--and that is what
persons of my way of thinking will by no means put up with. I love
Peace quite as much as you could wish; but I want it good, solid and
honorable. Socrates or Plato would have thought as I do on this subject,
had they found themselves placed in the accursed position which is now
mine in the world.

"Think you there is any pleasure in leading this dog of a life [CHIENNE,
she-dog]? In seeing and causing the butchery of people you know nothing
of; in losing daily those you do know and love; in seeing perpetually
your reputation exposed to the caprices of chance; in passing year after
year in disquietudes and apprehensions; in risking, without end, your
life and your fortune?

"I know right well the value of tranquillity, the sweets of society, the
charms of life; and I love to be happy, as much as anybody whatever. But
much as I desire these blessings, I will not purchase them by basenesses
and infamies. Philosophy enjoins us to do our duty; faithfully to serve
our Country, at the price of our blood, of our repose, and of every
sacrifice that can be required of us. The illustrious ZADIG went through
a good many adventures which were not to his taste, CANDIDE the like;
and nevertheless took their misfortune in patience. What finer example
to follow than that of those heroes?

"Take my word, our 'curt jackets,' as you call them [HABITS ECOURTES,
peculiar to the Prussian soldier at that time], are as good as your red
heels, as the Hungarian pelisses, and the green frocks of the Roxelans
[Russians]. We are actually on the heels of the latter [at least
poor Dohna is, and poor Dictator Wedell will be, not with the effect
anticipated!]--who by their stupidities give us fine chance. You will
see I shall get out of the scrape this Year too, and deliver myself
both from the Greens and the Dirty-Whites [Austrian color of coat].
My neighbor of the Sacred Hat,--I think, in spite of Holy Father's
benediction, the Holy Ghost must have inspired him the reverse way; he
seems to have a great deal of lead in his bottom.... F." [_OEuvres de
Frederic,_ xxiii. 53.]

VOLTAIRE IN ANSWER.

"THE DELICES," guessed to be some time in "August, 1759."

"In whatever state you are, it is very certain that you are a great
man. It is not to weary your Majesty that I now write; it is to confess
myself,--on condition you will give me absolution! I have betrayed you;
that is the fact"--(really guilty this time, and HAVE shown something of
your writing; as your Majesty, oh how unjustly, is often suspecting that
I do, and with mischievous intention, instead of good, ah, Sire!)--In
fact, I have received that fine "MARCUS-AURELIUS" Letter (Letter we have
just read); exquisite Piece, though with biting "JUVENAL" qualities in
it too; and have shown it, keeping back the biting parts, to a beautiful
gillflirt of the Court, MINAUDIERE (who seems to be a Mistress of
Choiseul's), who is here attending Tissot for her health: MINAUDIERE
charmed with it; insists on my sending to Choiseul, "He admires the King
of Prussia, as he does all nobleness and genius; send it!" And I did
so;--and look here, what an Answer from Choiseul (Answer lost): and
may it not have a fine effect, and perhaps bring Peace--Oh, forgive me,
Sire. But read that Note of the great man. "Try if you can decipher
his writing. One may have very honest sentiments, and a great deal of
ESPRIT, and yet write like a cat....

"Sire, there was once a lion and a mouse (RAT); the mouse fell in love
with the lion, and went to pay him court. The lion, tired of it, gave
him a little scrape with his paw. The mouse withdrew into his mouse-hole
(SOURICIERE); but he still loved the lion; and seeing one day a net they
were spreading out to catch the lion and kill him, he gnawed asunder one
mesh of it. Sire, the mouse kisses very humbly your beautiful claws,
in all submissiveness:--he will never die between two Capuchins, as,
at Bale, the mastiff (DOGUE) of St. Malo has done [27th July last]. He
would have wished to die beside his lion. Believe that the mouse was
more attached than the mastiff."--V. [_OEuvres de Frederic,_ xxiii. 59,
60.]

To which we saw the Answer, pair of Answers, at Sagan, in September
last. This Note from Choiseul, conveyed by Voltaire, appears to have
been the trifling well-spring from which all those wide-spread waters
of Negotiation flowed. Pitt, when applied to, on the strength of
Friedrich's hopes from this small Document of Choiseul's, was of course
ready, "How welcome every chance of a just Peace!" and agreed to the
Joint Declaration at the Hague; and took what farther trouble I know
not,--probably less sanguine of success than Friedrich. Friedrich was
ardently industrious in the affair; had a great deal of devising and
directing on it, a great deal of corresponding with Voltaire and the
Duchess, only small fractions of which are now left. He searched out, or
the Duchess of Sachsen-Gotha did it for him, a proper Secret Messenger
for Paris: Secret Messenger, one Baron von Edelsheim, properly veiled,
was to consult a certain Bailli de Froulay, a friend of Friedrich's in
Paris;--which loyal-hearted Bailli did accordingly endeavor there; but
made out nothing. Only much vague talking; part of it, or most of it,
subdolous on Choiseul's side. Pitt would hear of no Peace which did
not include Prussia as well as England: some said this was the cause
of failure;--the real cause was that Choiseul never had any serious
intention of succeeding. Light Choiseul, a clever man, but an unwise,
of the sort called "dashing," had entertained the matter merely in the
optative form,--and when it came nearer, wished to use it for making
mischief between Pitt and Friedrich, and for worming out Edelsheim's
secrets, if he had any,--for which reason he finally threw Edelsheim
into the Bastille for a few days. [_OEuvres de Frederic,_ v. 38-41,
detailed account of the Affair.]

About the end of March I guess it to have been that Choiseul, by way of
worming out poor Edelsheim's secrets, flung him into the Bastille for
a day or two. Already in December foregoing, we have seen Choiseul's
Black-Artist busy upon the Stolen EDITION of Friedrich's Verses. A
Choiseul full of intrigues; adroit enough, ambitious enough; restlessly
industrious in making mischief, if there were nothing else to be made;
who greatly disgusted Friedrich, now and afterwards.

And this was what the grand Voltaire Pacification came to, though
it filled the world with temporary noise, and was so interesting to
Voltaire and another. What a heart-affecting generosity, humility and
dulcet pathos in that of the poor Mouse gnawing asunder a mesh of the
Lion's net! There is a good deal of that throughout, on the Voltaire
side,--that is to say, while writing to Friedrich. But while writing of
him, to third parties, sometimes almost simultaneously, the contrast
of styles is not a little startling; and the beautiful affectionately
chirping Mouse is seen suddenly to be an injured Wild-cat with its fur
up. All readers of Voltaire are aware of this; and how Voltaire handles
his "LUC" (mysterious nickname for KING FRIEDRICH ), when Luc's back is
turned. For alas, there is no man or thing but has its wrong side too;
least of all, a Voltaire,--doing TREBLE voice withal, if you consider
it, in such a Duet of estranged Lovers! Suppose we give these few
Specimens,--treble mostly, and a few of bass as well,--to illustrate
the nature of this Duet, and of the noises that went on round it, in a
war-convulsed world? And first of all, concerning the enigma "What is
Luc?"

What the LUC in Voltaire is? Shocking explanations have been hit
upon: but Wagniere (WAGNER, an intelligent Swiss man), Voltaire's old
Secretary, gives this plain reading of the riddle: "M. de Voltaire had,
at The Delices [near by Ferney, till the Chateau got built], a big
Ape, of excessively mischievous turn; who used to throw stones at the
passers-by, and sometimes would attack with its teeth friend or foe
alike. One day it thrice over bit M. de Voltaire's own leg. He had
called it LUC (Luke); and in conversation with select friends, as also
in Letters to such, he sometimes designated the King of Prussia by that
nickname: 'HE is like my Luc here; bites whoever caresses him!'--In 1756
M. de Voltaire, having still on his heart the Frankfurt Outrage, wrote
curious MEMOIRES [ah, yes, VIE PRIVEE]; and afterwards wished to burn
them; but a Copy had been stolen from him in 1768,"--and they still
afflict the poor world.

To the same effect speaks Johannes von Muller: "Voltaire had an Ape
called Luc; and the spiteful man, in thus naming the King, meant to
stigmatize him as the mere APE of greater men; as one without any
greatness of his own."--No; LUC was mischievous, flung stones after
passengers; had, according to Clogenson, "bitten Voltaire himself, while
being caressed by him;" that was the analogy in Voltaire's mind. Preuss
says, this Nickname first occurs "12th December, 1757." Suppose 11th
December to have been the day of getting one's leg bitten thrice over;
and that, in bed next morning,--stiff, smarting, fretful against the sad
ape-tricks and offences of this life,--before getting up to one's Works
and Correspondences, the angry similitude had shot, slightly fulgurous
and consolatory, athwart the gloom of one's mood? [Longchamp et Wagniere
_Memoires,_ i. 34; Johannes von Muller, _Works _ (12mo, Stuttgard,
1821), xxxi. 140 (LETTERS TO HIS BROTHER, No, 218, "July, 1796");
Clogenson's Note, in _OEuvres de Voltaire,_ lxxvii. 103; Preuss, ii.
71.] That will account for Luc.

Many of the Voltaire-Friedrich LETTERS are lost; and the remainder
lie in sad disorder in all the Editions, their sequence unintelligible
without lengthy explanation. So that the following Snatches cannot well
be arranged here in the way of Choral Strophe and Antistrophe, as would
have been desirable. We shall have to group them loosely under heads;
with less respect to date than to subject-matter, and to the reader's
convenience for understanding them.


VOLTAIRE ON FRIEDRICH, TO DIFFERENT THIRD-PARTIES, DURING THIS WAR.

TO D'ARGENTAL (Has not yet heard of LEUTHEN, which happened five days
before).... "I have tasted the vengeance of consoling the King of
Prussia, and that is enough for me. He goes beating on the one side, and
getting beaten on the other: except for another miracle [like Rossbach],
he will be ruined. Better have really been a philosopher, as he
pretended to be." [_OEuvres de Voltaire,_ lxvii. 139 ("The Delices, 10th
December, 1757").]

TO THE REVEREND COMTE DE BERNIS (outwardly still our flourishing
Prime-Minister, by grace of Pompadour, but soon to be extinguished under
a Red Hat. Date is six days before ZORNDORF).... "I cannot imagine
how some people have gone into suspecting that my heart might have the
weakness to lean a little towards WHOM you know, towards my Ingrate that
was! One is bound to have politeness; but one has memory as well;--and
one is attached, as warmly as superfluously, to the Good Cause, which
it belongs only to you to defend. Certain it is, poor I am not like the
three-fourths of the Germans in these days [since ROSSBACH, above all]!
I have everywhere seen Ladies'-fans with the Prussian Eagle painted on
them, eating the FLEUR-DE-LIS; the Hanover Horse giving a kick to M.
de Richelieu's bottom; a Courier carrying a bottle of Queen-of-Hungary
Water to Madame de Pompadour. My Nieces shall certainly not have
that fashion of Fans, at my poor little DELICES, whither I am just
returning." [Ib. lxxvii. 35 ("Soleure, 19th August, 1758").]

TO MADAME D'ARGENTAL (on occasion of MINDEN: Kunersdorf three days ago,
but not yet heard of).... "Truly, Madame, when M. de Contades leads to
the butchery all the descendants of our ancient chevaliers, and sets
them to attack eighty pieces of cannon [not in the least, if you knew
it; the reverse, if you knew it],--as Don Quixote did the windmills!
This horrible day pierces my soul. I am French to excess, especially
since those new favors [not worth mentioning here], which I owe to my
divine Angels and to M. le Duc de Choiseul.

"Luc--you know who Luc is [as do we]--is probably giving Battle to the
Austrians and Russians [KUNERSDORF, 12th; three days ago, did it,
and was beaten to your mind], at the moment while I have the honor of
writing to you; at least, he told me such was his Royal intention. If
they beat him, as may happen, what a shame for us to have been beaten by
the Duke of Brunswick! I wish you knew this Duke [as I have done; a Duke
of no ESPRIT, no gift of tongue, in fact no talent at all that I could
discern], you would be much astonished; and would say, 'The people whom
he beats must be great blockheads.' The truth of the fact is, that all
these troops are better disciplined than ours:" [_OEuvres de Voltaire,_
lxxviii, 186, 187 ("Delices, 15th August, 1759").]--Yes indeed, my
esteemed Voltaire; and also, perhaps, that ESPRIT, or gift of tongue, is
not the sole gift for Battles and Campaigns?--

TO D'ARGENTAL (seventh day after KUNERSDORF: "mouse upon lion's net"
nearly contemporaneous). "At last, then, I think my Russians must be
near Great Glogau [might have been, one thinks, after such a Kunersdorf;
did not start for a month yet; never could get very near at all]. Who
would have thought that Barberina [Mackenzie's Dancer once; sent to
Glogau, Cocceji and she, when their marriage became public] was going to
be besieged by the Russians, and in Glogau: O Destiny!--

"I don't love Luc, far from it: I never will pardon him his infamous
procedure with my Niece [at Frankfurt that time]; nor the face he has to
write me flattering things twice a month; without having ever repaired
his wrongs. I desire much his entire humiliation, the chastisement of
the sinner; whether his eternal damnation. I don't quite know." [Ib.
lxxviii. 195 ("19th August, 1759").] (Hear, hear!)

TO THE SAME (a month after MAXEN: "Peace" Negotiation very lively). ...
"Meanwhile, if Luc could be punished before this happy Peace! If, by
this last stroke of General Beck [tussle with Dierecke at Meissen, 4th
December, capture of Dierecke and 1,500; stroke not of an overwhelming
nature, but let us be thankful for our mercies], which has opened the
road from the Lausitz to Berlin [alas, not in the least], some Haddick
could pay Berlin a visit again! You see, in Tragedy I wish always to
have crime punished.

"There is talk of a great Battle fought the 6th [not a word of truth in
it] between Luc and him of the Consecrated Hat: said to have been very
murderous. I interest myself very much in this Piece" now playing under
the Sun. "Whenever the Austrians have any advantage, Kaunitz says to
Madame de Bentinck [litigant wandering Lady, known to me at Berlin and
elsewhere], 'Write that to our Friend Voltaire.' Whenever Luc has the
least success, he tells me, 'I have battered the oppressors of mankind.
Dear Angel, in these horrors I am the only one that has room to
laugh:--and yet I don't laugh either; owing to the CULS-NOIRS [base
crockery; one's Dinner Plate all vanished [Supra, p. 374.]], to the
Annuities, Lotteries, and to Pondicherry,--for I am always afraid about
that latter!" (Going, that, for certain; going, gone, and your East
Indies along with it!) [_OEuvres de Voltaire,_ lxxviii. 346 ("22d
December, 1759").]

TO PERPETUAL SECRETARY FORMEY (in forwarding a "Letter left with me").
"Health and peace, Monsieur; and be SECRETAIRE ETERNEL. Your King is
always a man unique, astonishing, inimitable. He makes charming verses,
in times when another could not write a line of prose; he deserves to
be happy: but will he be so? And if not, what becomes of you? For my own
part, I will not die between two Capuchins. Hardly worth while, exalting
one's soul for such a future as that. What a stupid and detestable farce
this world is!" [Ib. lxxviii. 348 (from SOUVENIRS D'UN CITOYEN, i. 302),
"11th January 1760."]

TO D'ARGENTAL ("Peace" Negotiations still at their briskest),... "But,
my dear Angel, you will see on Tuesday the great man who has turned my
head (DONT JE SUIS FOU), M. le Duc de Choiseul. The Letters he honors
me with enchant me. God will bless him, don't doubt it,"--after all! "We
have at Pondicherry a Lally, a devil of an Irish spirit,--who will cost
me, sooner or later, above 20,000 livres annually [have rents in our
INDIA COMPANY, say 1,000 pounds a year, as my Angels know], which used
to be the readiest item of my Pittance. But M. le Duc de Choiseul will
triumph over Luc in one way or other; then what joy! I suppose he shows
you my impertinent reveries. Do you know, Luc is so mad, that I don't
despair of bringing him to reason [persuading him to give up Cleve, and
knuckle as he should, in this Peace Affair]. That were what I should
call the true Comedy! I should like to have your advices on the
conduct of that Dramatic Piece." [_OEuvres de Voltaire,_ lxxviii. 375
("Delices, 15th February, 1760").]

The late "mouse" gnawing its mesh of net, what a subtle and mighty
hunter has it grown! This of Cleve, however, and of knuckling, would
not do. Hear the stiff Answer that comes: "'Conditions of Peace,' do you
call them? The people that propose such can have no wish to see Peace.
What a logic theirs! 'I might yield the Country of Cleve, because the
inhabitants are stupid'! What would your Ministers say if one required
the Province of Champagne from them, because the Proverb says,
Ninety-nine sheep and one Champagner make a Hundred head of cattle?"
[Friedrich to Voltaire, "Freyberg, 3d April, 1760:" _OEuvres de
Frederic,_ xxiii. 73, 74.]

AGAIN TO D'ARGENTAL (three or four months after; Luc having proved
obstinate, and still unsuccessful).... "I conjure you make use of all
your eloquence to tell him [the supreme Duc de Choiseul], that if Luc
misgo, it will be no misfortune to France. That Brandenburg will always
remain an Electorate; that it is good there be no Elector in it strong
enough to do without the protection of our King; and that all the
Princes of the Empire will always have recourse to that august
protection Most Christian Majesty's] CONTRA L'AQUILA GRIFAGNA,--were
the Prussian Kingship but abolished. Nota bene, if Luc were discomfited
this Year, we should have Peace next Winter." [_OEuvres de Voltaire,_
lxxix. 110 ("July, 1760").]

TO SUPREME CHOISEUL (a year later).... "He has been a bad man, this Luc;
and now, if one were to bet,--by the law of probability it would be 3
to 1 that Luc will go to pot (SERA PERDU), with his rhymings and his
banterings, and his injustices and politics, all as bad as himself."
[Ib. lxxx. 313 ("Chateau de Ferney, 13th July, 1761").]


VOLTAIRE ON SURROUNDING OBJECTS, CHIEFLY ON MAUPERTUIS, AND THE BATTLES.

TO D'ALEMBERT (in the Rossbach-Leuthen interval: on the Battle of
BRESLAU, 22d November, 1757; called by the Austrians "a Malplaquet," and
believed by Voltaire to be a Malplaquet and more). ... "The Austrians
do avenge us, and humble us [us, and our miserable Rossbachs], in a
terrible manner. Thirteen attacks on the Prussian intrenchments, lasted
six hours; never was Victory bloodier, or more horribly beautiful
[in the brain of certain men]. We pretty French fellows, we are more
expeditious, our job is done in five minutes. The King of Prussia is
always writing me Verses, now like a desperado, now like a hero; and
as for me, I try to live like a philosopher in my hermitage. He has
obtained what he always wished: to beat the French, to be admired by
them, to mock them; but the Austrians are mocking him in a very serious
way. Our shame of November 5th has given him glory; and with such glory,
which is but transient and dearly bought, he must content himself. He
will lose his own Countries, with those he has seized, unless the French
again discover [which they will] the secret of losing all their Armies,
as they did in 1741." [Ib. Lxxvii. 133, 134 ("Delices, 6th December,
1757," day after Leuthen).]


TO CLAIRAUT, THE MATHEMATICIAN (Maupertuis lately dead). An excellent
Treatise, this you have sent me, Monsieur! "Your war with the Geometers
on the subject of this Comet appears to me like a war of the gods in
Olympus, while on Earth there is going on a fight of dogs and cats....
Would to Heaven our friend Moreau-Maupertuis had cultivated his art
like you! That he had predicted comets, instead of exalting his soul
to predict the future; of dissecting the brains of giants to know the
nature of the soul; of japanning people with pitch to cure them of every
malady; of persecuting Konig; and of dying between Two Capuchins" (dead
three weeks ago, on those terms, poor soul)! [_OEuvres de Voltaire,_
lxxviii. 191 ("Delices, 19th August, 1759").]

TO D'ALEMBERT (a week later).... "What say you of Maupertuis dying
between Two Capuchins! He was ill, this long while, of a repletion of
pride; but I had not reckoned him either a hypocrite or an imbecile.
I don't advise you ever to go and fill his place at Berlin; you would
repent that. I am Astolpho warning Roger (Ruggiero) not to trust himself
to the Enchantress Alcina; but Roger was unadvisable." [Ib. lxxviii. 197
("Delices, 25th August, 1759").]

TO THE SAME (two years later: Luc, on certain grounds, may as well
be saved). "With regard to Luc, though I have my just causes of anger
against him, I own to you, in my quality of Frenchman and thinking
being, I am glad that a certain most Orthodox House has not swallowed
Germany, and that the Jesuits are not confessing in Berlin. Over towards
the Danube superstition is very powerful.... The INFAME--You are
well aware that I speak of superstition only; for as to the Christian
religion, I respect and love it, like you. Courage, Brethren! Preach
with force, and write with address: God will bless you.--Protect, you
my Brother, the Widow Calas all you can! She is a poor weak-minded
Huguenot, but her Husband was the victim of the WHITE PENITENTS. It
is the concern of Human Nature that the Fanatics of Toulouse be
confounded." (The case of Calas, SECOND act of it, getting on the
scene: a case still memorable to everybody. Stupendous bit of French
judicature; and Voltaire's noblest outburst, into mere transcendent
blaze of pity, virtuous wrath, and determination to bring rescue and
help against the whole world.) [_OEuvres de Voltaire,_ lxxviii. 52, 53
("Ferney, 28th November, 1762").]


FRIEDRICH TO VOLTAIRE, BEFORE AND DURING THESE PEACE NEGOTIATIONS.

AT SCHMOTTSEIFEN, FIVE DAYS BEFORE ZULLICHAU, TEN DAYS BEFORE THAT HUNT
OF LOUDON AND HADDICK (Voltaire, under rebuke for indiscretion, has been
whimpering a little. My discreet Niece burnt those LAST verses, Sire;
no danger there, at least! Truculent Bishop Something-AC tried to attack
your Majesty; but was done for by a certain person). Friedrich answers:
"In truth, you are a singular creature. When I think of scolding you,
you say two words, and the reproach expires. Impossible to scold you,
even when you deserve it....

"As to your Niece, let her burn me or roast me, I care little. Nor are
you to think me so sensitive to what your Bishops in IC or in AC may
say of me. I have the lot of all actors who play in public; applauded
by some, despised by others. One must prepare oneself for satires,
for calumnies, for a multitude of lies, which will be sent abroad into
currency against one: but need that trouble my tranquillity? I go my
road; I do nothing against the interior voice of my conscience; and I
concern myself very little in what way my actions paint themselves in
the brain of beings, not always very thinking, with two legs and without
feathers." ["Schmottseifen, 18th July, 1759;" _OEuvres de Frederic,_
xxiii. 55, 56.]

AT WILSDRUF, JUST BEFORE MAXEN (an exultant exuberant curious Letter;
too long for insertion,--part of it given above).... "For your Tragedy
of SOCRATE, thanks. At Paris they are going to burn it, the wretched
fools,--not aware that absurd fanaticism is their dominant vice. Better
burn the dose of medicine, however, than the useful Doctor. I, can I
join myself to that set? If I bite you, as you complain, it is without
my knowledge. But I am surrounded with enemies, one hitting me, another
pricking me, another daubing me with mud;--patience at last yields, and
one flies abroad into a general rage, too indiscriminate perhaps."

You talk of my Verses on Rossbach (my ADIEU TO THE HOOPERS on finding
their Bridge burnt [Supra, p. 21.]). "This Campaign I have had no
beatific vision, in the style of Moses. The barbarous Cossacks and
Tartars, infamous to look at on any side, have burnt and ravaged
countries, and committed atrocious inhumanities. This is all I saw of
THEM. Such melancholy spectacles don't tend to raise one's spirits.
[Breaks off into metre:] LA FORTUNE INCONSTANTE ET FIERE, Fortune
inconstant and proud. Does not treat her suitors Always in an equal
manner. Those fools called heroes, who run the country,

     Ces fous nommes heros, et qui courent les champs,
     Couverts de sang et de poussiere,
     Voltaire, n'ont pas tous les ans
     La faceur de voir le derriere
     De leurs ennemis insolents.

Can't expect that pleasure every year"!...

Maupertuis, say you? "Don't trouble the ashes of the dead; let the grave
at least put an end to your unjust hatreds. Reflect that even Kings make
peace after long battling; cannot you ever make it? I think you would
be capable, like Orpheus, of descending to Hell, not to soften Pluto and
bring back your beautiful Emilie, but to pursue into that Abode of Woe
an enemy whom your wrath has only too much persecuted in the world: for
shame!" [_OEuvres de Frederic,_ xxiii. 61-65 ("Wilsdruf, 17th November,
1759").]--and rebukes him, more than once elsewhere, in very serious
terms.

IN WINTER-QUARTERS, ON PEACE AND THE STOLEN EDITION. (Starts in verse,
which we abridge:) With how many laurels you have covered yourself in
all the fields of Literature! One laurel yet is wanting to the brow
of Voltaire. If, as the crown of so many perfect works, he could by a
skilful manoeuvre bring back Peace, I, and Europe with me, would think
that his masterpiece! [Takes to prose:]

"This is my thought and all Europe's. Virgil made as fine Verses as you;
but he never made a Peace. It will be a distinction you will have over
all your brethren of Parnassus, if you succeed.

"I know not who has betrayed me, and thought of printing [the
EDITION;--not you, surely!] a pack of rhapsodies which were good enough
to amuse myself, but were never meant for publication. After all, I
am so used to treacheries and bad manoeuvres,"--what matters this
insignificant one?

"I know not who the Bredow is [whom you speak of having met]; but he has
told you true. The sword and death have made frightful ravages among
us. And the worst is, we are not yet at the end of the tragedy. You may
judge what effect these cruel shocks made on me. I wrap myself in my
stoicism, the best I can. Flesh and blood revolt against such tyrannous
command; but it must be followed. If you saw me, you would scarcely know
me again: I am old, broken, gray-headed, wrinkled; I am losing my teeth
and my gayety: if this go on, there will be nothing of me left, but the
mania of making verses, and an inviolable attachment to my duties and
to the few virtuous men whom I know." [_OEuvres de Frederic,_ xxiii. 69
("Freyberg, 24th Feb. 1760").]

IN WINTER-QUARTERS, A MONTH LATER (comes still on "Peace" again). ...
"I will have you paid that bit of debt [perhaps of postage or the like],
that Louis of the Mill (Louis du Moulin," at Fontenoy, who got upon a
Windmill with his Dauphin, and caught that nickname from the common men)
"may have wherewithal to make war on me. Add tenth-penny tax to your tax
of twentieth-penny; impose new capitations, make titular offices to get
money; do, in a word, whatever you like. In spite of all your efforts,
you will not get a Peace signed by my hands, except on conditions
honorable to my Nation. Your people, blown up with self-conceit and
folly, may depend on these words. Adieu, live happy; and while you make
all your efforts to destroy Prussia, think that nobody has less deserved
it than I, either of you or of your French." [Ib. xxiii. 72 ("Freyberg,
20th March, 1760").]

STILL IN WINTER-QUARTERS (on "Peace" still; but begins with
"Maupertuis," which is all we will give). "What rage animates you
against Maupertuis? You accuse HIM of having published that Furtive
EDITION. Know that his Copy, well sealed by him, arrived here after his
death, and that he was incapable of such an indiscretion. [Breaks into
verse:]

     Leave in peace the cold ashes of Maupertuis:
     Truth can defend him, and will.
     His soul was faithful and noble:
     He pardoned you that scandalous Akakia (CE VIL LIBELLE
     QUE VOTRE FUREUR CRIMINELLE
     PRIT SOIN CHEZ MOI DE GRIFFONER); he did:--
     And you? Shame on such delirium as Voltaire's!
     What, this beautiful, what, this grand genius,
     Whom I admired with transport,
     Soils himself with calumny, and is ferocious on the dead?
     Flocking together, in the air uttering cries of joy,
     Vile ravens pounce down upon sepulchres,
     And make their prey of corpses:"--

Blush, repent, alas!

These Specimens will suffice. "The King of Prussia?" Voltaire would
sometimes say: "He is as potent and as malignant as the Devil; but he
is also as unhappy, not knowing friendship,"--having such a chance, too,
with some of us!




FRIEDRICH HAS SENT LORD MARISCHAL TO SPAIN: OTHER FOND HOPES OF
FRIEDRICH'S.

In the beginning of this Year, 1759, Earl Marischal had been called
out of his Neufchatel stagnancy, and launched into the Diplomatic field
again; sent on mission into Spain, namely. The case was this: Ferdinand
VI. of Spain (he who would not pay Friedrich the old Spanish debt, but
sent him merino rams, and a jar of Queen-Dowager snuff) had fallen into
one of his gloomy fits, and was thought to be dying;--did, in fact,
die, in a state nearly mad, on the 10th August following. By Treaty of
Aix-la-Chapelle, and by all manner of Treaties, Carlos of Naples, his
Half-Brother (Termagant's Baby Carlos, whom we all knew), was to succeed
him in Spain; Don Philip, the next Brother, now of Parma and Piacenza,
was to follow as King in Naples,--ceding those two litigious Duchies to
Austria, after all. Friedrich, vividly awake to every chance, foresaw,
in case of such disjunctures in Italy, good likelihood of quarrel there.
And has despatched the experienced old Marischal to be on the ground,
and have his eyes open. Marischal knows Spain very well; and has often
said, "He left a dear old friend there, the Sun." Marischal was under
way, about New-year's time; but lingered by the road, waiting how
Ferdinand would turn,--and having withal an important business of his
own, as he sauntered on. Did not arrive, I think, till Summer was at
hand, and his dear Old Friend coming out in vigor.

August 10th, 1759, Ferdinand died; and the same day Carlos became King
of Spain. But, instead of giving Naples to Don Philip, Carlos gave it
to a junior Son of his own; and left poor Philip to content himself with
Parma and Piacenza, as heretofore. Clear against the rights of Austria;
Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle is perfectly explicit on that point! Will
not Austria vindicate its claim? Politicians say, Austria might have
recovered not only Parma and Piacenza, but the kingdom of Naples
itself,--no France at present able to hinder it, no Spain ever able. But
Austria, contrary to expectation, would not: a Country tenacious enough
of its rights, real and imaginary; greedy enough of Italy, but of
Silesia much more! The matter was deliberated in Council at Vienna; but
the result was magnanimously, No. "Finish this Friedrich first; finish
this Silesia. Nothing else till that!"

The Marischal's legationary function, therefore, proved a sinecure;
no Carlos needing Anti-Austrian assistance from Friedrich or another;
Austria magnanimously having let him alone. Doubtless a considerable
disappointment to Friedrich. Industrious Friedrich had tried, on
the other side of this affair, Whether the King of Sardinia, once
an adventurous fighting kind of man, could not be stirred up, having
interests involved? But no; he too, grown old, devotional, apprehensive,
held by his rosaries, and answered, No. Here is again a hope reasonable
to look at, but which proves fallacious.

Marischal continued in Spain, corresponding, sending news (the Prussian
Archives alone know what), for nearly a couple of years. [Returned
"April, 1762" (Friedrich's Letter to him, "10th April, 1762:" in
_OEuvres de Frederic,_ xx. 285).] His Embassy had one effect, which is
of interest to us here. On his way out, he had gone by London, with a
view of getting legal absolution for his Jacobitism,--so far, at least,
as to be able to inherit the Earldom of Kintore, which is likely to
fall vacant soon. By blood it is his, were the Jacobite incapacities
withdrawn. Kintore is a cadet branch of the Keiths; "John, younger Son
of William Sixth Lord Marischal," was the first Kintore. William Sixth's
younger Son, yes;--and William's Father, a man always venerable to me,
had (A.D. 1593) founded Marischal College, Aberdeen,--where, for a
few, in those stern granite Countries, the Diviner Pursuits are still
possible (thank God and this Keith) on frugal oatmeal. MARISCHAL-COLLEGE
Keith, or FIFTH Lord Marischal, was grandfather's grandfather of our
Potsdam Friend, who is tenth and last. [Douglas's _Scotch Peerage,_
pp. 448 et seq., 387 et seq.] Honor to the brave and noble, now fallen
silent under foot NOT of the nobler! In a word, the fourth Kintore was
about dying childless; and Marischal had come by London on that heritage
business.

He carried, naturally, the best recommendations. Britannic Majesty, Pitt
and everybody met him with welcome and furtherance; what he wished was
done, and in such a style of promptness and cordiality, Pitt pushing
it through, as quite gained the heart of old Marischal. And it is
not doubted, though particulars have not been published, That he sent
important Spanish notices to Pitt, in these years;-and especially
informed him that King Carlos and the French Bourbon had signed a FAMILY
COMPACT (15th August, 1761), or solemn covenant, to stand by one another
as brothers. Which was thenceforth, to Pitt privately, an important
fact, as perhaps we shall see; though to other men it was still only a
painful rumor and dubiety. Whether the old Marischal informed him, That
King Carlos hated the English; that he never had, in his royal mind,
forgiven that insult of Commodore Martin's (watch laid on the table, in
the Bay of Naples, long ago), I do not know; but that also was a fact. A
diligent, indignant kind of man, this Carlos, I am told; by no means an
undeserving King of Spain, though his Portraits declare him an ugly:
we will leave him in the discreet Marischal's hands, with the dear Old
Friend shining equally on both.

Singular to see how, in so veracious an intellect as Friedrich's, so
many fallacies of hope are constantly entertained. War in Italy, on
quarrel with King Carlos; Peace with France and the Pompadour, by help
of Edelsheim and the Bailli de Froulay; Peace with Russia and the INFAME
CATIN, by help of English briberies (Friedrich sent an agent this winter
with plenty of English guineas, but he got no farther than the Frontier,
not allowed even to try): sometimes, as again this winter, it is hope of
Denmark joining him (in alarm against the Russian views on Holstein; but
that, too, comes to nothing); above all, there is perennially, budding
out yearly, the brighter after every disappointment, a hope in the
Grand Turk and his adherencies. Grand Turk, or failing him, the Cham of
Tartary,--for certain, some of these will be got to fasten on the heels
of Austria, of Russia; and create a favorable diversion? Friedrich took
an immense deal of trouble about this latter hope. It is almost pathetic
to see with what a fond tenacity he clings to it; and hopes it over
again, every new Spring and Summer. [Preuss, ii. 121 et seq., 292 &c.;
Schoning, ii. iii. PASSIM.]

The hope that an INFAME CATIN might die some day (for she is now deep
in chaotic ailments, deepish even in brandy) seems never to have
struck him; at least there is nowhere any articulate hint of it,--the
eagle-flight of one's imagination soaring far above such a pettiness!
Hope is very beautiful; and even fallacious hope, in such a Friedrich.
The one hope that did not deceive him, was hope in his own best exertion
to the very death; and no fallacy ever for a moment slackened him in
that. Stand to thyself: in the wide domain of Imagination, there is no
other certainty of help. No other certainty;--and yet who knows through
what pettinesses Heaven may send help!




Chapter IX.--PRELIMINARIES TO A FIFTH CAMPAIGN.

It was April 25th before Friedrich quitted Freyberg, and took Camp; not
till the middle of June that anything of serious Movement came. Much
discouragement prevails in his Army, we hear: and indeed, it must
be owned, the horoscope of these Campaigns grows yearly darker. Only
Friedrich himself must not be discouraged! Nor is;--though there seldom
lay ahead of any man a more dangerous-looking Year than this that is
now dimly shaping itself to Friedrich. His fortune seems to have quitted
him; his enemies are more confident than ever.

This Year, it seems, they have bethought them of a new device against
him. "We have 90 million Population," count they; "he has hardly 5; in
the end, he must run out of men! Let us cease exchanging prisoners with
him." At Jagerndorf, in April, 1758 (just before our march to Olmutz),
there had been exchange; not without haggles; but this was the last on
Austria's part. Cartel of the usual kind, values punctually settled: a
Field-marshal is worth 3,000 common men, or 1,500 pounds; Colonel worth
130 men, or 65 pounds; common man is worth 10s. sterling, not a high
figure. [Archenholtz, ii. 53.] The Russians haggled still more, no
keeping of them to their word; but they tried it a second time, last
year (October, 1759); and by careful urging and guiding, were got
dragged through it, and the prisoners on both sides sent to their colors
again. After which, it was a settled line of policy, "No more exchanging
or cartelling; we will starve him out in that article!" And had
Friedrich had nothing but his own 5 millions to go upon, though these
contributed liberally, he had in truth been starved out. Nor could
Saxony, with Mecklenburg, Anhalt, Erfurt, and their 10,000 men a year,
have supplied him,--"had not there," says Archenholtz (a man rather fond
of superlatives),--

"Had not there risen a Recruiting system," or Crimping system, "the
like of which for kind and degree was never seen in the Earth before.
Prisoners, captive soldiers, if at all likely fellows, were by
every means persuaded, and even compelled, to take Prussian
service. Compelled, cudgel in hand," says Archenholtz (who is too
indiscriminating, I can see,--for there were Pfalzers, Wurtembergers,
Reichsfolk, who had FIRST been compelled the other way): "not asked if
they wished to serve, but dragged to the Prussian colors, obliged to
swear there, and fight against, their countrymen." Say at least,
against their countrymen's Governors, contumacious Serene Highnesses of
Wurtemberg, Mecklenburg and the like. Wurtemberg, we mentioned lately,
had to shoot a good few of his first levy against the Protestant
Champion, before they would march at all!--I am sorry for these poor
men; and wish the Reich had been what it once was, a Veracity and
Practical Reality, not an Imaginary Entity and hideously contemptible
Wiggery, as it now is! Contemptible, and hideous as well;--setting
itself up on that, fundamental mendacity; which is eternally tragical,
though little regarded in these days, and which entails mendacities
without end on parties concerned!--But, apart from all this, certain it
is,

"The whole German Reich was deluged with secret Prussian Enlisters.
The greater part of these were not actual Officers at all, but hungry
Adventurers, who had been bargained with, and who, for their own profit,
allowed themselves every imaginable art to pick up men. Head and centre
of them was the Prussian Colonel Colignon," one of the Free-Corps
people; "a man formed by nature for this business [what a beautiful
man!]--who gave all the others their directions, and taught them by his
own example. Colignon himself," in winter-time, "travelled about in all
manner of costumes and characters; persuading hundreds of people
into the Prussian service. He not only promised Commissions, but gave
such,--nominating loose young fellows (LAFFEN), students, merchants'
clerks and the like, to Lieutenancies and Captaincies in the Prussian
Army [about as likely as in the Seraphim and Cherubim, had they known
it]: in the Infantry, in the Cuirassiers, in the Hussars,--it is all
one, you have only to choose. The renown of the Prussian arms was so
universal, and combined with the notion of rich booty, that Colignon's
Commission-manufactory was continually busy. No need to provide
marching-money, hand-money [shillings for earnest]; Colignon's recruits
travelled mostly of will and at their own charge. In Franken, in
Schwaben, in the Rhine Countries, a dissolute son would rob his
father,--as shopmen their masters' tills, and managers their
cash-boxes,--and hie off to those magnanimous Prussian Officials, who
gave away companies like kreutzers, and had a value for young fellows
of spirit. They hastened to Magdeburg with their Commissions; where they
were received as common recruits, and put by force into the regiments
suitable. No use in resisting: the cudgel and the drill-sergeant,"--who
doubts it?--"till complete submission. By this and other methods
Colignon and his helpers are reckoned to have raised for the King, in
the course of this War, about 60,000 recruits." [Archenholtz, ii. 53.]

This Year, Daun, though his reputation is on the decline lately, is to
have the chief command, as usual; the Grand Army, with Saxony for field
of conquest, and the Reichsfolk to assist, is to be Daun's. But, what is
reckoned an important improvement, Loudon is to have a separate command,
and Army of his own. Loudon, hot of temper, melancholic, shy, is not a
man to recommend himself to Kriegshofrath people; but no doubt Imperial
Majesty has had her own wise eye on him. His merits are so undeniable;
the need of some Commander NOT of the Cunctator type is become so very
pressing. "Army of Silesia, 50,000;" that is to be Loudon's, with
40,000 Russians to co-operate and unite themselves with Loudon; and
try actually for conquest of Silesia, this Year; while Daun, conquering
Saxony, keeps the King busy.

At Petersburg, Versailles, Vienna, much planning there has been, and
arduous consulting: first at Petersburg, in time and in importance,
where Montalembert has again been very urgent in regard to those poor
Swedish people, and the getting of them turned to some kind of use:
"Stettin in conjunction with the Swedes; oh, listen to reason, and
take Stettin!" "Would not Dantzig by ourselves be the advisable thing?"
answers Soltikof: "Dantzig is an important Town, and the grand Baltic
Haven; and would be so convenient for our Preussen, since we have
determined to maintain that fine Conquest." So thinks Czarish Majesty,
as well as Soltikof, privately, though there are difficulties as to
Dantzig; and, in fine, except Colberg over again, there can be nothing
attempted of sieging thereabouts. A Siege of Colberg, however, there is
actually to be: Second Siege,--if perhaps it will prove luckier than
the First was, two years since? Naval Armament Swedish-Russian,
specific Land Armament wholly Russian, are to do this Second Siege, at a
favorable time; except by wishes, Soltikof will not be concerned in
it; nor, it is to be hoped, shall we,--in such pressure of haste as is
probably ahead for us.

"Silesia would be the place for sieges!" say the Vienna people always;
and Imperial Majesty is very urgent; and tries all methods,--eloquence,
flatteries, bribes,--to bring Petersburg to that view. Which is at
last adopted; heartily by Czarish Majesty, ever ready for revenge on
Friedrich, the more fatal and the more direct, the better. Heartily
by her; not so heartily by Soltikof and her Army people, who know the
Austrian habits; and privately decide on NOT picking chestnuts from
the fire, while the other party's paws keep idle, and only his jaws are
ready.

Of Small-War there is nothing or little to be said; indeed there occurs
almost none. Roving Cossack-Parties, under one Tottleben, whom we shall
hear of otherwise, infest Pommern, bickering with the Prussian posts
there; not ravaging as formerly, Tottleben being a civilized kind of
man. One of these called at the Castle of Schwedt, one day; found Prince
Eugen of Wurtemberg there (nearly recovered of his Kunersdorf
wounds), who is a Son-in-law of the House, married to a Daughter of
Schwedt;--ancestor of the now Russian Czars too, had anybody then known
it. Him these Cossacks carried off with them, a march or two; then,
taking his bond for a certain ransom, let him go. Bond and bondholder
being soon after captured by the Prussians, Eugen paid no ransom; so
that to us his adventure is without moment, though it then made some
noise among the Gazetteers.

Two other little passages, and only two, we will mention; which have in
themselves a kind of memorability. First, that of General Czetteritz and
the MANUSCRIPT he lost. Of posts across the Elbe I find none mentionable
here, and believe there is none, except only Czetteritz's; who stands at
Cosdorf, well up towards Torgau Country, as sentry over Torgau and the
Towns there. On Czetteritz there was, in February, an attempt made
by the active General Beck, whom Daun had detached for that object.
Extremely successful, according to the Austrian Gazetteers; but in
reality amounting to as good as nothing:--Surprisal of Czetteritz's
first vedette, in the dawn of a misty February morning (February 21st,
1760); non-surprisal of his second, which did give fire and alarm,
whereupon debate; and Czetteritz springing into his saddle; retreat of
his people to rearward, with loss of 7 Officers and 200 prisoners;--but
ending in re-advance, with fresh force, a few hours after; [Seyfarth,
ii. 655.]--in repulse of Beck, in recovery of Cosdorf, and a general
state of AS-YOU-WERE in that part. A sputter of Post-War, not now worth
mentioning at all,--except only for one small circumstance: That in
the careering and swift ordering, such as there was, on the rear-guard
especially, Major-General Czetteritz's horse happened to fall; whereby
not only was the General taken prisoner, but his quarters got plundered,
and in his luggage,--what is the notable circumstance,--there was found
a small Manuscript, MILITAIRISCHE INSTRUKZION FUR DIE GENERALE, such
as every Prussian General has, and is bound to keep religiously
secret.[Stands now in _OEuvres de Frederic,_ xxviii. 3 et. seq.; was
finished (the revisal of it was), by the King, "2d April, 1748)" see
PREUSS, i. 478-480; and (_OEuvres de Frederic,_ xxviii. PREFACE, for
endless indistinct details about the translations and editions of it.
London Edition, 1818, calls itself the FIFTH.] This, carried to Daun's
head-quarters, was duly prized, copied; and in the course of a year came
to print, in many shapes and places; was translated into English, under
the Title, MILITARY INSTRUCTIONS BY THE KING OF PRUSSIA, in 1762 (and
again, hardly so WELL, in 1797); and still languidly circulates among
the studious of our soldiers. Not a little admired by some of them; and
unfortunately nearly all they seem to know of this greatest of modern
Soldiers. [See, for example, in _Life of General Sir Charles Napier, by
his Brother_ (London, 1857), iii. 365 and elsewhere,--one of the best
judges in the world expressing his joy and admiration on discovery
of Friedrich; discovery, if you read well, which amounts to these
INSTRUCTIONS, and no more.]

Next, about a month after, we have something to report of Loudon from
Silesia, or rather of the Enemies he meets there; for it is not a
victorious thing. But it means a starting of the Campaign by an
Austrian invasion of Silesia; long before sieging time, while all these
Montalembert-Soltikof pleadings and counter-pleadings hang dubious at
Petersburg, and Loudon's "Silesian Army" is still only in a nascent or
theoretic state, and only Loudon himself is in a practical one.

Friedrich has always Fouquet at Landshut, in charge of the Silesian
Frontier; whose outposts, under Goltz as head of these, stretch, by
Neisse, far eastward, through the Hills to utmost Mahren; Fouquet's own
head-quarter being generally Landshut, the main gate of the Country.
Fouquet, long since, rooted himself rather firmly into that important
post; has a beautiful ring of fortified Hills around Landshut; battery
crossing battery, girdling it with sure destruction, under an expert
Fouquet,--but would require 30,000 men to keep it, instead of 13,000,
which is Fouquet's allotment. Upon whom Loudon is fully intending a
stroke this Year. Fouquet, as we know, has strenuously managed to
keep ward there for a twelvemonth past; in spite, often enough, of
new violent invadings and attemptings (violent, miscellaneous, but
intermittent) by the Devilles and others;--and always under many
difficulties of his own, and vicissitudes in his employment: a
Fouquet coming and going, waxing and waning, according to the King's
necessities, and to the intermittency or constancy of pressures on
Landshut. Under Loudon, this Year, Fouquet will have harder times than
ever;--in the end, too hard! But will resist, judge how by the following
small sample:--

"Besides Fouquet and his 13,000," says my Note, "the Silesian Garrisons
are all vigilant, are or ought to be; and there are far eastward of
him, for guarding of the Jagerndorf-Troppau Border, some 4 or 6,000,
scattered about, under Lieutenant-General Goltz, in various Hill
Posts,--the chief Post of which, Goltz's own, is the little Town of
Neustadt, northward of Jagerndorf [where we have billeted in the
old Silesian Wars]: Goltz's Neustadt is the chief; and Leobschutz,
southwestward of it, under 'General Le Grand' [once the Major GRANT of
Kolin Battle, if readers remember him, "Your Majesty and I cannot take
the Battery ourselves!"] is probably the second in importance. Loudon,
cantoned along the Moravian side of the Border, perceives that he can
assemble 32,000 foot and horse; that the Prussians are 13,000 PLUS
6,000; that Silesia can be invaded with advantage, were the weather
come. And that, in any kind of weather, Goltz and his straggle of
posts might be swept into the interior, perhaps picked up and pocketed
altogether, if Loudon were sharp enough. Swept into the interior Goltz
was; by no means pocketed altogether, as he ought to have been!

"MARCH 13th, 1760, Loudon orders general muster hereabouts for the 15th,
everybody to have two days, bread and forage; and warns Goltz, as bound
in honor: 'Excellenz, to-morrow is March 14th; to-morrow our pleasant
time of Truce is out,--the more the pity for both of us!' 'Yea,
my esteemed neighbor Excellenz!' answers Goltz, with the proper
compliments; but judges that his esteemed neighbor is intending mischief
almost immediately. Goltz instantly sends orders to all his posts: 'You,
Herr General Grant, you at Leobschutz, and all the rest of you, make
your packages; march without delay; rendezvous at Steinau and Upper
Glogau [far different from GREAT-Glogau], Neisse-ward; swift!' And would
have himself gone on the 14th, but could not,--his poor little Bakery
not being here, nor wagons for his baggages quite to be collected in a
moment,--and it was Saturday, 15th, 5 A.M., that Goltz appointed himself
to march.

"The last time we saw General Goltz was on the Green of Bautzen, above
two years ago,--when he delivered that hard message to the King's
Brother and his party, 'You deserve to be tried by Court-martial, and
have your heads cut off!' He was of that sad Zittau business of the late
Prince of Prussia's,--Goltz, Winterfeld, Ziethen, Schmettau and others?
Winterfeld and the Prince are both dead; Schmettau is fallen into
disaster; Goltz is still in good esteem with the King. A stalwart,
swift, flinty kind of man, to judge by the Portraits of him;
considerable obstinacy, of a tacitly intelligent kind, in that steady
eye, in that droop of the eyebrows towards the strong cheek-bones;
plenty of sleeping fire in Lieutenant-General Goltz.

"His principal force, on this occasion, is one Infantry Regiment;
REGIMENT MANTEUFFEL:--readers perhaps recollect that stout Pommern
Regiment, Manteuffel of Foot, and the little Dialogue it had with the
King himself, on the eve of Leuthen: 'Good-night, then, Fritz! To-morrow
all dead, or else the Enemy beaten.' Their conduct, I have heard, was
very shining at Leuthen, where everybody shone; and since then they
have been plunging about through the death-element in their old
rugged way,--and re-emerge here into definite view again, under
Lieutenant-General Goltz, issuing from the north end of Neustadt, in the
dim dawn of a cold spring morning, March 15th, 5 A.M.; weather latterly
very wet, as I learn. They intend Neisse-way, with their considerable
stock of baggage-wagons; a company of Dragoons is to help in escorting:
party perhaps about 2,000 in all. Goltz will have his difficulties this
day; and has calculated on them. And, indeed, at the first issuing, here
they already are.

"Loudon, with about 5,000 horse,--four Regiments drawn up here, and
by and by with a fifth (happily not with the grenadiers, as he had
calculated, who are detained by broken bridges, waters all in flood
from the rain),--is waiting for him, at the very environs of Neustadt.
Loudon, by a trumpet, politely invites him to surrender, being so
outnumbered; Goltz, politely thanking, disregards it, and marches on:
Loudon escorting, in an ominous way; till, at Buchelsdorf, the fifth
Regiment (best in the Austrian service) is seen drawn out across the
highway, plainly intimating, No thoroughfare to Goltz and Pommern.
Loudon sends a second trumpet: 'Surrender prisoners; honorablest terms;
keep all your baggage: refuse, and you are cut down every man.' 'You
shall yourself hear the answer,' said Goltz. Goltz leads this second
trumpet to the front; and, in Pommern dialect, makes known what General
Loudon's proposal is. The Pommerners answer, as one man, a No of such
emphasis as I have never heard; in terms which are intensely vernacular,
it seems, and which do at this day astonish the foreign mind: 'We will
for him something, WIR WOLLEN IHM WAS--' But the powers of translation
and even of typography fail; and feeble paraphrase must give it: 'We
will for him SOMETHING INEFFABLE CONCOCT,' of a surprisingly contrary
kind! 'WIR WOLLEN IHM WAS' (with ineffable dissyllabic verb governing
it)! growled one indignant Pommerner; 'and it ran like file-fire along
the ranks,' says Archenholtz; everybody growling it, and bellowing
it, in fierce bass chorus, as the indubitable vote of Pommern in those
circumstances.

"Loudon's trumpet withdrew. Pommern formed square round its baggage;
Loudon's 5,000 came thundering in, fit to break adamant; but met such
a storm of bullets from Pommern, they stopped about ten paces short,
in considerable amazement, and wheeled back. Tried it again, still
more amazement; the like a third time; every time in vain. After which,
Pommern took the road again, with vanguard, rearguard; and had peace for
certain miles,--Loudon gloomily following, for a new chance. How many
times Loudon tried again, and ever again, at good places, I forget,--say
six times in all. Between Siebenhufen and Steinau, in a dirty defile,
the jewel of the road for Loudon, who tried his very best there, one of
our wagons broke down; the few to rear of it, eighteen wagons and some
country carts, had to be left standing. Nothing more of Pommern was left
there or anywhere. Near Steinau there, Loudon gave it up as desperate,
and went his way. His loss, they say, was 300 killed, 500 wounded;
Pommern's was 35 killed, and above 100 left wounded or prisoners. One
of the stiffest day's works I have known: some twelve miles of march, in
every two an attack. Pommern has really concocted something surprising,
and kept its promise to Loudon! 'Thou knowest what the Pommerners can
do,' said they once to their own King. An obstinate, strong-boned,
heavy-browed people; not so stupid as you think. More or less of Jutish
or Anglish type; highly deficient in the graces of speech, and, I should
judge, with little call to Parliamentary Eloquence." [Preuss, ii. 241
(incorrect in some small points); Archenholtz, ii. 61; Seyfarth, ii.
640, and _Beylagen,_ ii. 657-660; Tempelhof, iv. 8-10; in ANONYMOUS OF
HAMBURG (iv. 68) the Austrian account.]

Friedrich is, this Year, considered by the generality of mankind, to be
ruined: "Lost 60,000 men last Campaign; was beaten twice; his luck is
done; what is to become of him?" say his enemies, and even the impartial
Gazetteer, with joy or sorrow. Among his own people there is gloom or
censure; hard commentaries on Maxen: "So self-willed, high, and deaf
to counsel from Prince Henri!" Henri himself, they say, is sullen;
threatening, as he often does, to resign "for want of health;" and as he
quite did, for a while, in the end of this Campaign, or interval between
this and next.

Friedrich has, with incredible diligence, got together his finance
(copper in larger dose than ever, Jew Ephraim presiding as usual); and,
as if by art-magic, has on their feet 100,000 men against his enemy's
280,000. Some higher Officers are secretly in bad spirits; but the men
know nothing of discouragement. Friedrich proclaims to them at marching,
"For every cannon you capture, 100 ducats; for every flag, 50; for
every standard (cavalry flag), 40;"--which sums, as they fell due,
were accordingly paid thenceforth. [Stenzel, v. 236, 237; ib. 243.] But
Friedrich, too, is abundantly gloomy, if that could help him; which he
knows well it cannot, and strictly hides it from all but a few;--or all
but D'Argens almost alone, to whom it can do no harm. Read carefully by
the light of contemporary occurrences, not vaguely in the vacant
haze, as the Editors give it, his correspondence with D'Argens becomes
interesting almost to a painful degree: an unaffected picture of one
of the bravest human souls weighed down with dispiriting labors and
chagrins, such as were seldom laid on any man; almost beyond bearing,
but incurable, and demanding to be borne. Wilhelmina is away, away; to
D'Argens alone of mortals does he whisper of these things; and to him
not wearisomely, or with the least prolixity, but in short sharp gusts,
seldom now with any indignation, oftenest with a touch of humor in them,
not soliciting any sympathy, nor expecting nearly as much as he will get
from the faithful D'Argens.

"I am unfortunate and old, dear Marquis; that is why they persecute
me: God knows what my future is to be this Year! I grieve to resemble
Cassandra with my prophecies; but how augur well of the desperate
situation we are in, and which goes on growing worse? I am so gloomy
to-day, I will cut short.... Write to me when you have nothing better
to do; and don't forget a poor Philosopher who, perhaps to expiate his
incredulity, is doomed to find his Purgatory in THIS world." [_OEuvres
de Frederic,_ xix. 138, 139 ("Freyberg, 20th March, 1760").]... To
another Friend, in the way of speech, he more deliberately says:
"The difficulties I had, last Campaign, were almost infinite: such a
multitude of enemies acting against me; Pommern, Brandenburg, Saxony,
Frontiers of Silesia, alike in danger, often enough all at one time.
If I escaped absolute destructiou, I must impute it chiefly to the
misconduct of my enemies; who gained such advantages, but had not the
sense to follow them up. Experience often corrects people of their
blunders: I cannot expect to profit by anything of that kind; on their
part, in the course of this Campaign:" judge if it will be a light
one, MON CHER. [To Mitchell, one evening, "Camp of Schlettau, May 23d"
(Mitchell, ii. 159).]

The symptoms we decipher in these Letters, and otherwise, are those of
a man drenched in misery; but used to his black element, unaffectedly
defiant of it, or not at the pains to defy it; occupied only to do
his very utmost in it, with or without success, till the end come.
Prometheus, chained on the Ocean-cliffs, with the New Ruling-Powers in
the upper hand, and their vultures gradually eating him; dumb Time and
dumb Space looking on, apparently with small sympathy: Prometheus and
other Titans, now and then, have touched the soul of some AEschylus,
and drawn tones of melodious sympathy, far heard among mankind. But with
this new Titan it is not so: nor, upon the whole, with the proper
Titan, in this world, is it usually so; the world being a--what shall
we say?--a poorish kind of world, and its melodies and dissonances,
its loves and its hatreds worth comparatively little in the long-run.
Friedrich does wonderfully without sympathy from almost anybody; and
the indifference with which he walks along, under such a cloud of sulky
stupidities, of mendacities and misconceptions from the herd of mankind,
is decidedly admirable to me.

But let us look into the Campaign itself. Perhaps--contrary to the
world's opinion, and to Friedrich's own when, in ultra-lucid moments, he
gazes into it in the light of cold arithmetic, and finds the aspect of
it "frightful"--this Campaign will be a little luckier to him than the
last? Unluckier it cannot well be:--or if so, it will at least be final
to him!

========================================
========================================

EARLY KINGS OF NORWAY.

by Thomas Carlyle


Transcriber's Note: The text has been taken from volume 19 of the
"Sterling Edition" of Carlyle's complete works. All footnotes have been
collected as endnotes. The pound (currency) symbol has been replaced by
the word "pounds".



The Icelanders, in their long winter, had a great habit of writing; and
were, and still are, excellent in penmanship, says Dahlmann. It is to
this fact, that any little history there is of the Norse Kings and their
old tragedies, crimes and heroisms, is almost all due. The Icelanders,
it seems, not only made beautiful letters on their paper or parchment,
but were laudably observant and desirous of accuracy; and have left
us such a collection of narratives (_Sagas_, literally "Says") as,
for quantity and quality, is unexampled among rude nations. Snorro
Sturleson's History of the Norse Kings is built out of these old
Sagas; and has in it a great deal of poetic fire, not a little faithful
sagacity applied in sifting and adjusting these old Sagas; and, in a
word, deserves, were it once well edited, furnished with accurate
maps, chronological summaries, &c., to be reckoned among the great
history-books of the world. It is from these sources, greatly aided by
accurate, learned and unwearied Dahlmann, [1] the German Professor, that
the following rough notes of the early Norway Kings are hastily thrown
together. In Histories of England (Rapin's excepted) next to nothing has
been shown of the many and strong threads of connection between English
affairs and Norse.



CHAPTER I. HARALD HAARFAGR.

Till about the Year of Grace 860 there were no kings in Norway, nothing
but numerous jarls,--essentially kinglets, each presiding over a kind of
republican or parliamentary little territory; generally striving each
to be on some terms of human neighborhood with those about him, but,--in
spite of "_Fylke Things_" (Folk Things, little parish parliaments),
and small combinations of these, which had gradually formed
themselves,--often reduced to the unhappy state of quarrel with them.
Harald Haarfagr was the first to put an end to this state of things, and
become memorable and profitable to his country by uniting it under
one head and making a kingdom of it; which it has continued to be ever
since. His father, Halfdan the Black, had already begun this rough but
salutary process,--inspired by the cupidities and instincts, by the
faculties and opportunities, which the good genius of this world,
beneficent often enough under savage forms, and diligent at all times to
diminish anarchy as the world's worst savagery, usually appoints in
such cases,--conquest, hard fighting, followed by wise guidance of the
conquered;--but it was Harald the Fairhaired, his son, who conspicuously
carried it on and completed it. Harald's birth-year, death-year, and
chronology in general, are known only by inference and computation; but,
by the latest reckoning, he died about the year 933 of our era, a man of
eighty-three.

The business of conquest lasted Harald about twelve years (A.D.
860-872?), in which he subdued also the vikings of the out-islands,
Orkneys, Shetlands, Hebrides, and Man. Sixty more years were given him
to consolidate and regulate what he had conquered, which he did with
great judgment, industry and success. His reign altogether is counted to
have been of over seventy years.

The beginning of his great adventure was of a romantic
character.--youthful love for the beautiful Gyda, a then glorious and
famous young lady of those regions, whom the young Harald aspired to
marry. Gyda answered his embassy and prayer in a distant, lofty manner:
"Her it would not beseem to wed any Jarl or poor creature of that kind;
let him do as Gorm of Denmark, Eric of Sweden, Egbert of England,
and others had done,--subdue into peace and regulation the confused,
contentious bits of jarls round him, and become a king; then, perhaps,
she might think of his proposal: till then, not." Harald was struck with
this proud answer, which rendered Gyda tenfold more desirable to him.
He vowed to let his hair grow, never to cut or even to comb it till this
feat were done, and the peerless Gyda his own. He proceeded accordingly
to conquer, in fierce battle, a Jarl or two every year, and, at the end
of twelve years, had his unkempt (and almost unimaginable) head of hair
clipt off,--Jarl Rognwald (_Reginald_) of More, the most valued and
valuable of all his subject-jarls, being promoted to this sublime barber
function;--after which King Harald, with head thoroughly cleaned, and
hair grown, or growing again to the luxuriant beauty that had no equal
in his day, brought home his Gyda, and made her the brightest queen
in all the north. He had after her, in succession, or perhaps even
simultaneously in some cases, at least six other wives; and by Gyda
herself one daughter and four sons.

Harald was not to be considered a strict-living man, and he had a great
deal of trouble, as we shall see, with the tumultuous ambition of his
sons; but he managed his government, aided by Jarl Rognwald and others,
in a large, quietly potent, and successful manner; and it lasted in this
royal form till his death, after sixty years of it.

These were the times of Norse colonization; proud Norsemen flying into
other lands, to freer scenes,--to Iceland, to the Faroe Islands, which
were hitherto quite vacant (tenanted only by some mournful hermit,
Irish Christian _fakir_, or so); still more copiously to the Orkney and
Shetland Isles, the Hebrides and other countries where Norse squatters
and settlers already were. Settlement of Iceland, we say; settlement
of the Faroe Islands, and, by far the notablest of all, settlement of
Normandy by Rolf the Ganger (A.D. 876?). [2]

Rolf, son of Rognwald, [3] was lord of three little islets far north,
near the Fjord of Folden, called the Three Vigten Islands; but his
chief means of living was that of sea robbery; which, or at least Rolf's
conduct in which, Harald did not approve of. In the Court of Harald,
sea-robbery was strictly forbidden as between Harald's own countries,
but as against foreign countries it continued to be the one profession
for a gentleman; thus, I read, Harald's own chief son, King Eric that
afterwards was, had been at sea in such employments ever since his
twelfth year. Rolf's crime, however, was that in coming home from one of
these expeditions, his crew having fallen short of victual, Rolf landed
with them on the shore of Norway, and in his strait, drove in some
cattle there (a crime by law) and proceeded to kill and eat; which, in a
little while, he heard that King Harald was on foot to inquire into and
punish; whereupon Rolf the Ganger speedily got into his ships again, got
to the coast of France with his sea-robbers, got infestment by the poor
King of France in the fruitful, shaggy desert which is since called
Normandy, land of the Northmen; and there, gradually felling the
forests, banking the rivers, tilling the fields, became, during the next
two centuries, Wilhelmus Conquaestor, the man famous to England, and
momentous at this day, not to England alone, but to all speakers of the
English tongue, now spread from side to side of the world in a wonderful
degree. Tancred of Hauteville and his Italian Normans, though important
too, in Italy, are not worth naming in comparison. This is a feracious
earth, and the grain of mustard-seed will grow to miraculous extent in
some cases.

Harald's chief helper, counsellor, and lieutenant was the
above-mentioned Jarl Rognwald of More, who had the honor to cut Harald's
dreadful head of hair. This Rognwald was father of Turf-Einar, who first
invented peat in the Orkneys, finding the wood all gone there; and
is remembered to this day. Einar, being come to these islands by King
Harald's permission, to see what he could do in them,--islands
inhabited by what miscellany of Picts, Scots, Norse squatters we do not
know,--found the indispensable fuel all wasted. Turf-Einar too may be
regarded as a benefactor to his kind. He was, it appears, a bastard;
and got no coddling from his father, who disliked him, partly perhaps,
because "he was ugly and blind of an eye,"--got no flattering even on
his conquest of the Orkneys and invention of peat. Here is the parting
speech his father made to him on fitting him out with a "long-ship"
(ship of war, "dragon-ship," ancient seventy-four), and sending him
forth to make a living for himself in the world: "It were best if thou
never camest back, for I have small hope that thy people will have honor
by thee; thy mother's kin throughout is slavish."

Harald Haarfagr had a good many sons and daughters; the daughters he
married mostly to jarls of due merit who were loyal to him; with the
sons, as remarked above, he had a great deal of trouble. They were
ambitious, stirring fellows, and grudged at their finding so little
promotion from a father so kind to his jarls; sea-robbery by no means
an adequate career for the sons of a great king, two of them, Halfdan
Haaleg (Long-leg), and Gudrod Ljome (Gleam), jealous of the favors won
by the great Jarl Rognwald, surrounded him in his house one night, and
burnt him and sixty men to death there. That was the end of Rognwald,
the invaluable jarl, always true to Haarfagr; and distinguished in world
history by producing Rolf the Ganger, author of the Norman Conquest of
England, and Turf-Einar, who invented peat in the Orkneys. Whether Rolf
had left Norway at this time there is no chronology to tell me. As to
Rolf's surname, "Ganger," there are various hypotheses; the likeliest,
perhaps, that Rolf was so weighty a man no horse (small Norwegian
horses, big ponies rather) could carry him, and that he usually walked,
having a mighty stride withal, and great velocity on foot.

One of these murderers of Jarl Rognwald quietly set himself in
Rognwald's place, the other making for Orkney to serve Turf-Einar in
like fashion. Turf-Einar, taken by surprise, fled to the mainland; but
returned, days or perhaps weeks after, ready for battle, fought with
Halfdan, put his party to flight, and at next morning's light searched
the island and slew all the men he found. As to Halfdan Long-leg
himself, in fierce memory of his own murdered father, Turf-Einar "cut an
eagle on his back," that is to say, hewed the ribs from each side of the
spine and turned them out like the wings of a spread-eagle: a mode of
Norse vengeance fashionable at that time in extremely aggravated cases!

Harald Haarfagr, in the mean time, had descended upon the Rognwald
scene, not in mild mood towards the new jarl there; indignantly
dismissed said jarl, and appointed a brother of Rognwald (brother, notes
Dahlmann), though Rognwald had left other sons. Which done, Haarfagr
sailed with all speed to the Orkneys, there to avenge that cutting of an
eagle on the human back on Turf-Einar's part. Turf-Einar did not resist;
submissively met the angry Haarfagr, said he left it all, what had been
done, what provocation there had been, to Haarfagr's own equity and
greatness of mind. Magnanimous Haarfagr inflicted a fine of sixty marks
in gold, which was paid in ready money by Turf-Einar, and so the matter
ended.



CHAPTER II. ERIC BLOOD-AXE AND BROTHERS.

In such violent courses Haarfagr's sons, I know not how many of them,
had come to an untimely end; only Eric, the accomplished sea-rover, and
three others remained to him. Among these four sons, rather impatient
for property and authority of their own, King Harald, in his old days,
tried to part his kingdom in some eligible and equitable way, and retire
from the constant press of business, now becoming burdensome to him. To
each of them he gave a kind of kingdom; Eric, his eldest son, to be head
king, and the others to be feudatory under him, and pay a certain yearly
contribution; an arrangement which did not answer well at all. Head-King
Eric insisted on his tribute; quarrels arose as to the payment,
considerable fighting and disturbance, bringing fierce destruction from
King Eric upon many valiant but too stubborn Norse spirits, and among
the rest upon all his three brothers, which got him from the Norse
populations the surname of _Blod-axe_, "Eric Blood-axe," his title in
history. One of his brothers he had killed in battle before his old
father's life ended; this brother was Bjorn, a peaceable, improving,
trading economic Under-king, whom the others mockingly called "Bjorn
the Chapman." The great-grandson of this Bjorn became extremely
distinguished by and by as _Saint_ Olaf. Head-King Eric seems to have
had a violent wife, too. She was thought to have poisoned one of her
other brothers-in-law. Eric Blood-axe had by no means a gentle life
of it in this world, trained to sea-robbery on the coasts of England,
Scotland, Ireland and France, since his twelfth year.

Old King Fairhair, at the age of seventy, had another son, to whom was
given the name of Hakon. His mother was a slave in Fairhair's house;
slave by ill-luck of war, though nobly enough born. A strange adventure
connects this Hakon with England and King Athelstan, who was then
entering upon his great career there. Short while after this Hakon came
into the world, there entered Fairhair's palace, one evening as Fairhair
sat Feasting, an English ambassador or messenger, bearing in his hand,
as gift from King Athelstan, a magnificent sword, with gold hilt and
other fine trimmings, to the great Harald, King of Norway. Harald
took the sword, drew it, or was half drawing it, admiringly from the
scabbard, when the English excellency broke into a scornful laugh, "Ha,
ha; thou art now the feudatory of my English king; thou hast accepted
the sword from him, and art now his man!" (acceptance of a sword in that
manner being the symbol of investiture in those days.) Harald looked
a trifle flurried, it is probable; but held in his wrath, and did
no damage to the tricksy Englishman. He kept the matter in his mind,
however, and next summer little Hakon, having got his weaning done,--one
of the prettiest, healthiest little creatures,--Harald sent him off,
under charge of "Hauk" (Hawk so called), one of his Principal, warriors,
with order, "Take him to England," and instructions what to do with him
there. And accordingly, one evening, Hauk, with thirty men escorting,
strode into Athelstan's high dwelling (where situated, how built,
whether with logs like Harald's, I cannot specifically say), into
Athelstan's high presence, and silently set the wild little cherub upon
Athelstan's knee. "What is this?" asked Athelstan, looking at the little
cherub. "This is King Harald's son, whom a serving-maid bore to him, and
whom he now gives thee as foster-child!" Indignant Athelstan drew his
sword, as if to do the gift a mischief; but Hauk said, "Thou hast taken
him on thy knee  [common symbol of adoption]; thou canst kill him if thou
wilt; but thou dost not thereby kill all the sons of Harald." Athelstan
straightway took milder thoughts; brought up, and carefully educated
Hakon; from whom, and this singular adventure, came, before very long,
the first tidings of Christianity into Norway.

Harald Haarfagr, latterly withdrawn from all kinds of business, died
at the age of eighty-three--about A.D. 933, as is computed; nearly
contemporary in death with the first Danish King, Gorm the Old, who had
done a corresponding feat in reducing Denmark under one head. Remarkable
old men, these two first kings; and possessed of gifts for bringing
Chaos a little nearer to the form of Cosmos; possessed, in fact, of
loyalties to Cosmos, that is to say, of authentic virtues in the savage
state, such as have been needed in all societies at their incipience in
this world; a kind of "virtues" hugely in discredit at present, but not
unlikely to be needed again, to the astonishment of careless persons,
before all is done!



CHAPTER III. HAKON THE GOOD.

Eric Blood-axe, whose practical reign is counted to have begun about
A.D. 930, had by this time, or within a year or so of this time, pretty
much extinguished all his brother kings, and crushed down recalcitrant
spirits, in his violent way; but had naturally become entirely unpopular
in Norway, and filled it with silent discontent and even rage against
him. Hakon Fairhair's last son, the little foster-child of Athelstan in
England, who had been baptized and carefully educated, was come to
his fourteenth or fifteenth year at his father's death; a very
shining youth, as Athelstan saw with just pleasure. So soon as the few
preliminary preparations had been settled, Hakon, furnished with a ship
or two by Athelstan, suddenly appeared in Norway got acknowledged by
the Peasant Thing in Trondhjem "the news of which flew over Norway, like
fire through dried grass," says an old chronicler. So that Eric, with
his Queen Gunhild, and seven small children, had to run; no other shift
for Eric. They went to the Orkneys first of all, then to England, and
he "got Northumberland as earldom," I vaguely hear, from Athelstan.
But Eric soon died, and his queen, with her children, went back to
the Orkneys in search of refuge or help; to little purpose there or
elsewhere. From Orkney she went to Denmark, where Harald Blue-tooth took
her poor eldest boy as foster-child; but I fear did not very faithfully
keep that promise. The Danes had been robbing extensively during the
late tumults in Norway; this the Christian Hakon, now established there,
paid in kind, and the two countries were at war; so that Gunhild's
little boy was a welcome card in the hand of Blue-tooth.

Hakon proved a brilliant and successful king; regulated many things,
public law among others (_Gule-Thing_ Law, _Frost-Thing_ Law: these
are little codes of his accepted by their respective Things, and had a
salutary effect in their time); with prompt dexterity he drove back the
Blue-tooth foster-son invasions every time they came; and on the whole
gained for himself the name of Hakon the Good. These Danish invasions
were a frequent source of trouble to him, but his greatest and continual
trouble was that of extirpating heathen idolatry from Norway, and
introducing the Christian Evangel in its stead. His transcendent anxiety
to achieve this salutary enterprise was all along his grand difficulty
and stumbling-block; the heathen opposition to it being also rooted
and great. Bishops and priests from England Hakon had, preaching and
baptizing what they could, but making only slow progress; much too slow
for Hakon's zeal. On the other hand, every Yule-tide, when the chief
heathen were assembled in his own palace on their grand sacrificial
festival, there was great pressure put upon Hakon, as to sprinkling
with horse-blood, drinking Yule-beer, eating horse-flesh, and the other
distressing rites; the whole of which Hakon abhorred, and with all
his steadfastness strove to reject utterly. Sigurd, Jarl of Lade
(Trondhjem), a liberal heathen, not openly a Christian, was ever a wise
counsellor and conciliator in such affairs; and proved of great help
to Hakon. Once, for example, there having risen at a Yule-feast, loud,
almost stormful demand that Hakon, like a true man and brother, should
drink Yule-beer with them in their sacred hightide, Sigurd persuaded him
to comply, for peace's sake, at least, in form. Hakon took the cup in
his left hand (excellent hot _beer_), and with his right cut the sign
of the cross above it, then drank a draught. "Yes; but what is this with
the king's right hand?" cried the company. "Don't you see?" answered
shifty Sigurd; "he makes the sign of Thor's hammer before drinking!"
which quenched the matter for the time.

Horse-flesh, horse-broth, and the horse ingredient generally, Hakon all
but inexorably declined. By Sigurd's pressing exhortation and entreaty,
he did once take a kettle of horsebroth by the handle, with a good deal
of linen-quilt or towel interposed, and did open his lips for what of
steam could insinuate itself. At another time he consented to a particle
of horse-liver, intending privately, I guess, to keep it outside the
gullet, and smuggle it away without swallowing; but farther than this
not even Sigurd could persuade him to go. At the Things held in regard
to this matter Hakon's success was always incomplete; now and then it
was plain failure, and Hakon had to draw back till a better time. Here
is one specimen of the response he got on such an occasion; curious
specimen, withal, of antique parliamentary eloquence from an
Anti-Christian Thing.

At a Thing of all the Fylkes of Trondhjem, Thing held at Froste in that
region, King Hakon, with all the eloquence he had, signified that it was
imperatively necessary that all Bonders and sub-Bonders should become
Christians, and believe in one God, Christ the Son of Mary; renouncing
entirely blood sacrifices and heathen idols; should keep every seventh
day holy, abstain from labor that day, and even from food, devoting the
day to fasting and sacred meditation. Whereupon, by way of universal
answer, arose a confused universal murmur of entire dissent. "Take away
from us our old belief, and also our time for labor!" murmured they in
angry astonishment; "how can even the land be got tilled in that way?"
"We cannot work if we don't get food," said the hand laborers and
slaves. "It lies in King Hakon's blood," remarked others; "his father
and all his kindred were apt to be stingy about food, though liberal
enough with money." At length, one Osbjorn (or Bear of the Asen or Gods,
what we now call Osborne), one Osbjorn of Medalhusin Gulathal,
stept forward, and said, in a distinct manner, "We Bonders (peasant
proprietors) thought, King Hakon, when thou heldest thy first Thing-day
here in Trondhjem, and we took thee for our king, and received our
hereditary lands from thee again that we had got heaven itself. But
now we know not how it is, whether we have won freedom, or whether thou
intendest anew to make us slaves, with this wonderful proposal that we
should renounce our faith, which our fathers before us have held, and
all our ancestors as well, first in the age of burial by burning, and
now in that of earth burial; and yet these departed ones were much our
superiors, and their faith, too, has brought prosperity to us. Thee, at
the same time, we have loved so much that we raised thee to manage all
the laws of the land, and speak as their voice to us all. And even now
it is our will and the vote of all Bonders to keep that paction which
thou gavest us here on the Thing at Froste, and to maintain thee as king
so long as any of us Bonders who are here upon the Thing has life left,
provided thou, king, wilt go fairly to work, and demand of us only such
things as are not impossible. But if thou wilt fix upon this thing with
so great obstinacy, and employ force and power, in that case, we Bonders
have taken the resolution, all of us, to fall away from thee, and to
take for ourselves another head, who will so behave that we may enjoy
in freedom the belief which is agreeable to us. Now shalt thou, king,
choose one of these two courses before the Thing disperse." "Whereupon,"
adds the Chronicle, "all the Bonders raised a mighty shout, 'Yes,
we will have it so, as has been said.'" So that Jarl Sigurd had to
intervene, and King Hakon to choose for the moment the milder branch of
the alternative. [4] At other Things Hakon was more or less successful.
All his days, by such methods as there were, he kept pressing forward
with this great enterprise; and on the whole did thoroughly shake
asunder the old edifice of heathendom, and fairly introduce some
foundation for the new and better rule of faith and life among his
people. Sigurd, Jarl of Lade, his wise counsellor in all these matters,
is also a man worthy of notice.

Hakon's arrangements against the continual invasions of Eric's sons,
with Danish Blue-tooth backing them, were manifold, and for a long time
successful. He appointed, after consultation and consent in the various
Things, so many war-ships, fully manned and ready, to be furnished
instantly on the King's demand by each province or fjord; watch-fires,
on fit places, from hill to hill all along the coast, were to be
carefully set up, carefully maintained in readiness, and kindled on any
alarm of war. By such methods Blue-tooth and Co.'s invasions were for a
long while triumphantly, and even rapidly, one and all of them, beaten
back, till at length they seemed as if intending to cease altogether,
and leave Hakon alone of them. But such was not their issue after all.
The sons of Eric had only abated under constant discouragement, had not
finally left off from what seemed their one great feasibility in
life. Gunhild, their mother, was still with them: a most contriving,
fierce-minded, irreconcilable woman, diligent and urgent on them, in
season and out of season; and as for King Blue-tooth, he was at all
times ready to help, with his good-will at least.

That of the alarm-fires on Hakon's part was found troublesome by his
people; sometimes it was even hurtful and provoking (lighting your
alarm-fires and rousing the whole coast and population, when it was
nothing but some paltry viking with a couple of ships); in short, the
alarm-signal system fell into disuse, and good King Hakon himself,
in the first place, paid the penalty. It is counted, by the latest
commentators, to have been about A.D. 961, sixteenth or seventeenth year
of Hakon's pious, valiant, and worthy reign. Being at a feast one day,
with many guests, on the Island of Stord, sudden announcement came
to him that ships from the south were approaching in quantity, and
evidently ships of war. This was the biggest of all the Blue-tooth
foster-son invasions; and it was fatal to Hakon the Good that night.
Eyvind the Skaldaspillir (annihilator of all other Skalds), in his famed
_Hakon's Song_, gives account, and, still more pertinently, the always
practical Snorro. Danes in great multitude, six to one, as people
afterwards computed, springing swiftly to land, and ranking themselves;
Hakon, nevertheless, at once deciding not to take to his ships and
run, but to fight there, one to six; fighting, accordingly, in his
most splendid manner, and at last gloriously prevailing; routing and
scattering back to their ships and flight homeward these six-to-one
Danes. "During the struggle of the fight," says Snorro, "he was very
conspicuous among other men; and while the sun shone, his bright gilded
helmet glanced, and thereby many weapons were directed at him. One of
his henchmen, Eyvind Finnson (_i.e._ Skaldaspillir, the poet), took a
hat, and put it over the king's helmet. Now, among the hostile first
leaders were two uncles of the Ericsons, brothers of Gunhild, great
champions both; Skreya, the elder of them, on the disappearance of the
glittering helmet, shouted boastfully, 'Does the king of the Norsemen
hide himself, then, or has he fled? Where now is the golden helmet?' And
so saying, Skreya, and his brother Alf with him, pushed on like fools or
madmen. The king said, 'Come on in that way, and you shall find the king
of the Norsemen.'" And in a short space of time braggart Skreya did
come up, swinging his sword, and made a cut at the king; but Thoralf the
Strong, an Icelander, who fought at the king's side, dashed his shield
so hard against Skreya, that he tottered with the shock. On the same
instant the king takes his sword "quernbiter" (able to cut _querns_
or millstones) with both hands, and hews Skreya through helm and head,
cleaving him down to the shoulders. Thoralf also slew Alf. That was what
they got by such over-hasty search for the king of the Norsemen. [5]

Snorro considers the fall of these two champion uncles as the crisis of
the fight; the Danish force being much disheartened by such a sight, and
King Hakon now pressing on so hard that all men gave way before him,
the battle on the Ericson part became a whirl of recoil; and in a few
minutes more a torrent of mere flight and haste to get on board their
ships, and put to sea again; in which operation many of them were
drowned, says Snorro; survivors making instant sail for Denmark in that
sad condition.

This seems to have been King Hakon's finest battle, and the most
conspicuous of his victories, due not a little to his own grand
qualities shown on the occasion. But, alas! it was his last also. He was
still zealously directing the chase of that mad Danish flight, or whirl
of recoil towards their ships, when an arrow, shot Most likely at a
venture, hit him under the left armpit; and this proved his death.

He was helped into his ship, and made sail for Alrekstad, where his
chief residence in those parts was; but had to stop at a smaller place
of his (which had been his mother's, and where he himself was born)--a
place called Hella (the Flat Rock), still known as "Hakon's Hella,"
faint from loss of blood, and crushed down as he had never before felt.
Having no son and only one daughter, he appointed these invasive sons
of Eric to be sent for, and if he died to become king; but to "spare his
friends and kindred." "If a longer life be granted me," he said, "I will
go out of this land to Christian men, and do penance for what I have
committed against God. But if I die in the country of the heathen, let
me have such burial as you yourselves think fittest." These are his
last recorded words. And in heathen fashion he was buried, and besung by
Eyvind and the Skalds, though himself a zealously Christian king. Hakon
the _Good_; so one still finds him worthy of being called. The sorrow on
Hakon's death, Snorro tells us, was so great and universal, "that he
was lamented both by friends and enemies; and they said that never again
would Norway see such a king."



CHAPTER IV. HARALD GREYFELL AND BROTHERS.

Eric's sons, four or five of them, with a Harald at the top, now at once
got Norway in hand, all of it but Trondhjem, as king and under-kings;
and made a severe time of it for those who had been, or seemed to be,
their enemies. Excellent Jarl Sigurd, always so useful to Hakon and his
country, was killed by them; and they came to repent that before very
long. The slain Sigurd left a son, Hakon, as Jarl, who became famous
in the northern world by and by. This Hakon, and him only, would the
Trondhjemers accept as sovereign. "Death to him, then," said the sons
of Eric, but only in secret, till they had got their hands free and
were ready; which was not yet for some years. Nay, Hakon, when actually
attacked, made good resistance, and threatened to cause trouble. Nor did
he by any means get his death from these sons of Eric at this time, or
till long afterwards at all, from one of their kin, as it chanced. On
the contrary, he fled to Denmark now, and by and by managed to come
back, to their cost.

Among their other chief victims were two cousins of their own, Tryggve
and Gudrod, who had been honest under-kings to the late head-king, Hakon
the Good; but were now become suspect, and had to fight for their lives,
and lose them in a tragic manner. Tryggve had a son, whom we shall hear
of. Gudrod, son of worthy Bjorn the Chapman, was grandfather of Saint
Olaf, whom all men have heard of,--who has a church in Southwark even,
and another in Old Jewry, to this hour. In all these violences, Gunhild,
widow of the late king Eric, was understood to have a principal hand.
She had come back to Norway with her sons; and naturally passed for the
secret adviser and Maternal President in whatever of violence went on;
always reckoned a fell, vehement, relentless personage where her own
interests were concerned. Probably as things settled, her influence on
affairs grew less. At least one hopes so; and, in the Sagas, hears less
and less of her, and before long nothing.

Harald, the head-king in this Eric fraternity, does not seem to have
been a bad man,--the contrary indeed; but his position was untowardly,
full of difficulty and contradictions. Whatever Harald could accomplish
for behoof of Christianity, or real benefit to Norway, in these cross
circumstances, he seems to have done in a modest and honest manner. He
got the name of _Greyfell_ from his people on a very trivial account,
but seemingly with perfect good humor on their part. Some Iceland trader
had brought a cargo of furs to Trondhjem (Lade) for sale; sale being
slacker than the Icelander wished, he presented a chosen specimen,
cloak, doublet, or whatever it was, to Harald; who wore it with
acceptance in public, and rapidly brought disposal of the Icelander's
stock, and the surname of _Greyfell_ to himself. His under-kings and he
were certainly not popular, though I almost think Greyfell himself, in
absence of his mother and the under-kings, might have been so. But here
they all were, and had wrought great trouble in Norway. "Too many of
them," said everybody; "too many of these courts and court people,
eating up any substance that there is." For the seasons withal, two or
three of them in succession, were bad for grass, much more for grain;
no _herring_ came either; very cleanness of teeth was like to come in
Eyvind Skaldaspillir's opinion. This scarcity became at last their share
of the great Famine Of A.D. 975, which desolated Western Europe (see the
poem in the Saxon Chronicle). And all this by Eyvind Skaldaspillir, and
the heathen Norse in general, was ascribed to anger of the heathen gods.
Discontent in Norway, and especially in Eyvind Skaldaspillir, seems to
have been very great.

Whereupon exile Hakon, Jarl Sigurd's son, bestirs himself in Denmark,
backed by old King Blue-tooth, and begins invading and encroaching in a
miscellaneous way; especially intriguing and contriving plots all round
him. An unfathomably cunning kind of fellow, as well as an audacious and
strong-handed! Intriguing in Trondhjem, where he gets the under-king,
Greyfell's brother, fallen upon and murdered; intriguing with Gold
Harald, a distinguished cousin or nephew of King Blue-tooth's, who had
done fine viking work, and gained, such wealth that he got the
epithet of "Gold," and who now was infinitely desirous of a share in
Blue-tooth's kingdom as the proper finish to these sea-rovings. He even
ventured one day to make publicly a distinct proposal that way to King
Harald Blue-tooth himself; who flew into thunder and lightning at the
mere mention of it; so that none durst speak to him for several days
afterwards. Of both these Haralds Hakon was confidential friend; and
needed all his skill to walk without immediate annihilation between such
a pair of dragons, and work out Norway for himself withal. In the end
he found he must take solidly to Blue-tooth's side of the question; and
that they two must provide a recipe for Gold Harald and Norway both at
once.

"It is as much as your life is worth to speak again of sharing this
Danish kingdom," said Hakon very privately to Gold Harald; "but could
not you, my golden friend, be content with Norway for a kingdom, if one
helped you to it?"

"That could I well," answered Harald.

"Then keep me those nine war-ships you have just been rigging for a new
viking cruise; have these in readiness when I lift my finger!"

That was the recipe contrived for Gold Harald; recipe for King Greyfell
goes into the same vial, and is also ready.

Hitherto the Hakon-Blue-tooth disturbances in Norway had amounted to but
little. King Greyfell, a very active and valiant man, has constantly,
without much difficulty, repelled these sporadic bits of troubles; but
Greyfell, all the same, would willingly have peace with dangerous old
Blue-tooth (ever anxious to get his clutches over Norway on any terms)
if peace with him could be had. Blue-tooth, too, professes every
willingness; inveigles Greyfell, he and Hakon do; to have a friendly
meeting on the Danish borders, and not only settle all these quarrels,
but generously settle Greyfell in certain fiefs which he claimed in
Denmark itself; and so swear everlasting friendship. Greyfell joyfully
complies, punctually appears at the appointed day in Lymfjord Sound,
the appointed place. Whereupon Hakon gives signal to Gold Harald, "To
Lymfjord with these nine ships of yours, swift!" Gold Harald flies to
Lymfjord with his ships, challenges King Harald Greyfell to land and
fight; which the undaunted Greyfell, though so far outnumbered, does;
and, fighting his very best, perishes there, he and almost all his
people. Which done, Jarl Hakon, who is in readiness, attacks Gold
Harald, the victorious but the wearied; easily beats Gold Harald, takes
him prisoner, and instantly hangs and ends him, to the huge joy of King
Blue-tooth and Hakon; who now make instant voyage to Norway; drive
all the brother under-kings into rapid flight to the Orkneys, to any
readiest shelter; and so, under the patronage of Blue-tooth, Hakon, with
the title of Jarl, becomes ruler of Norway. This foul treachery done on
the brave and honest Harald Greyfell is by some dated about A.D. 969, by
Munch, 965, by others, computing out of Snorro only, A.D. 975. For there
is always an uncertainty in these Icelandic dates (say rather, rare and
rude attempts at dating, without even an "A.D." or other fixed "year
one" to go upon in Iceland), though seldom, I think, so large a
discrepancy as here.



CHAPTER V. HAKON JARL.

Hakon Jarl, such the style he took, had engaged to pay some kind of
tribute to King Blue-tooth, "if he could;" but he never did pay any,
pleading always the necessity of his own affairs; with which excuse,
joined to Hakon's readiness in things less important, King Blue-tooth
managed to content himself, Hakon being always his good neighbor, at
least, and the two mutually dependent. In Norway, Hakon, without
the title of king, did in a strong-handed, steadfast, and at length,
successful way, the office of one; governed Norway (some count) for
above twenty years; and, both at home and abroad, had much consideration
through most of that time; specially amongst the heathen orthodox, for
Hakon Jarl himself was a zealous heathen, fixed in his mind against
these chimerical Christian innovations and unsalutary changes of creed,
and would have gladly trampled out all traces of what the last two kings
(for Greyfell, also, was an English Christian after his sort) had done
in this respect. But he wisely discerned that it was not possible, and
that, for peace's sake, he must not even attempt it, but must strike
preferably into "perfect toleration," and that of "every one getting to
heaven or even to the other goal in his own way." He himself, it is well
known, repaired many heathen temples (a great "church builder" in his
way!), manufactured many splendid idols, with much gilding and such
artistic ornament as there was,--in particular, one huge image of Thor,
not forgetting the hammer and appendages, and such a collar (supposed of
solid gold, which it was not quite, as we shall hear in time) round the
neck of him as was never seen in all the North. How he did his own
Yule festivals, with what magnificent solemnity, the horse-eatings,
blood-sprinklings, and other sacred rites, need not be told. Something
of a "Ritualist," one may perceive; perhaps had Scandinavian Puseyisms
in him, and other desperate heathen notions. He was universally believed
to have gone into magic, for one thing, and to have dangerous potencies
derived from the Devil himself. The dark heathen mind of him struggling
vehemently in that strange element, not altogether so unlike our own in
some points.

For the rest, he was evidently, in practical matters, a man of sharp,
clear insight, of steadfast resolution, diligence, promptitude; and
managed his secular matters uncommonly well. Had sixteen Jarls under
him, though himself only Hakon Jarl by title; and got obedience from
them stricter than any king since Haarfagr had done. Add to which
that the country had years excellent for grass and crop, and that the
herrings came in exuberance; tokens, to the thinking mind, that Hakon
Jarl was a favorite of Heaven.

His fight with the far-famed Jomsvikings was his grandest exploit in
public rumor. Jomsburg, a locality not now known, except that it was
near the mouth of the River Oder, denoted in those ages the impregnable
castle of a certain hotly corporate, or "Sea Robbery Association
(limited)," which, for some generations, held the Baltic in terror, and
plundered far beyond the Belt,--in the ocean itself, in Flanders and the
opulent trading havens there,--above all, in opulent anarchic England,
which, for forty years from about this time, was the pirates' Goshen;
and yielded, regularly every summer, slaves, Danegelt, and miscellaneous
plunder, like no other country Jomsburg or the viking-world had
ever known. Palnatoke, Bue, and the other quasi-heroic heads of this
establishment are still remembered in the northern parts. _Palnatoke_
is the title of a tragedy by Oehlenschlager, which had its run of
immortality in Copenhagen some sixty or seventy years ago.

I judge the institution to have been in its floweriest state, probably
now in Hakon Jarl's time. Hakon Jarl and these pirates, robbing Hakon's
subjects and merchants that frequented him, were naturally in quarrel;
and frequent fightings had fallen out, not generally to the profit of
the Jomsburgers, who at last determined on revenge, and the rooting out
of this obstructive Hakon Jarl. They assembled in force at the Cape of
Stad,--in the Firda Fylke; and the fight was dreadful in the extreme,
noise of it filling all the north for long afterwards. Hakon, fighting
like a lion, could scarcely hold his own,--Death or Victory, the word on
both sides; when suddenly, the heavens grew black, and there broke out
a terrific storm of thunder and hail, appalling to the human
mind,--universe swallowed wholly in black night; only the momentary
forked-blazes, the thunder-pealing as of Ragnarok, and the battering
hail-torrents, hailstones about the size of an egg. Thor with his hammer
evidently acting; but in behalf of whom? The Jomsburgers in the
hideous darkness, broken only by flashing thunder-bolts, had a dismal
apprehension that it was probably not on their behalf (Thor having a
sense of justice in him); and before the storm ended, thirty-five of
their seventy ships sheered away, leaving gallant Bue, with the other
thirty-five, to follow as they liked, who reproachfully hailed these
fugitives, and continued the now hopeless battle. Bue's nose and lips
were smashed or cut away; Bue managed, half-articulately, to exclaim,
"Ha! the maids ('mays') of Funen will never kiss me more. Overboard, all
ye Bue's men!" And taking his two sea-chests, with all the gold he had
gained in such life-struggle from of old, sprang overboard accordingly,
and finished the affair. Hakon Jarl's renown rose naturally to the
transcendent pitch after this exploit. His people, I suppose chiefly the
Christian part of them, whispered one to another, with a shudder, "That
in the blackest of the thunder-storm, he had taken his youngest little
boy, and made away with him; sacrificed him to Thor or some devil, and
gained his victory by art-magic, or something worse." Jarl Eric, Hakon's
eldest son, without suspicion of art-magic, but already a distinguished
viking, became thrice distinguished by his style of sea-fighting in this
battle; and awakened great expectations in the viking public; of him we
shall hear again.

The Jomsburgers, one might fancy, after this sad clap went visibly down
in the world; but the fact is not altogether so. Old King Blue-tooth was
now dead, died of a wound got in battle with his unnatural (so-called
"natural") son and successor, Otto Svein of the Forked Beard, afterwards
king and conqueror of England for a little while; and seldom, perhaps
never, had vikingism been in such flower as now. This man's name is Sven
in Swedish, Svend in German, and means boy or lad,--the English "swain."
It was at old "Father Bluetooth's funeral-ale" (drunken burial-feast),
that Svein, carousing with his Jomsburg chiefs and other choice spirits,
generally of the robber class, all risen into height of highest robber
enthusiasm, pledged the vow to one another; Svein that he would conquer
England (which, in a sense, he, after long struggling, did); and the
Jomsburgers that they would ruin and root out Hakon Jarl (which, as
we have just seen, they could by no means do), and other guests other
foolish things which proved equally unfeasible. Sea-robber volunteers
so especially abounding in that time, one perceives how easily the
Jomsburgers could recruit themselves, build or refit new robber fleets,
man them with the pick of crews, and steer for opulent, fruitful
England; where, under Ethelred the Unready, was such a field for
profitable enterprise as the viking public never had before or since.

An idle question sometimes rises on me,--idle enough, for it never can
be answered in the affirmative or the negative, Whether it was not these
same refitted Jomsburgers who appeared some while after this at Red Head
Point, on the shore of Angus, and sustained a new severe beating, in
what the Scotch still faintly remember as their "Battle of Loncarty"?
Beyond doubt a powerful Norse-pirate armament dropt anchor at the Red
Head, to the alarm of peaceable mortals, about that time. It was thought
and hoped to be on its way for England, but it visibly hung on for
several days, deliberating (as was thought) whether they would do this
poorer coast the honor to land on it before going farther. Did land, and
vigorously plunder and burn south-westward as far as Perth; laid siege
to Perth; but brought out King Kenneth on them, and produced that
"Battle of Loncarty" which still dwells in vague memory among the Scots.
Perhaps it might be the Jomsburgers; perhaps also not; for there were
many pirate associations, lasting not from century to century like the
Jomsburgers, but only for very limited periods, or from year to year;
indeed, it was mainly by such that the splendid thief-harvest of England
was reaped in this disastrous time. No Scottish chronicler gives the
least of exact date to their famed victory of Loncarty, only that it was
achieved by Kenneth III., which will mean some time between A.D. 975 and
994; and, by the order they put it in, probably soon after A.D. 975, or
the beginning of this Kenneth's reign. Buchanan's narrative, carefully
distilled from all the ancient Scottish sources, is of admirable quality
for style and otherwise quiet, brief, with perfect clearness, perfect
credibility even, except that semi-miraculous appendage of the
Ploughmen, Hay and Sons, always hanging to the tail of it; the grain of
possible truth in which can now never be extracted by man's art! [6] In
brief, what we know is, fragments of ancient human bones and armor
have occasionally been ploughed up in this locality, proof positive of
ancient fighting here; and the fight fell out not long after Hakon's
beating of the Jomsburgers at the Cape of Stad. And in such dim glimmer
of wavering twilight, the question whether these of Loncarty were
refitted Jomsburgers or not, must be left hanging. Loncarty is now the
biggest bleach-field in Queen Victoria's dominions; no village or hamlet
there, only the huge bleaching-house and a beautiful field, some six or
seven miles northwest of Perth, bordered by the beautiful Tay river
on the one side, and by its beautiful tributary Almond on the other; a
Loncarty fitted either for bleaching linen, or for a bit of fair duel
between nations, in those simple times.

Whether our refitted Jomsburgers had the least thing to do with it is
only matter of fancy, but if it were they who here again got a good
beating, fancy would be glad to find herself fact. The old piratical
kings of Denmark had been at the founding of Jomsburg, and to Svein of
the Forked Beard it was still vitally important, but not so to the great
Knut, or any king that followed; all of whom had better business than
mere thieving; and it was Magnus the Good, of Norway, a man of still
higher anti-anarchic qualities, that annihilated it, about a century
later.

Hakon Jarl, his chief labors in the world being over, is said to have
become very dissolute in his elder days, especially in the matter of
women; the wretched old fool, led away by idleness and fulness of bread,
which to all of us are well said to be the parents of mischief. Having
absolute power, he got into the habit of openly plundering men's pretty
daughters and wives from them, and, after a few weeks, sending them
back; greatly to the rage of the fierce Norse heart, had there been any
means of resisting or revenging. It did, after a little while, prove the
ruin and destruction of Hakon the Rich, as he was then called. It opened
the door, namely, for entry of Olaf Tryggveson upon the scene,--a very
much grander man; in regard to whom the wiles and traps of Hakon proved
to be a recipe, not on Tryggveson, but on the wily Hakon himself, as
shall now be seen straightway.



CHAPTER VI. OLAF TRYGGVESON.

Hakon, in late times, had heard of a famous stirring person, victorious
in various lands and seas, latterly united in sea-robbery with Svein,
Prince Royal of Denmark, afterwards King Svein of the Double-beard
("_Zvae Skiaeg_", _Twa Shag_) or fork-beard, both of whom had already
done transcendent feats in the viking way during this copartnery. The
fame of Svein, and this stirring personage, whose name was "Ole," and,
recently, their stupendous feats in plunder of England, siege of London,
and other wonders and splendors of viking glory and success, had gone
over all the North, awakening the attention of Hakon and everybody
there. The name of "Ole" was enigmatic, mysterious, and even
dangerous-looking to Hakon Jarl; who at length sent out a confidential
spy to investigate this "Ole;" a feat which the confidential spy did
completely accomplish,--by no means to Hakon's profit! The mysterious
"Ole" proved to be no other than Olaf, son of Tryggve, destined to blow
Hakon Jarl suddenly into destruction, and become famous among the heroes
of the Norse world.

Of Olaf Tryggveson one always hopes there might, one day, some real
outline of a biography be written; fished from the abysses where (as
usual) it welters deep in foul neighborhood for the present. Farther on
we intend a few words more upon the matter. But in this place all that
concerns us in it limits itself to the two following facts first, that
Hakon's confidential spy "found Ole in Dublin;" picked acquaintance with
him, got him to confess that he was actually Olaf, son of Tryggve (the
Tryggve, whom Blood-axe's fierce widow and her sons had murdered); got
him gradually to own that perhaps an expedition into Norway might have
its chances; and finally that, under such a wise and loyal guidance
as his (the confidential spy's, whose friendship for Tryggveson was so
indubitable), he (Tryggveson) would actually try it upon Hakon Jarl, the
dissolute old scoundrel. Fact second is, that about the time they two
set sail from Dublin on their Norway expedition, Hakon Jarl removed to
Trondhjem, then called Lade; intending to pass some months there.

Now just about the time when Tryggveson, spy, and party had landed in
Norway, and were advancing upon Lade, with what support from the public
could be got, dissolute old Hakon Jarl had heard of one Gudrun, a
Bonder's wife, unparalleled in beauty, who was called in those parts,
"Sunbeam of the Grove" (so inexpressibly lovely); and sent off a couple
of thralls to bring her to him. "Never," answered Gudrun; "never," her
indignant husband; in a tone dangerous and displeasing to these Court
thralls; who had to leave rapidly, but threatened to return in better
strength before long. Whereupon, instantly, the indignant Bonder and his
Sunbeam of the Grove sent out their war-arrow, rousing all the country
into angry promptitude, and more than one perhaps into greedy hope of
revenge for their own injuries. The rest of Hakon's history now rushes
on with extreme rapidity.

Sunbeam of the Grove, when next demanded of her Bonder, has the whole
neighborhood assembled in arms round her; rumor of Tryggveson is fast
making it the whole country. Hakon's insolent messengers are cut in
pieces; Hakon finds he cannot fly under cover too soon. With a single
slave he flies that same night;--but whitherward? Can think of no safe
place, except to some old mistress of his, who lives retired in that
neighborhood, and has some pity or regard for the wicked old Hakon. Old
mistress does receive him, pities him, will do all she can to protect
and hide him. But how, by what uttermost stretch of female artifice hide
him here; every one will search here first of all! Old mistress, by the
slave's help, extemporizes a cellar under the floor of her pig-house;
sticks Hakon and slave into that, as the one safe seclusion she can
contrive. Hakon and slave, begrunted by the pigs above them, tortured by
the devils within and about them, passed two days in circumstances
more and more horrible. For they heard, through their light-slit
and breathing-slit, the triumph of Tryggveson proclaiming itself by
Tryggveson's own lips, who had mounted a big boulder near by and was
victoriously speaking to the people, winding up with a promise of
honors and rewards to whoever should bring him wicked old Hakon's head.
Wretched Hakon, justly suspecting his slave, tried to at least keep
himself awake. Slave did keep himself awake till Hakon dozed or slept,
then swiftly cut off Hakon's head, and plunged out with it to the
presence of Tryggveson. Tryggveson, detesting the traitor, useful as the
treachery was, cut off the slave's head too, had it hung up along with
Hakon's on the pinnacle of the Lade Gallows, where the populace pelted
both heads with stones and many curses, especially the more important of
the two. "Hakon the Bad" ever henceforth, instead of Hakon the Rich.

This was the end of Hakon Jarl, the last support of heathenry in Norway,
among other characteristics he had: a stronghanded, hard-headed, very
relentless, greedy and wicked being. He is reckoned to have ruled in
Norway, or mainly ruled, either in the struggling or triumphant state,
for about thirty years (965-995?). He and his seemed to have formed,
by chance rather than design, the chief opposition which the Haarfagr
posterity throughout its whole course experienced in Norway. Such
the cost to them of killing good Jarl Sigurd, in Greyfell's time! For
"curses, like chickens," do sometimes visibly "come home to feed," as
they always, either visibly or else invisibly, are punctually sure to
do.

Hakon Jarl is considerably connected with the _Faroer Saga_ often
mentioned there, and comes out perfectly in character; an altogether
worldly-wise man of the roughest type, not without a turn for
practicality of kindness to those who would really be of use to him. His
tendencies to magic also are not forgotten.

Hakon left two sons, Eric and Svein, often also mentioned in this Saga.
On their father's death they fled to Sweden, to Denmark, and were busy
stirring up troubles in those countries against Olaf Tryggveson; till at
length, by a favorable combination, under their auspices chiefly, they
got his brief and noble reign put an end to. Nay, furthermore, Jarl Eric
left sons, especially an elder son, named also Eric, who proved a sore
affliction, and a continual stone of stumbling to a new generation of
Haarfagrs, and so continued the curse of Sigurd's murder upon them.

Towards the end of this Hakon's reign it was that the discovery of
America took place (985). Actual discovery, it appears, by Eric the Red,
an Icelander; concerning which there has been abundant investigation and
discussion in our time. _Ginnungagap_ (Roaring Abyss) is thought to be
the mouth of Behring's Straits in Baffin's Bay; _Big Helloland_, the
coast from Cape Walsingham to near Newfoundland; _Little Helloland_,
Newfoundland itself. _Markland_ was Lower Canada, New Brunswick, and
Nova Scotia. Southward thence to Chesapeake Bay was called _Wine Land_
(wild grapes still grow in Rhode Island, and more luxuriantly further
south). _White Man's Land_, called also _Great Ireland_, is supposed
to mean the two Carolinas, down to the Southern Cape of Florida. In
Dahlmann's opinion, the Irish themselves might even pretend to have
probably been the first discoverers of America; they had evidently got
to Iceland itself before the Norse exiles found it out. It appears to be
certain that, from the end of the tenth century to the early part of the
fourteenth, there was a dim knowledge of those distant shores extant
in the Norse mind, and even some straggling series of visits thither
by roving Norsemen; though, as only danger, difficulty, and no profit
resulted, the visits ceased, and the whole matter sank into oblivion,
and, but for the Icelandic talent of writing in the long winter nights,
would never have been heard of by posterity at all.



CHAPTER VII. REIGN OF OLAF TRYGGVESON.

Olaf Tryggveson (A.D. 995-1000) also makes a great figure in the _Faroer
Saga_, and recounts there his early troubles, which were strange and
many. He is still reckoned a grand hero of the North, though his _vates_
now is only Snorro Sturleson of Iceland. Tryggveson had indeed many
adventures in the world. His poor mother, Astrid, was obliged to fly, on
murder of her husband by Gunhild,--to fly for life, three months before
he, her little Olaf, was born. She lay concealed in reedy islands, fled
through trackless forests; reached her father's with the little baby in
her arms, and lay deep-hidden there, tended only by her father himself;
Gunhild's pursuit being so incessant, and keen as with sleuth-hounds.
Poor Astrid had to fly again, deviously to Sweden, to Esthland
(Esthonia), to Russia. In Esthland she was sold as a slave, quite parted
from her boy,--who also was sold, and again sold; but did at last
fall in with a kinsman high in the Russian service; did from him find
redemption and help, and so rose, in a distinguished manner, to manhood,
victorious self-help, and recovery of his kingdom at last. He even met
his mother again, he as king of Norway, she as one wonderfully lifted
out of darkness into new life and happiness still in store.

Grown to manhood, Tryggveson,--now become acquainted with his birth,
and with his, alas, hopeless claims,--left Russia for the one profession
open to him, that of sea-robbery; and did feats without number in that
questionable line in many seas and scenes,--in England latterly, and
most conspicuously of all. In one of his courses thither, after long
labors in the Hebrides, Man, Wales, and down the western shores to
the very Land's End and farther, he paused at the Scilly Islands for
a little while. He was told of a wonderful Christian hermit living
strangely in these sea-solitudes; had the curiosity to seek him out,
examine, question, and discourse with him; and, after some reflection,
accepted Christian baptism from the venerable man. In Snorro the story
is involved in miracle, rumor, and fable; but the fact itself seems
certain, and is very interesting; the great, wild, noble soul of fierce
Olaf opening to this wonderful gospel of tidings from beyond the world,
tidings which infinitely transcended all else he had ever heard or
dreamt of! It seems certain he was baptized here; date not fixable;
shortly before poor heart-broken Dunstan's death, or shortly after; most
English churches, monasteries especially, lying burnt, under continual
visitation of the Danes. Olaf such baptism notwithstanding, did not quit
his viking profession; indeed, what other was there for him in the world
as yet?

We mentioned his occasional copartneries with Svein of the Double-beard,
now become King of Denmark, but the greatest of these, and the alone
interesting at this time, is their joint invasion of England, and
Tryggveson's exploits and fortunes there some years after that adventure
of baptism in the Scilly Isles. Svein and he "were above a year in
England together," this time: they steered up the Thames with three
hundred ships and many fighters; siege, or at least furious assault, of
London was their first or main enterprise, but it did not succeed. The
Saxon Chronicle gives date to it, A.D. 994, and names expressly, as
Svein's co-partner, "Olaus, king of Norway,"--which he was as yet far
from being; but in regard to the Year of Grace the Saxon Chronicle is
to be held indisputable, and, indeed, has the field to itself in this
matter. Famed Olaf Tryggveson, seen visibly at the siege of London,
year 994, it throws a kind of momentary light to us over that disastrous
whirlpool of miseries and confusions, all dark and painful to the
fancy otherwise! This big voyage and furious siege of London is Svein
Double-beard's first real attempt to fulfil that vow of his at Father
Blue-tooth's "funeral ale," and conquer England,--which it is a pity he
could not yet do. Had London now fallen to him, it is pretty evident all
England must have followed, and poor England, with Svein as king over
it, been delivered from immeasurable woes, which had to last some
two-and-twenty years farther, before this result could be arrived at.
But finding London impregnable for the moment (no ship able to get
athwart the bridge, and many Danes perishing in the attempt to do it by
swimming), Svein and Olaf turned to other enterprises; all England in
a manner lying open to them, turn which way they liked. They burnt and
plundered over Kent, over Hampshire, Sussex; they stormed far and wide;
world lying all before them where to choose. Wretched Ethelred, as the
one invention he could fall upon, offered them Danegelt (16,000 pounds
of silver this year, but it rose in other years as high as 48,000
pounds); the desperate Ethelred, a clear method of quenching fire
by pouring oil on it! Svein and Olaf accepted; withdrew to
Southampton,--Olaf at least did,--till the money was got ready. Strange
to think of, fierce Svein of the Double-beard, and conquest of England
by him; this had at last become the one salutary result which remained
for that distracted, down-trodden, now utterly chaotic and anarchic
country. A conquering Svein, followed by an ably and earnestly
administrative, as well as conquering, Knut (whom Dahlmann compares
to Charlemagne), were thus by the mysterious destinies appointed the
effective saviors of England.

Tryggveson, on this occasion, was a good while at Southampton; and
roamed extensively about, easily victorious over everything, if
resistance were attempted, but finding little or none; and acting now
in a peaceable or even friendly capacity. In the Southampton country
he came in contact with the then Bishop of Winchester, afterwards
Archbishop of Canterbury, excellent Elphegus, still dimly decipherable
to us as a man of great natural discernment, piety, and inborn veracity;
a hero-soul, probably of real brotherhood with Olaf's own. He even made
court visits to King Ethelred; one visit to him at Andover of a very
serious nature. By Elphegus, as we can discover, he was introduced into
the real depths of the Christian faith. Elphegus, with due solemnity of
apparatus, in presence of the king, at Andover, baptized Olaf anew, and
to him Olaf engaged that he would never plunder in England any more;
which promise, too, he kept. In fact, not long after, Svein's conquest
of England being in an evidently forward state, Tryggveson (having made,
withal, a great English or Irish marriage,--a dowager Princess, who had
voluntarily fallen in love with him,--see Snorro for this fine romantic
fact!) mainly resided in our island for two or three years, or else in
Dublin, in the precincts of the Danish Court there in the Sister Isle.
Accordingly it was in Dublin, as above noted, that Hakon's spy found
him; and from the Liffey that his squadron sailed, through the Hebrides,
through the Orkneys, plundering and baptizing in their strange way,
towards such success as we have seen.

Tryggveson made a stout, and, in effect, victorious and glorious
struggle for himself as king. Daily and hourly vigilant to do so, often
enough by soft and even merry methods, for he was a witty, jocund man,
and had a fine ringing laugh in him, and clear pregnant words ever
ready,--or if soft methods would not serve, then by hard and even
hardest he put down a great deal of miscellaneous anarchy in Norway; was
especially busy against heathenism (devil-worship and its rites): this,
indeed, may be called the focus and heart of all his royal endeavor in
Norway, and of all the troubles he now had with his people there. For
this was a serious, vital, all-comprehending matter; devil-worship, a
thing not to be tolerated one moment longer than you could by any method
help! Olaf's success was intermittent, of varying complexion; but his
effort, swift or slow, was strong and continual; and on the whole he did
succeed. Take a sample or two of that wonderful conversion process:--

At one of his first Things he found the Bonders all assembled in
arms; resolute to the death seemingly, against his proposal and him.
Tryggveson said little; waited impassive, "What your reasons are,
good men?" One zealous Bonder started up in passionate parliamentary
eloquence; but after a sentence or two, broke down; one, and then
another, and still another, and remained all three staring in
open-mouthed silence there! The peasant-proprietors accepted the
phenomenon as ludicrous, perhaps partly as miraculous withal, and
consented to baptism this time.

On another occasion of a Thing, which had assembled near some heathen
temple to meet him,--temple where Hakon Jarl had done much repairing,
and set up many idol figures and sumptuous ornaments, regardless of
expense, especially a very big and splendid Thor, with massive gold
collar round the neck of him, not the like of it in Norway,--King Olaf
Tryggveson was clamorously invited by the Bonders to step in there,
enlighten his eyes, and partake of the sacred rites. Instead of which
he rushed into the temple with his armed men; smashed down, with his own
battle-axe, the god Thor, prostrate on the ground at one stroke, to set
an example; and, in a few minutes, had the whole Hakon Pantheon wrecked;
packing up meanwhile all the gold and preciosities accumulated there
(not forgetting Thor's illustrious gold collar, of which we shall hear
again), and victoriously took the plunder home with him for his own
royal uses and behoof of the state. In other cases, though a friend to
strong measures, he had to hold in, and await the favorable moment. Thus
once, in beginning a parliamentary address, so soon as he came to touch
upon Christianity, the Bonders rose in murmurs, in vociferations and
jingling of arms, which quite drowned the royal voice; declared, they
had taken arms against king Hakon the Good to compel him to desist from
his Christian proposals; and they did not think King Olaf a higher man
than him (Hakon the Good). The king then said, "He purposed coming to
them next Yule to their great sacrificial feast, to see for himself
what their customs were," which pacified the Bonders for this time. The
appointed place of meeting was again a Hakon-Jarl Temple, not yet done
to ruin; chief shrine in those Trondhjem parts, I believe: there should
Tryggveson appear at Yule. Well, but before Yule came, Tryggveson made a
great banquet in his palace at Trondhjem, and invited far and wide, all
manner of important persons out of the district as guests there. Banquet
hardly done, Tryggveson gave some slight signal, upon which armed men
strode in, seized eleven of these principal persons, and the king said:
"Since he himself was to become a heathen again, and do sacrifice, it
was his purpose to do it in the highest form, namely, that of Human
Sacrifice; and this time not of slaves and malefactors, but of the best
men in the country!" In which stringent circumstances the eleven seized
persons, and company at large, gave unanimous consent to baptism;
straightway received the same, and abjured their idols; but were not
permitted to go home till they had left, in sons, brothers, and other
precious relatives, sufficient hostages in the king's hands.

By unwearied industry of this and better kinds, Tryggveson had trampled
down idolatry, so far as form went,--how far in substance may be greatly
doubted. But it is to be remembered withal, that always on the back of
these compulsory adventures there followed English bishops, priests and
preachers; whereby to the open-minded, conviction, to all degrees of it,
was attainable, while silence and passivity became the duty or necessity
of the unconvinced party.

In about two years Norway was all gone over with a rough harrow of
conversion. Heathenism at least constrained to be silent and outwardly
conformable. Tryggveson, next turned his attention to Iceland, sent one
Thangbrand, priest from Saxony, of wonderful qualities, military as
well as theological, to try and convert Iceland. Thangbrand made a few
converts; for Olaf had already many estimable Iceland friends, whom he
liked much, and was much liked by; and conversion was the ready road
to his favor. Thangbrand, I find, lodged with Hall of Sida (familiar
acquaintance of "Burnt Njal," whose Saga has its admirers among us even
now). Thangbrand converted Hall and one or two other leading men;
but in general he was reckoned quarrelsome and blusterous rather than
eloquent and piously convincing. Two skalds of repute made biting
lampoons upon Thangbrand, whom Thangbrand, by two opportunities that
offered, cut down and did to death because of their skaldic quality.
Another he killed with his own hand, I know not for what reason. In
brief, after about a year, Thangbrand returned to Norway and king Olaf;
declaring the Icelanders to be a perverse, satirical, and inconvertible
people, having himself, the record says, "been the death of three men
there." King Olaf was in high rage at this result; but was persuaded by
the Icelanders about him to try farther, and by a wilder instrument. He
accordingly chose one Thormod, a pious, patient, and kindly man, who,
within the next year or so, did actually accomplish the matter; namely,
get Christianity, by open vote, declared at Thingvalla by the general
Thing of Iceland there; the roar of a big thunder-clap at the right
moment rather helping the conclusion, if I recollect. Whereupon Olaf's
joy was no doubt great.

One general result of these successful operations was the discontent,
to all manner of degrees, on the part of many Norse individuals, against
this glorious and victorious, but peremptory and terrible king of
theirs. Tryggveson, I fancy, did not much regard all that; a man of
joyful, cheery temper, habitually contemptuous of danger. Another
trivial misfortune that befell in these conversion operations, and
became important to him, he did not even know of, and would have much
despised if he had. It was this: Sigrid, queen dowager of Sweden,
thought to be amongst the most shining women of the world, was also
known for one of the most imperious, revengeful, and relentless, and had
got for herself the name of Sigrid the Proud. In her high widowhood she
had naturally many wooers; but treated them in a manner unexampled. Two
of her suitors, a simultaneous Two, were, King Harald Graenske (a cousin
of King Tryggveson's, and kind of king in some district, by sufferance
of the late Hakon's),--this luckless Graenske and the then Russian
Sovereign as well, name not worth mentioning, were zealous suitors of
Queen Dowager Sigrid, and were perversely slow to accept the negative,
which in her heart was inexorable for both, though the expression of
it could not be quite so emphatic. By ill-luck for them they came
once,--from the far West, Graenske; from the far East, the Russian;--and
arrived both together at Sigrid's court, to prosecute their importunate,
and to her odious and tiresome suit; much, how very much, to her
impatience and disdain. She lodged them both in some old mansion, which
she had contiguous, and got compendiously furnished for them; and there,
I know not whether on the first or on the second, or on what following
night, this unparalleled Queen Sigrid had the house surrounded, set on
fire, and the two suitors and their people burnt to ashes! No more of
bother from these two at least! This appears to be a fact; and it could
not be unknown to Tryggveson.

In spite of which, however, there went from Tryggveson, who was now a
widower, some incipient marriage proposals to this proud widow; by
whom they were favorably received; as from the brightest man in all the
world, they might seem worth being. Now, in one of these anti-heathen
onslaughts of King Olaf's on the idol temples of Hakon--(I think it
was that case where Olaf's own battle-axe struck down the monstrous
refulgent Thor, and conquered an immense gold ring from the neck of him,
or from the door of his temple),--a huge gold ring, at any rate, had
come into Olaf's hands; and this he bethought him might be a pretty
present to Queen Sigrid, the now favorable, though the proud. Sigrid
received the ring with joy; fancied what a collar it would make for her
own fair neck; but noticed that her two goldsmiths, weighing it on their
fingers, exchanged a glance. "What is that?" exclaimed Queen Sigrid.
"Nothing," answered they, or endeavored to answer, dreading mischief.
But Sigrid compelled them to break open the ring; and there was found,
all along the inside of it, an occult ring of copper, not a heart of
gold at all! "Ha," said the proud Queen, flinging it away, "he that
could deceive in this matter can deceive in many others!" And was in hot
wrath with Olaf; though, by degrees, again she took milder thoughts.

Milder thoughts, we say; and consented to a meeting next autumn, at some
half-way station, where their great business might be brought to a happy
settlement and betrothment. Both Olaf Tryggveson and the high dowager
appear to have been tolerably of willing mind at this meeting; but Olaf
interposed, what was always one condition with him, "Thou must consent
to baptism, and give up thy idol-gods." "They are the gods of all my
forefathers," answered the lady, "choose thou what gods thou pleasest,
but leave me mine." Whereupon an altercation; and Tryggveson, as was his
wont, towered up into shining wrath, and exclaimed at last, "Why should
I care about thee then, old faded heathen creature?" And impatiently
wagging his glove, hit her, or slightly switched her, on the face with
it, and contemptuously turning away, walked out of the adventure. "This
is a feat that may cost thee dear one day," said Sigrid. And in the end
it came to do so, little as the magnificent Olaf deigned to think of it
at the moment.

One of the last scuffles I remember of Olaf's having with his refractory
heathens, was at a Thing in Hordaland or Rogaland, far in the North,
where the chief opposition hero was one Jaernskaegg ("ironbeard")
Scottice ("Airn-shag," as it were!). Here again was a grand heathen
temple, Hakon Jarl's building, with a splendid Thor in it and much idol
furniture. The king stated what was his constant wish here as elsewhere,
but had no sooner entered upon the subject of Christianity than
universal murmur, rising into clangor and violent dissent, interrupted
him, and Ironbeard took up the discourse in reply. Ironbeard did not
break down; on the contrary, he, with great brevity, emphasis, and
clearness, signified "that the proposal to reject their old gods was in
the highest degree unacceptable to this Thing; that it was contrary
to bargain, withal; so that if it were insisted on, they would have to
fight with the king about it; and in fact were now ready to do so." In
reply to this, Olaf, without word uttered, but merely with some signal
to the trusty armed men he had with him, rushed off to the temple close
at hand; burst into it, shutting the door behind him; smashed Thor and
Co. to destruction; then reappearing victorious, found much confusion
outside, and, in particular, what was a most important item, the rugged
Ironbeard done to death by Olaf's men in the interim. Which entirely
disheartened the Thing from fighting at that moment; having now no
leader who dared to head them in so dangerous an enterprise. So that
every one departed to digest his rage in silence as he could.

Matters having cooled for a week or two, there was another Thing held;
in which King Olaf testified regret for the quarrel that had fallen out,
readiness to pay what _mulct_ was due by law for that unlucky homicide
of Ironbeard by his people; and, withal, to take the fair daughter of
Ironbeard to wife, if all would comply and be friends with him in other
matters; which was the course resolved on as most convenient: accept
baptism, we; marry Jaernskaegg's daughter, you. This bargain held on
both sides. The wedding, too, was celebrated, but that took rather a
strange turn. On the morning of the bride-night, Olaf, who had not been
sleeping, though his fair partner thought he had, opened his eyes, and
saw, with astonishment, the fair partner aiming a long knife ready
to strike home upon him! Which at once ended their wedded life; poor
Demoiselle Ironbeard immediately bundling off with her attendants home
again; King Olaf into the apartment of his servants, mentioning there
what had happened, and forbidding any of them to follow her.

Olaf Tryggveson, though his kingdom was the smallest of the Norse Three,
had risen to a renown over all the Norse world, which neither he
of Denmark nor he of Sweden could pretend to rival. A magnificent,
far-shining man; more expert in all "bodily exercises" as the Norse call
them, than any man had ever been before him, or after was. Could keep
five daggers in the air, always catching the proper fifth by its handle,
and sending it aloft again; could shoot supremely, throw a javelin with
either hand; and, in fact, in battle usually throw two together. These,
with swimming, climbing, leaping, were the then admirable Fine Arts of
the North; in all which Tryggveson appears to have been the Raphael and
the Michael Angelo at once. Essentially definable, too, if we look
well into him, as a wild bit of real heroism, in such rude guise and
environment; a high, true, and great human soul. A jovial burst of
laughter in him, withal; a bright, airy, wise way of speech; dressed
beautifully and with care; a man admired and loved exceedingly by those
he liked; dreaded as death by those he did not like. "Hardly any king,"
says Snorro, "was ever so well obeyed; by one class out of zeal and
love, by the rest out of dread." His glorious course, however, was not
to last long.

King Svein of the Double-Beard had not yet completed his conquest of
England,--by no means yet, some thirteen horrid years of that still
before him!--when, over in Denmark, he found that complaints against
him and intricacies had arisen, on the part principally of one Burislav,
King of the Wends (far up the Baltic), and in a less degree with the
King of Sweden and other minor individuals. Svein earnestly applied
himself to settle these, and have his hands free. Burislav, an aged
heathen gentleman, proved reasonable and conciliatory; so, too, the King
of Sweden, and Dowager Queen Sigrid, his managing mother. Bargain in
both these cases got sealed and crowned by marriage. Svein, who had
become a widower lately, now wedded Sigrid; and might think, possibly
enough, he had got a proud bargain, though a heathen one. Burislav also
insisted on marriage with Princess Thyri, the Double-Beard's sister.
Thyri, inexpressibly disinclined to wed an aged heathen of that stamp,
pleaded hard with her brother; but the Double-Bearded was inexorable;
Thyri's wailings and entreaties went for nothing. With some guardian
foster-brother, and a serving-maid or two, she had to go on this hated
journey. Old Burislav, at sight of her, blazed out into marriage-feast
of supreme magnificence, and was charmed to see her; but Thyri would not
join the marriage party; refused to eat with it or sit with it at all.
Day after day, for six days, flatly refused; and after nightfall of the
sixth, glided out with her foster-brother into the woods, into by-paths
and inconceivable wanderings; and, in effect, got home to Denmark.
Brother Svein was not for the moment there; probably enough gone to
England again. But Thyri knew too well he would not allow her to stay
here, or anywhere that he could help, except with the old heathen she
had just fled from.

Thyri, looking round the world, saw no likely road for her, but to Olaf
Tryggveson in Norway; to beg protection from the most heroic man she
knew of in the world. Olaf, except by renown, was not known to her; but
by renown he well was. Olaf, at sight of her, promised protection
and asylum against all mortals. Nay, in discoursing with Thyri Olaf
perceived more and more clearly what a fine handsome being, soul and
body, Thyri was; and in a short space of time winded up by proposing
marriage to Thyri; who, humbly, and we may fancy with what secret joy,
consented to say yes, and become Queen of Norway. In the due months they
had a little son, Harald; who, it is credibly recorded, was the joy of
both his parents; but who, to their inexpressible sorrow, in about a
year died, and vanished from them. This, and one other fact now to be
mentioned, is all the wedded history we have of Thyri.

The other fact is, that Thyri had, by inheritance or covenant, not
depending on her marriage with old Burislav, considerable properties in
Wendland; which, she often reflected, might be not a little behooveful
to her here in Norway, where her civil-list was probably but straitened.
She spoke of this to her husband; but her husband would take no hold,
merely made her gifts, and said, "Pooh, pooh, can't we live without old
Burislav and his Wendland properties?" So that the lady sank into
ever deeper anxiety and eagerness about this Wendland object; took to
weeping; sat weeping whole days; and when Olaf asked, "What ails thee,
then?" would answer, or did answer once, "What a different man my father
Harald Gormson was  [vulgarly called Blue-tooth], compared with some that
are now kings! For no King Svein in the world would Harald Gormson
have given up his own or his wife's just rights!" Whereupon Tryggveson
started up, exclaiming in some heat, "Of thy brother Svein I never was
afraid; if Svein and I meet in contest, it will not be Svein, I believe,
that conquers;" and went off in a towering fume. Consented, however,
at last, had to consent, to get his fine fleet equipped and armed, and
decide to sail with it to Wendland to have speech and settlement with
King Burislav.

Tryggveson had already ships and navies that were the wonder of the
North. Especially in building war ships, the Crane, the Serpent, last
of all the Long Serpent, [7]--he had, for size, for outward beauty, and
inward perfection of equipment, transcended all example.

This new sea expedition became an object of attention to all neighbors;
especially Queen Sigrid the Proud and Svein Double-Beard, her now king,
were attentive to it.

"This insolent Tryggveson," Queen Sigrid would often say, and had long
been saying, to her Svein, "to marry thy sister without leave had or
asked of thee; and now flaunting forth his war navies, as if he, king
only of paltry Norway, were the big hero of the North! Why do you suffer
it, you kings really great?"

By such persuasions and reiterations, King Svein of Denmark, King
Olaf of Sweden, and Jarl Eric, now a great man there, grown rich by
prosperous sea robbery and other good management, were brought to take
the matter up, and combine strenuously for destruction of King Olaf
Tryggveson on this grand Wendland expedition of his. Fleets and forces
were with best diligence got ready; and, withal, a certain Jarl Sigwald,
of Jomsburg, chieftain of the Jomsvikings, a powerful, plausible,
and cunning man, was appointed to find means of joining himself to
Tryggveson's grand voyage, of getting into Tryggveson's confidence, and
keeping Svein Double-Beard, Eric, and the Swedish King aware of all his
movements.

King Olaf Tryggveson, unacquainted with all this, sailed away in summer,
with his splendid fleet; went through the Belts with prosperous winds,
under bright skies, to the admiration of both shores. Such a fleet, with
its shining Serpents, long and short, and perfection of equipment and
appearance, the Baltic never saw before. Jarl Sigwald joined with new
ships by the way: "Had," he too, "a visit to King Burislav to pay; how
could he ever do it in better company?" and studiously and skilfully
ingratiated himself with King Olaf. Old Burislav, when they arrived,
proved altogether courteous, handsome, and amenable; agreed at once to
Olaf's claims for his now queen, did the rites of hospitality with a
generous plenitude to Olaf; who cheerily renewed acquaintance with that
country, known to him in early days (the cradle of his fortunes in the
viking line), and found old friends there still surviving, joyful to
meet him again. Jarl Sigwald encouraged these delays, King Svein and Co.
not being yet quite ready. "Get ready!" Sigwald directed them, and they
diligently did. Olaf's men, their business now done, were impatient to
be home; and grudged every day of loitering there; but, till Sigwald
pleased, such his power of flattering and cajoling Tryggveson, they
could not get away.

At length, Sigwald's secret messengers reporting all ready on the part
of Svein and Co., Olaf took farewell of Burislav and Wendland, and
all gladly sailed away. Svein, Eric, and the Swedish king, with their
combined fleets, lay in wait behind some cape in a safe little bay of
some island, then called Svolde, but not in our time to be found; the
Baltic tumults in the fourteenth century having swallowed it, as some
think, and leaving us uncertain whether it was in the neighborhood of
Rugen Island or in the Sound of Elsinore. There lay Svein, Eric, and Co.
waiting till Tryggveson and his fleet came up, Sigwald's spy messengers
daily reporting what progress he and it had made. At length, one bright
summer morning, the fleet made appearance, sailing in loose order,
Sigwald, as one acquainted with the shoal places, steering ahead, and
showing them the way.

Snorro rises into one of his pictorial fits, seized with enthusiasm at
the thought of such a fleet, and reports to us largely in what order
Tryggveson's winged Coursers of the Deep, in long series, for perhaps an
hour or more, came on, and what the three potentates, from their knoll
of vantage, said of each as it hove in sight, Svein thrice over guessed
this and the other noble vessel to be the Long Serpent; Eric, always
correcting him, "No, that is not the Long Serpent yet" (and aside
always), "Nor shall you be lord of it, king, when it does come." The
Long Serpent itself did make appearance. Eric, Svein, and the Swedish
king hurried on board, and pushed out of their hiding-place into
the open sea. Treacherous Sigwald, at the beginning of all this, had
suddenly doubled that cape of theirs, and struck into the bay out of
sight, leaving the foremost Tryggveson ships astonished, and uncertain
what to do, if it were not simply to strike sail and wait till Olaf
himself with the Long Serpent arrived.

Olaf's chief captains, seeing the enemy's huge fleet come out, and
how the matter lay, strongly advised King Olaf to elude this stroke of
treachery, and, with all sail, hold on his course, fight being now on so
unequal terms. Snorro says, the king, high on the quarter-deck where
he stood, replied, "Strike the sails; never shall men of mine think of
flight. I never fled from battle. Let God dispose of my life; but flight
I will never take." And so the battle arrangements immediately began,
and the battle with all fury went loose; and lasted hour after hour,
till almost sunset, if I well recollect. "Olaf stood on the Serpent's
quarter-deck," says Snorro, "high over the others. He had a gilt shield
and a helmet inlaid with gold; over his armor he had a short red coat,
and was easily distinguished from other men." Snorro's account of the
battle is altogether animated, graphic, and so minute that antiquaries
gather from it, if so disposed (which we but little are), what the
methods of Norse sea-fighting were; their shooting of arrows, casting
of javelins, pitching of big stones, ultimately boarding, and mutual
clashing and smashing, which it would not avail us to speak of here.
Olaf stood conspicuous all day, throwing javelins, of deadly aim, with
both hands at once; encouraging, fighting and commanding like a highest
sea-king.

The Danish fleet, the Swedish fleet, were, both of them, quickly dealt
with, and successively withdrew out of shot-range. And then Jarl Eric
came up, and fiercely grappled with the Long Serpent, or, rather, with
her surrounding comrades; and gradually, as they were beaten empty of
men, with the Long Serpent herself. The fight grew ever fiercer, more
furious. Eric was supplied with new men from the Swedes and Danes; Olaf
had no such resource, except from the crews of his own beaten ships, and
at length this also failed him; all his ships, except the Long Serpent,
being beaten and emptied. Olaf fought on unyielding. Eric twice boarded
him, was twice repulsed. Olaf kept his quarterdeck; unconquerable,
though left now more and more hopeless, fatally short of help. A tall
young man, called Einar Tamberskelver, very celebrated and important
afterwards in Norway, and already the best archer known, kept busy with
his bow. Twice he nearly shot Jarl Eric in his ship. "Shoot me that
man," said Jarl Eric to a bowman near him; and, just as Tamberskelver
was drawing his bow the third time, an arrow hit it in the middle
and broke it in two. "What is this that has broken?" asked King Olaf.
"Norway from thy hand, king," answered Tamberskelver. Tryggveson's men,
he observed with surprise, were striking violently on Eric's; but to no
purpose: nobody fell. "How is this?" asked Tryggveson. "Our swords are
notched and blunted, king; they do not cut." Olaf stept down to his
arm-chest; delivered out new swords; and it was observed as he did it,
blood ran trickling from his wrist; but none knew where the wound was.
Eric boarded a third time. Olaf, left with hardly more than one man,
sprang overboard (one sees that red coat of his still glancing in the
evening sun), and sank in the deep waters to his long rest.

Rumor ran among his people that he still was not dead; grounding on some
movement by the ships of that traitorous Sigwald, they fancied Olaf had
dived beneath the keels of his enemies, and got away with Sigwald, as
Sigwald himself evidently did. "Much was hoped, supposed, spoken," says
one old mourning Skald; "but the truth was, Olaf Tryggveson was never
seen in Norseland more." Strangely he remains still a shining figure to
us; the wildly beautifulest man, in body and in soul, that one has ever
heard of in the North.



CHAPTER VIII. JARLS ERIC AND SVEIN.

Jarl Eric, splendent with this victory, not to speak of that over the
Jomsburgers with his father long ago, was now made Governor of Norway:
Governor or quasi-sovereign, with his brother, Jarl. Svein, as partner,
who, however, took but little hand in governing;--and, under the
patronage of Svein Double-Beard and the then Swedish king (Olaf his
name, Sigrid the Proud, his mother's), administered it, they say, with
skill and prudence for above fourteen years. Tryggveson's death is
understood and laboriously computed to have happened in the year 1000;
but there is no exact chronology in these things, but a continual
uncertain guessing after such; so that one eye in History as regards
them is as if put out;--neither indeed have I yet had the luck to find
any decipherable and intelligible map of Norway: so that the other
eye of History is much blinded withal, and her path through those wild
regions and epochs is an extremely dim and chaotic one. An evil that
much demands remedying, and especially wants some first attempt at
remedying, by inquirers into English History; the whole period from
Egbert, the first Saxon King of England, on to Edward the Confessor,
the last, being everywhere completely interwoven with that of their
mysterious, continually invasive "Danes," as they call them, and
inextricably unintelligible till these also get to be a little
understood, and cease to be utterly dark, hideous, and mythical to us as
they now are.

King Olaf Tryggveson is the first Norseman who is expressly mentioned
to have been in England by our English History books, new or old; and of
him it is merely said that he had an interview with King Ethelred II. at
Andover, of a pacific and friendly nature,--though it is absurdly added
that the noble Olaf was converted to Christianity by that extremely
stupid Royal Person. Greater contrast in an interview than in this
at Andover, between heroic Olaf Tryggveson and Ethelred the forever
Unready, was not perhaps seen in the terrestrial Planet that day.
Olaf or "Olaus," or "Anlaf," as they name him, did "engage on oath to
Ethelred not to invade England any more," and kept his promise, they
farther say. Essentially a truth, as we already know, though the
circumstances were all different; and the promise was to a devout High
Priest, not to a crowned Blockhead and cowardly Do-nothing. One other
"Olaus" I find mentioned in our Books, two or three centuries before,
at a time when there existed no such individual; not to speak of several
Anlafs, who sometimes seem to mean Olaf and still oftener to mean nobody
possible. Which occasions not a little obscurity in our early History,
says the learned Selden. A thing remediable, too, in which, if any
Englishman of due genius (or even capacity for standing labor), who
understood the Icelandic and Anglo-Saxon languages, would engage in
it, he might do a great deal of good, and bring the matter into a
comparatively lucid state. Vain aspirations,--or perhaps not altogether
vain.

At the time of Olaf Tryggveson's death, and indeed long before, King
Svein Double-Beard had always for chief enterprise the Conquest of
England, and followed it by fits with extreme violence and impetus;
often advancing largely towards a successful conclusion; but never, for
thirteen years yet, getting it concluded. He possessed long since all
England north of Watling Street. That is to say, Northumberland, East
Anglia (naturally full of Danish settlers by this time), were fixedly
his; Mercia, his oftener than not; Wessex itself, with all the coasts,
he was free to visit, and to burn and rob in at discretion. There or
elsewhere, Ethelred the Unready had no battle in him whatever; and,
for a forty years after the beginning of his reign, England excelled in
anarchic stupidity, murderous devastation, utter misery, platitude, and
sluggish contemptibility, all the countries one has read of. Apparently
a very opulent country, too; a ready skill in such arts and fine arts
as there were; Svein's very ships, they say, had their gold dragons,
top-mast pennons, and other metallic splendors generally wrought for
them in England. "Unexampled prosperity" in the manufacture way not
unknown there, it would seem! But co-existing with such spiritual
bankruptcy as was also unexampled, one would hope. Read Lupus
(Wulfstan), Archbishop of York's amazing _Sermon_ on the subject, [8]
addressed to contemporary audiences; setting forth such a state of
things,--sons selling their fathers, mothers, and sisters as Slaves to
the Danish robber; themselves living in debauchery, blusterous gluttony,
and depravity; the details of which are well-nigh incredible, though
clearly stated as things generally known,--the humor of these poor
wretches sunk to a state of what we may call greasy desperation, "Let us
eat and drink, for to-morrow we die." The manner in which they treated
their own English nuns, if young, good-looking, and captive to the
Danes; buying them on a kind of brutish or subter-brutish "Greatest
Happiness Principle" (for the moment), and by a Joint-Stock arrangement,
far transcends all human speech or imagination, and awakens in one the
momentary red-hot thought, The Danes have served you right, ye accursed!
The so-called soldiers, one finds, made not the least fight anywhere;
could make none, led and guided as they were, and the "Generals" often
enough traitors, always ignorant, and blockheads, were in the habit,
when expressly commanded to fight, of taking physic, and declaring that
nature was incapable of castor-oil and battle both at once. This
ought to be explained a little to the modern English and their
War-Secretaries, who undertake the conduct of armies. The undeniable
fact is, defeat on defeat was the constant fate of the English; during
these forty years not one battle in which they were not beaten. No gleam
of victory or real resistance till the noble Edmund Ironside (whom it
is always strange to me how such an Ethelred could produce for son)
made his appearance and ran his brief course, like a great and far-seen
meteor, soon extinguished without result. No remedy for England in that
base time, but yearly asking the victorious, plundering, burning and
murdering Danes, "How much money will you take to go away?" Thirty
thousand pounds in silver, which the annual _Danegelt_ soon rose to,
continued to be about the average yearly sum, though generally on the
increasing hand; in the last year I think it had risen to seventy-two
thousand pounds in silver, raised yearly by a tax (Income-tax of its
kind, rudely levied), the worst of all remedies, good for the day only.
Nay, there was one remedy still worse, which the miserable Ethelred
once tried: that of massacring "all the Danes settled in England"
(practically, of a few thousands or hundreds of them), by treachery and
a kind of Sicilian Vespers. Which issued, as such things usually do, in
terrible monition to you not to try the like again! Issued, namely, in
redoubled fury on the Danish part; new fiercer invasion by Svein's
Jarl Thorkel; then by Svein himself; which latter drove the miserable
Ethelred, with wife and family, into Normandy, to wife's brother, the
then Duke there; and ended that miserable struggle by Svein's becoming
King of England himself. Of this disgraceful massacre, which it would
appear has been immensely exaggerated in the English books, we can
happily give the exact date (A.D. 1002); and also of Svein's victorious
accession (A.D. 1013), [9]--pretty much the only benefit one gets out of
contemplating such a set of objects.

King Svein's first act was to levy a terribly increased Income-Tax
for the payment of his army. Svein was levying it with a stronghanded
diligence, but had not yet done levying it, when, at Gainsborough one
night, he suddenly died; smitten dead, once used to be said, by St.
Edmund, whilom murdered King of the East Angles; who could not bear
to see his shrine and monastery of St. Edmundsbury plundered by the
Tyrant's tax-collectors, as they were on the point of being. In all ways
impossible, however,--Edmund's own death did not occur till two years
after Svein's. Svein's death, by whatever cause, befell 1014; his fleet,
then lying in the Humber; and only Knut, [10] his eldest son (hardly
yet eighteen, count some), in charge of it; who, on short counsel, and
arrangement about this questionable kingdom of his, lifted anchor;
made for Sandwich, a safer station at the moment; "cut off the feet and
noses" (one shudders, and hopes not, there being some discrepancy about
it!) of his numerous hostages that had been delivered to King Svein;
set them ashore;--and made for Denmark, his natural storehouse and
stronghold, as the hopefulest first thing he could do.

Knut soon returned from Denmark, with increase of force sufficient for
the English problem; which latter he now ended in a victorious, and
essentially, for himself and chaotic England, beneficent manner. Became
widely known by and by, there and elsewhere, as Knut the Great; and is
thought by judges of our day to have really merited that title. A most
nimble, sharp-striking, clear-thinking, prudent and effective man, who
regulated this dismembered and distracted England in its Church matters,
in its State matters, like a real King. Had a Standing Army (_House
Carles_), who were well paid, well drilled and disciplined, capable of
instantly quenching insurrection or breakage of the peace; and piously
endeavored (with a signal earnestness, and even devoutness, if we look
well) to do justice to all men, and to make all men rest satisfied with
justice. In a word, he successfully strapped up, by every true method
and regulation, this miserable, dislocated, and dissevered mass
of bleeding Anarchy into something worthy to be called an England
again;--only that he died too soon, and a second "Conqueror" of us,
still weightier of structure, and under improved auspices, became
possible, and was needed here! To appearance, Knut himself was capable
of being a Charlemagne of England and the North (as has been already
said or quoted), had he only lived twice as long as he did. But his
whole sum of years seems not to have exceeded forty. His father Svein
of the Forkbeard is reckoned to have been fifty to sixty when St. Edmund
finished him at Gainsborough. We now return to Norway, ashamed of this
long circuit which has been a truancy more or less.



CHAPTER IX. KING OLAF THE THICK-SET'S VIKING DAYS

King Harald Graenske, who, with another from Russia accidentally lodging
beside him, got burned to death in Sweden, courting that unspeakable
Sigrid the Proud,--was third cousin or so to Tryggve, father of our
heroic Olaf. Accurately counted, he is great-grandson of Bjorn the
Chapman, first of Haarfagr's sons whom Eric Bloodaxe made away with. His
little "kingdom," as he called it, was a district named the Greenland
(_Graeneland_); he himself was one of those little Haarfagr kinglets
whom Hakon Jarl, much more Olaf Tryggveson, was content to leave
reigning, since they would keep the peace with him. Harald had a loving
wife of his own, Aasta the name of her, soon expecting the birth of her
and his pretty babe, named Olaf,--at the time he went on that deplorable
Swedish adventure, the foolish, fated creature, and ended self and
kingdom altogether. Aasta was greatly shocked; composed herself however;
married a new husband, Sigurd Syr, a kinglet, and a great-grandson of
Harald Fairhair, a man of great wealth, prudence, and influence in those
countries; in whose house, as favorite and well-beloved stepson, little
Olaf was wholesomely and skilfully brought up. In Sigurd's house he had,
withal, a special tutor entertained for him, one Rane, known as Rane the
Far-travelled, by whom he could be trained, from the earliest basis, in
Norse accomplishments and arts. New children came, one or two; but
Olaf, from his mother, seems always to have known that he was the
distinguished and royal article there. One day his Foster-father,
hurrying to leave home on business, hastily bade Olaf, no other being
by, saddle his horse for him. Olaf went out with the saddle, chose the
biggest he-goat about, saddled that, and brought it to the door by way
of horse. Old Sigurd, a most grave man, grinned sardonically at the
sight. "Hah, I see thou hast no mind to take commands from me; thou art
of too high a humor to take commands." To which, says Snorro, Boy Olaf
answered little except by laughing, till Sigurd saddled for himself, and
rode away. His mother Aasta appears to have been a thoughtful, prudent
woman, though always with a fierce royalism at the bottom of her memory,
and a secret implacability on that head.

At the age of twelve Olaf went to sea; furnished with a little fleet,
and skilful sea-counsellor, expert old Rane, by his Foster-father,
and set out to push his fortune in the world. Rane was a steersman and
counsellor in these incipient times; but the crew always called Olaf
"King," though at first, as Snorro thinks, except it were in the hour of
battle, he merely pulled an oar. He cruised and fought in this capacity
on many seas and shores; passed several years, perhaps till the age
of nineteen or twenty, in this wild element and way of life; fighting
always in a glorious and distinguished manner. In the hour of battle,
diligent enough "to amass property," as the Vikings termed it; and in
the long days and nights of sailing, given over, it is likely, to his
own thoughts and the unfathomable dialogue with the ever-moaning Sea;
not the worst High School a man could have, and indeed infinitely
preferable to the most that are going even now, for a high and deep
young soul.

His first distinguished expedition was to Sweden: natural to go thither
first, to avenge his poor father's death, were it nothing more. Which
he did, the Skalds say, in a distinguished manner; making victorious and
handsome battle for himself, in entering Maelare Lake; and in getting
out of it again, after being frozen there all winter, showing still more
surprising, almost miraculous contrivance and dexterity. This was the
first of his glorious victories, of which the Skalds reckon up some
fourteen or thirteen very glorious indeed, mostly in the Western and
Southern countries, most of all in England; till the name of Olaf
Haraldson became quite famous in the Viking and strategic world. He
seems really to have learned the secrets of his trade, and to have been,
then and afterwards, for vigilance, contrivance, valor, and promptitude
of execution, a superior fighter. Several exploits recorded of him
betoken, in simple forms, what may be called a military genius.

The principal, and to us the alone interesting, of his exploits seem
to have lain in England, and, what is further notable, always on the
anti-Svein side. English books do not mention him at all that I can
find; but it is fairly credible that, as the Norse records report,
in the end of Ethelred's reign, he was the ally or hired general of
Ethelred, and did a great deal of sea-fighting, watching, sailing, and
sieging for this miserable king and Edmund Ironside, his son. Snorro
says expressly, London, the impregnable city, had to be besieged again
for Ethelred's behoof (in the interval between Svein's death and young
Knut's getting back from Denmark), and that our Olaf Haraldson was
the great engineer and victorious captor of London on that singular
occasion,--London captured for the first time. The Bridge, as usual,
Snorro says, offered almost insuperable obstacles. But the engineering
genius of Olaf contrived huge "platforms of wainscoting  [old walls
of wooden houses, in fact], bound together by withes;" these, carried
steadily aloft above the ships, will (thinks Olaf) considerably secure
them and us from the destructive missiles, big boulder stones, and
other, mischief profusely showered down on us, till we get under the
Bridge with axes and cables, and do some good upon it. Olaf's plan
was tried; most of the other ships, in spite of their wainscoting and
withes, recoiled on reaching the Bridge, so destructive were the boulder
and other missile showers. But Olaf's ships and self got actually under
the Bridge; fixed all manner of cables there; and then, with the river
current in their favor, and the frightened ships rallying to help in
this safer part of the enterprise, tore out the important piles and
props, and fairly broke the poor Bridge, wholly or partly, down into
the river, and its Danish defenders into immediate surrender. That is
Snorro's account.

On a previous occasion, Olaf had been deep in a hopeful combination with
Ethelred's two younger sons, Alfred and Edward, afterwards King Edward
the Confessor: That they two should sally out from Normandy in strong
force, unite with Olaf in ditto, and, landing on the Thames, do
something effectual for themselves. But impediments, bad weather or the
like, disheartened the poor Princes, and it came to nothing. Olaf was
much in Normandy, what they then called Walland; a man held in honor by
those Norman Dukes.

What amount of "property" he had amassed I do not know, but could prove,
were it necessary, that he had acquired some tactical or even strategic
faculty and real talent for war. At Lymfjord, in Jutland, but some
years after this (A.D. 1027), he had a sea-battle with the great Knut
himself,--ships combined with flood-gates, with roaring, artificial
deluges; right well managed by King Olaf; which were within a
hair's-breadth of destroying Knut, now become a King and Great; and did
in effect send him instantly running. But of this more particularly by
and by.

What still more surprises me is the mystery, where Olaf, in this
wandering, fighting, sea-roving life, acquired his deeply religious
feeling, his intense adherence to the Christian Faith. I suppose it
had been in England, where many pious persons, priestly and other, were
still to be met with, that Olaf had gathered these doctrines; and that
in those his unfathomable dialogues with the ever-moaning Ocean, they
had struck root downwards in the soul of him, and borne fruit upwards to
the degree so conspicuous afterwards. It is certain he became a deeply
pious man during these long Viking cruises; and directed all his
strength, when strength and authority were lent him, to establishing
the Christian religion in his country, and suppressing and abolishing
Vikingism there; both of which objects, and their respective worth and
unworth, he, must himself have long known so well.

It was well on in A.D. 1016 that Knut gained his last victory, at
Ashdon, in Essex, where the earth pyramids and antique church near by
still testify the thankful piety of Knut,--or, at lowest his joy at
having _won_ instead of lost and perished, as he was near doing there.
And it was still this same year when the noble Edmund Ironside, after
forced partition-treaty "in the Isle of Alney," got scandalously
murdered, and Knut became indisputable sole King of England, and
decisively settled himself to his work of governing there. In the year
before either of which events, while all still hung uncertain for Knut,
and even Eric Jarl of Norway had to be summoned in aid of him, in that
year 1015, as one might naturally guess and as all Icelandic hints
and indications lead us to date the thing, Olaf had decided to give
up Vikingism in all its forms; to return to Norway, and try whether he
could not assert the place and career that belonged to him there. Jarl
Eric had vanished with all his war forces towards England, leaving only
a boy, Hakon, as successor, and Svein, his own brother,--a quiet man,
who had always avoided war. Olaf landed in Norway without obstacle; but
decided to be quiet till he had himself examined and consulted friends.

His reception by his mother Aasta was of the kindest and proudest, and
is lovingly described by Snorro. A pretty idyllic, or epic piece, of
_Norse_ Homeric type: How Aasta, hearing of her son's advent, set all
her maids and menials to work at the top of their speed; despatched a
runner to the harvest-field, where her husband Sigurd was, to warn him
to come home and dress. How Sigurd was standing among his harvest folk,
reapers and binders; and what he had on,--broad slouch hat, with veil
(against the midges), blue kirtle, hose of I forget what color, with
laced boots; and in his hand a stick with silver head and ditto ring
upon it;--a personable old gentleman, of the eleventh century, in those
parts. Sigurd was cautious, prudentially cunctatory, though heartily
friendly in his counsel to Olaf as to the King question. Aasta had a
Spartan tone in her wild maternal heart; and assures Olaf that she, with
a half-reproachful glance at Sigurd, will stand by him to the death in
this his just and noble enterprise. Sigurd promises to consult farther
in his neighborhood, and to correspond by messages; the result is, Olaf
resolutely pushing forward himself, resolves to call a Thing, and
openly claim his kingship there. The Thing itself was willing enough:
opposition parties do here and there bestir themselves; but Olaf
is always swifter than they. Five kinglets somewhere in the
Uplands, [11]--all descendants of Haarfagr; but averse to break the
peace, which Jarl Eric and Hakon Jarl both have always willingly allowed
to peaceable people,--seem to be the main opposition party. These five
take the field against Olaf with what force they have; Olaf, one night,
by beautiful celerity and strategic practice which a Friedrich or a
Turenne might have approved, surrounds these Five; and when morning
breaks, there is nothing for them but either death, or else instant
surrender, and swearing of fealty to King Olaf. Which latter branch of
the alternative they gladly accept, the whole five of them, and go home
again.

This was a beautiful bit of war-practice by King Olaf on land. By
another stroke still more compendious at sea, he had already settled
poor young Hakon, and made him peaceable for a long while. Olaf by
diligent quest and spy-messaging, had ascertained that Hakon, just
returning from Denmark and farewell to Papa and Knut, both now under way
for England, was coasting north towards Trondhjem; and intended on or
about such a day to land in such and such a fjord towards the end of
this Trondhjem voyage. Olaf at once mans two big ships, steers through
the narrow mouth of the said fjord, moors one ship on the north shore,
another on the south; fixes a strong cable, well sunk under water, to
the capstans of these two; and in all quietness waits for Hakon. Before
many hours, Hakon's royal or quasi-royal barge steers gaily into this
fjord; is a little surprised, perhaps, to see within the jaws of it two
big ships at anchor, but steers gallantly along, nothing doubting. Olaf
with a signal of "All hands," works his two capstans; has the cable
up high enough at the right moment, catches with it the keel of poor
Hakon's barge, upsets it, empties it wholly into the sea. Wholly into
the sea; saves Hakon, however, and his people from drowning, and brings
them on board. His dialogue with poor young Hakon, especially poor young
Hakon's responses, is very pretty. Shall I give it, out of Snorro, and
let the reader take it for as authentic as he can? It is at least
the true image of it in authentic Snorro's head, little more than two
centuries later.

"Jarl Hakon was led up to the king's ship. He was the handsomest man
that could be seen. He had long hair as fine as silk, bound about his
head with a gold ornament. When he sat down in the forehold the king
said to him:

_King._ "'It is not false, what is said of your family, that ye are
handsome people to look at; but now your luck has deserted you.'

_Hakon._ "'It has always been the case that success is changeable; and
there is no luck in the matter. It has gone with your family as with
mine to have by turns the better lot. I am little beyond childhood in
years; and at any rate we could not have defended ourselves, as we did
not expect any attack on the way. It may turn out better with us another
time.'

_King._ "'Dost thou not apprehend that thou art in such a condition
that, hereafter, there can be neither victory nor defeat for thee?'

_Hakon._ "'That is what only thou canst determine, King, according to
thy pleasure.'

_King._ "'What wilt thou give me, Jarl, if, for this time, I let thee
go, whole and unhurt?'

_Hakon._ "'What wilt thou take, King?'

_King._ "'Nothing, except that thou shalt leave the country; give up thy
kingdom; and take an oath that thou wilt never go into battle against
me.'" [12]

Jarl Hakon accepted the generous terms; went to England and King Knut,
and kept his bargain for a good few years; though he was at last driven,
by pressure of King Knut, to violate it,--little to his profit, as we
shall see. One victorious naval battle with Jarl Svein, Hakon's uncle,
and his adherents, who fled to Sweden, after his beating,--battle not
difficult to a skilful, hard-hitting king,--was pretty much all the
actual fighting Olaf had to do in this enterprise. He various times
met angry Bonders and refractory Things with arms in their hand; but by
skilful, firm management,--perfectly patient, but also perfectly ready
to be active,--he mostly managed without coming to strokes; and was
universally recognized by Norway as its real king. A promising young
man, and fit to be a king, thinks Snorro. Only of middle stature, almost
rather shortish; but firm-standing, and stout-built; so that they got
to call him Olaf the Thick (meaning Olaf the Thick-set, or Stout-built),
though his final epithet among them was infinitely higher. For the
rest, "a comely, earnest, prepossessing look; beautiful yellow hair in
quantity; broad, honest face, of a complexion pure as snow and rose;"
and finally (or firstly) "the brightest eyes in the world; such that,
in his anger, no man could stand them." He had a heavy task ahead, and
needed all his qualities and fine gifts to get it done.



CHAPTER X. REIGN OF KING OLAF THE SAINT.

The late two Jarls, now gone about their business, had both been
baptized, and called themselves Christians. But during their government
they did nothing in the conversion way; left every man to choose his own
God or Gods; so that some had actually two, the Christian God by land,
and at sea Thor, whom they considered safer in that element. And in
effect the mass of the people had fallen back into a sluggish heathenism
or half-heathenism, the life-labor of Olaf Tryggveson lying ruinous or
almost quite overset. The new Olaf, son of Harald, set himself with
all his strength to mend such a state of matters; and stood by his
enterprise to the end, as the one highest interest, including all
others, for his People and him. His method was by no means soft; on
the contrary, it was hard, rapid, severe,--somewhat on the model of
Tryggveson's, though with more of _bishoping_ and preaching superadded.
Yet still there was a great deal of mauling, vigorous punishing, and an
entire intolerance of these two things: Heathenism and Sea-robbery, at
least of Sea-robbery in the old style; whether in the style we moderns
still practise, and call privateering, I do not quite know. But
Vikingism proper had to cease in Norway; still more, Heathenism, under
penalties too severe to be borne; death, mutilation of limb, not to
mention forfeiture and less rigorous coercion. Olaf was inexorable
against violation of the law. "Too severe," cried many; to whom one
answers, "Perhaps in part _yes_, perhaps also in great part _no_;
depends altogether on the previous question, How far the law was the
eternal one of God Almighty in the universe, How far the law merely
of Olaf (destitute of right inspiration) left to his own passions and
whims?"

Many were the jangles Olaf had with the refractory Heathen Things and
Ironbeards of a new generation: very curious to see. Scarcely ever did
it come to fighting between King and Thing, though often enough near it;
but the Thing discerning, as it usually did in time, that the King was
stronger in men, seemed to say unanimously to itself, "We have lost,
then; baptize us, we must burn our old gods and conform." One new
feature we do slightly discern: here and there a touch of theological
argument on the heathen side. At one wild Thing, far up in the
Dovrefjeld, of a very heathen temper, there was much of that; not to be
quenched by King Olaf at the moment; so that it had to be adjourned till
the morrow, and again till the next day. Here are some traits of it,
much abridged from Snorro (who gives a highly punctual account), which
vividly represent Olaf's posture and manner of proceeding in such
intricacies.

The chief Ironbeard on this occasion was one Gudbrand, a very rugged
peasant; who, says Snorro, was like a king in that district. Some days
before, King Olaf, intending a religious Thing in those deeply heathen
parts, with alternative of Christianity or conflagration, is reported,
on looking down into the valley and the beautiful village of Loar
standing there, to have said wistfully, "What a pity it is that so
beautiful a village should be burnt!" Olaf sent out his message-token
all the same however, and met Gudbrand and an immense assemblage,
whose humor towards him was uncompliant to a high degree indeed. Judge
by this preliminary speech of Gudbrand to his Thing-people, while Olaf
was not yet arrived, but only advancing, hardly got to Breeden on the
other side of the hill: "A man has come to Loar who is called Olaf,"
said Gudbrand, "and will force upon us another faith than we had before,
and will break in pieces all our Gods. He says he has a much greater
and more powerful God; and it is wonderful that the earth does not burst
asunder under him, or that our God lets him go about unpunished when
he dares to talk such things. I know this for certain, that if we carry
Thor, who has always stood by us, out of our Temple that is standing
upon this farm, Olaf's God will melt away, and he and his men be made
nothing as soon as Thor looks upon them." Whereupon the Bonders all
shouted as one man, "Yea!"

Which tremendous message they even forwarded to Olaf, by Gudbrand's
younger son at the head of 700 armed men; but did not terrify Olaf with
it, who, on the contrary, drew up his troops, rode himself at the head
of them, and began a speech to the Bonders, in which he invited them to
adopt Christianity, as the one true faith for mortals.

Far from consenting to this, the Bonders raised a general shout, smiting
at the same time their shields with their weapons; but Olaf's men
advancing on them swiftly, and flinging spears, they turned and ran,
leaving Gudbrand's son behind, a prisoner, to whom Olaf gave his life:
"Go home now to thy father, and tell him I mean to be with him soon."

The son goes accordingly, and advises his father not to face Olaf; but
Gudbrand angrily replies: "Ha, coward! I see thou, too, art taken by
the folly that man is going about with;" and is resolved to fight. That
night, however, Gudbrand has a most remarkable Dream, or Vision: a Man
surrounded by light, bringing great terror with him, who warns Gudbrand
against doing battle with Olaf. "If thou dost, thou and all thy people
will fall; wolves will drag away thee and thine; ravens will tear
thee in stripes!" And lo, in telling this to Thord Potbelly, a sturdy
neighbor of his and henchman in the Thing, it is found that to Thord
also has come the self same terrible Apparition! Better propose truce to
Olaf (who seems to have these dreadful Ghostly Powers on his side), and
the holding of a Thing, to discuss matters between us. Thing assembles,
on a day of heavy rain. Being all seated, uprises King Olaf, and informs
them: "The people of Lesso, Loar, and Vaage, have accepted Christianity,
and broken down their idol-houses: they believe now in the True God, who
has made heaven and earth, and knows all things;" and sits down again
without more words.

"Gudbrand replies, 'We know nothing about him of whom thou speakest.
Dost thou call him God, whom neither thou nor any one else can see? But
we have a God who can be seen every day, although he is not out to-day
because the weather is wet; and he will appear to thee terrible and very
grand; and I expect that fear will mix with thy very blood when he comes
into the Thing. But since thou sayest thy God is so great, let him make
it so that to-morrow we have a cloudy day, but without rain, and then
let us meet again.'

"The king accordingly returned home to his lodging, taking Gudbrand's
son as a hostage; but he gave them a man as hostage in exchange. In
the evening the king asked Gudbrand's son What their God was like? He
replied that he bore the likeness of Thor; had a hammer in his hand; was
of great size, but hollow within; and had a high stand, upon which he
stood when he was out. 'Neither gold nor silver are wanting about him,
and every day he receives four cakes of bread, besides meat.' They then
went to bed; but the king watched all night in prayer. When day dawned
the king went to mass; then to table, and from thence to the Thing. The
weather was such as Gudbrand desired. Now the Bishop stood up in his
choir-robes, with bishop's coif on his head, and bishop's crosier in his
hand. He spoke to the Bonders of the true faith, told the many wonderful
acts of God, and concluded his speech well.

"Thord Potbelly replies, 'Many things we are told of by this learned man
with the staff in his hand, crooked at the top like a ram's horn. But
since you say, comrades, that your God is so powerful, and can do so
many wonders, tell him to make it clear sunshine to-morrow forenoon, and
then we shall meet here again, and do one of two things,--either agree
with you about this business, or fight you.' And they separated for the
day."

Overnight the king instructed Kolbein the Strong, an immense fellow,
the same who killed Gunhild's two brothers, that he, Kolbein, must
stand next him to-morrow; people must go down to where the ships of the
Bonders lay, and punctually bore holes in every one of them; _item_, to
the farms where their horses wore, and punctually unhalter the whole of
them, and let them loose: all which was done. Snorro continues:--

"Now the king was in prayer all night, beseeching God of his goodness
and mercy to release him from evil. When mass was ended, and morning was
gray, the king went to the Thing. When he came thither, some Bonders had
already arrived, and they saw a great crowd coming along, and bearing
among them a huge man's image, glancing with gold and silver. When
the Bonders who were at the Thing saw it, they started up, and bowed
themselves down before the ugly idol. Thereupon it was set down upon the
Thing field; and on the one side of it sat the Bonders, and on the other
the King and his people.

"Then Dale Gudbrand stood up and said, 'Where now, king, is thy God? I
think he will now carry his head lower; and neither thou, nor the man
with the horn, sitting beside thee there, whom thou callest Bishop, are
so bold to-day as on the former days. For now our God, who rules over
all, is come, and looks on you with an angry eye; and now I see well
enough that you are terrified, and scarcely dare raise your eyes. Throw
away now all your opposition, and believe in the God who has your fate
wholly in his hands.'

"The king now whispers to Kolbein the Strong, without the Bonders
perceiving it, 'If it come so in the course of my speech that the
Bonders look another way than towards their idol, strike him as hard as
thou canst with thy club.'

"The king then stood up and spoke. 'Much hast thou talked to us this
morning, and greatly hast thou wondered that thou canst not see our God;
but we expect that he will soon come to us. Thou wouldst frighten us
with thy God, who is both blind and deaf, and cannot even move about
without being carried; but now I expect it will be but a short time
before he meets his fate: for turn your eyes towards the east,--behold
our God advancing in great light.'

"The sun was rising, and all turned to look. At that moment Kolbein gave
their God a stroke, so that he quite burst asunder; and there ran out
of him mice as big almost as cats, and reptiles and adders. The Bonders
were so terrified that some fled to their ships; but when they sprang
out upon them the ships filled with water, and could not get away.
Others ran to their horses, but could not find them. The king then
ordered the Bonders to be called together, saying he wanted to speak
with them; on which the Bonders came back, and the Thing was again
seated.

"The king rose up and said, 'I do not understand what your noise and
running mean. You yourselves see what your God can do,--the idol you
adorned with gold and silver, and brought meat and provisions to. You
see now that the protecting powers, who used and got good of all that,
were the mice and adders, the reptiles and lizards; and surely they do
ill who trust to such, and will not abandon this folly. Take now your
gold and ornaments that are lying strewed on the grass, and give them to
your wives and daughters, but never hang them hereafter upon stocks and
stones. Here are two conditions between us to choose upon: either accept
Christianity, or fight this very day, and the victory be to them to whom
the God we worship gives it.'

"Then Dale Gudbrand stood up and said, 'We have sustained great damage
upon our God; but since he will not help us, we will believe in the God
whom thou believest in.'

"Then all received Christianity. The Bishop baptized Gudbrand and his
son. King Olaf and Bishop Sigurd left behind them teachers; and they who
met as enemies parted as friends. And afterwards Gudbrand built a church
in the valley." [13]

Olaf was by no means an unmerciful man,--much the reverse where he saw
good cause. There was a wicked old King Raerik, for example, one
of those five kinglets whom, with their bits of armaments, Olaf by
stratagem had surrounded one night, and at once bagged and subjected
when morning rose, all of them consenting; all of them except this
Raerik, whom Olaf, as the readiest sure course, took home with him;
blinded, and kept in his own house; finding there was no alternative but
that or death to the obstinate old dog, who was a kind of distant cousin
withal, and could not conscientiously be killed. Stone-blind old Raerik
was not always in murderous humor. Indeed, for most part he wore a
placid, conciliatory aspect, and said shrewd amusing things; but
had thrice over tried, with amazing cunning of contrivance, though
stone-blind, to thrust a dagger into Olaf and the last time had all but
succeeded. So that, as Olaf still refused to have him killed, it had
become a problem what was to be done with him. Olaf's good humor, as
well as _his_ quiet, ready sense and practicality, are manifested in his
final settlement of this Raerik problem. Olaf's laugh, I can perceive,
was not so loud as Tryggveson's but equally hearty, coming from the
bright mind of him!

Besides blind Raerik, Olaf had in his household one Thorarin, an
Icelander; a remarkably ugly man, says Snorro, but a far-travelled,
shrewdly observant, loyal-minded, and good-humored person, whom Olaf
liked to talk with. "Remarkably ugly," says Snorro, "especially in
his hands and feet, which were large and ill-shaped to a degree."
One morning Thorarin, who, with other trusted ones, slept in Olaf's
apartment, was lazily dozing and yawning, and had stretched one of his
feet out of the bed before the king awoke. The foot was still there when
Olaf did open his bright eyes, which instantly lighted on this foot.

"Well, here is a foot," says Olaf, gayly, "which one seldom sees the
match of; I durst venture there is not another so ugly in this city of
Nidaros."

"Hah, king!" said Thorarin, "there are few things one cannot match if
one seek long and take pains. I would bet, with thy permission, King, to
find an uglier."

"Done!" cried Olaf. Upon which Thorarin stretched out the other foot.

"A still uglier," cried he; "for it has lost the little toe."

"Ho, ho!" said Olaf; "but it is I who have gained the bet. The _less_ of
an ugly thing the less ugly, not the more!"

Loyal Thorarin respectfully submitted.

"What is to be my penalty, then? The king it is that must decide."

"To take me that wicked old Raerik to Leif Ericson in Greenland."

Which the Icelander did; leaving two vacant seats henceforth at Olaf's
table. Leif Ericson, son of Eric discoverer of America, quietly managed
Raerik henceforth; sent him to Iceland,--I think to father Eric himself;
certainly to some safe hand there, in whose house, or in some still
quieter neighboring lodging, at his own choice, old Raerik spent the
last three years of his life in a perfectly quiescent manner.

Olaf's struggles in the matter of religion had actually settled that
question in Norway. By these rough methods of his, whatever we may think
of them, Heathenism had got itself smashed dead; and was no more heard
of in that country. Olaf himself was evidently a highly devout and pious
man;--whosoever is born with Olaf's temper now will still find, as Olaf
did, new and infinite field for it! Christianity in Norway had the like
fertility as in other countries; or even rose to a higher, and what
Dahlmann thinks, exuberant pitch, in the course of the two centuries
which followed that of Olaf. Him all testimony represents to us as a
most righteous no less than most religious king. Continually vigilant,
just, and rigorous was Olaf's administration of the laws; repression
of robbery, punishment of injustice, stern repayment of evil-doers,
wherever he could lay hold of them.

Among the Bonder or opulent class, and indeed everywhere, for the poor
too can be sinners and need punishment, Olaf had, by this course of
conduct, naturally made enemies. His severity so visible to all, and
the justice and infinite beneficence of it so invisible except to a very
few. But, at any rate, his reign for the first ten years was victorious;
and might have been so to the end, had it not been intersected, and
interfered with, by King Knut in his far bigger orbit and current of
affairs and interests. Knut's English affairs and Danish being all
settled to his mind, he seems, especially after that year of pilgrimage
to Rome, and association with the Pontiffs and Kaisers of the world on
that occasion, to have turned his more particular attention upon Norway,
and the claims he himself had there. Jarl Hakon, too, sister's son of
Knut, and always well seen by him, had long been busy in this direction,
much forgetful of that oath to Olaf when his barge got canted over
by the cable of two capstans, and his life was given him, not without
conditions altogether!

About the year 1026 there arrived two splendid persons out of England,
bearing King Knut the Great's letter and seal, with a message, likely
enough to be far from welcome to Olaf. For some days Olaf refused to see
them or their letter, shrewdly guessing what the purport would be. Which
indeed was couched in mild language, but of sharp meaning enough: a
notice to King Olaf namely, That Norway was properly, by just heritage,
Knut the Great's; and that Olaf must become the great Knut's liegeman,
and pay tribute to him, or worse would follow. King Olaf listening to
these two splendid persons and their letter, in indignant silence till
they quite ended, made answer: "I have heard say, by old accounts
there are, that King Gorm of Denmark  [Blue-tooth's father, Knut's
great-grandfather] was considered but a small king; having Denmark only
and few people to rule over. But the kings who succeeded him thought
that insufficient for them; and it has since come so far that King Knut
rules over both Denmark and England, and has conquered for himself a
part of Scotland. And now he claims also my paternal bit of heritage;
cannot be contented without that too. Does he wish to rule over all the
countries of the North? Can he eat up all the kale in England itself,
this Knut the Great? He shall do that, and reduce his England to a
desert, before I lay my head in his hands, or show him any other kind
of vassalage. And so I bid you tell him these my words: I will defend
Norway with battle-axe and sword as long as life is given me, and will
pay tax to no man for my kingdom." Words which naturally irritated Knut
to a high degree.

Next year accordingly (year 1027), tenth or eleventh year of Olaf's
reign, there came bad rumors out of England: That Knut was equipping an
immense army,--land-army, and such a fleet as had never sailed before;
Knut's own ship in it,--a Gold Dragon with no fewer than sixty benches
of oars. Olaf and Onund King of Sweden, whose sister he had married,
well guessed whither this armament was bound. They were friends withal,
they recognized their common peril in this imminence; and had, in
repeated consultations, taken measures the best that their united skill
(which I find was mainly Olaf's but loyally accepted by the other) could
suggest. It was in this year that Olaf (with his Swedish king assisting)
did his grand feat upon Knut in Lymfjord of Jutland, which was already
spoken of. The special circumstances of which were these:

Knut's big armament arriving on the Jutish coasts too late in the
season, and the coast country lying all plundered into temporary wreck
by the two Norse kings, who shrank away on sight of Knut, there was
nothing could be done upon them by Knut this year,--or, if anything,
what? Knut's ships ran into Lymfjord, the safe-sheltered frith, or
intricate long straggle of friths and straits, which almost cuts Jutland
in two in that region; and lay safe, idly rocking on the waters there,
uncertain what to do farther. At last he steered in his big ship and
some others, deeper into the interior of Lymfjord, deeper and deeper
onwards to the mouth of a big river called the Helge (_Helge-aa_, the
Holy River, not discoverable in my poor maps, but certainly enough still
existing and still flowing somewhere among those intricate straits and
friths), towards the bottom of which Helge river lay, in some safe nook,
the small combined Swedish and Norse fleet, under the charge of Onund,
the Swedish king, while at the top or source, which is a biggish
mountain lake, King Olaf had been doing considerable engineering works,
well suited to such an occasion, and was now ready at a moment's notice.
Knut's fleet having idly taken station here, notice from the Swedish
king was instantly sent; instantly Olaf's well-engineered flood-gates
were thrown open; from the swollen lake a huge deluge of water was
let loose; Olaf himself with all his people hastening down to join his
Swedish friend, and get on board in time; Helge river all the while
alongside of him, with ever-increasing roar, and wider-spreading deluge,
hastening down the steeps in the night-watches. So that, along with Olaf
or some way ahead of him, came immeasurable roaring waste of waters
upon Knut's negligent fleet; shattered, broke, and stranded many of his
ships, and was within a trifle of destroying the Golden Dragon herself,
with Knut on board. Olaf and Onund, we need not say, were promptly there
in person, doing their very best; the railings of the Golden Dragon,
however, were too high for their little ships; and Jarl Ulf, husband
of Knut's sister, at the top of his speed, courageously intervening,
spoiled their stratagem, and saved Knut from this very dangerous pass.

Knut did nothing more this winter. The two Norse kings, quite unequal to
attack such an armament, except by ambush and engineering, sailed away;
again plundering at discretion on the Danish coast; carrying into Sweden
great booties and many prisoners; but obliged to lie fixed all winter;
and indeed to leave their fleets there for a series of winters,--Knut's
fleet, posted at Elsinore on both sides of the Sound, rendering all
egress from the Baltic impossible, except at his pleasure. Ulf's
opportune deliverance of his royal brother-in-law did not much bestead
poor Ulf himself. He had been in disfavor before, pardoned with
difficulty, by Queen Emma's intercession; an ambitious, officious,
pushing, stirring, and, both in England and Denmark, almost dangerous
man; and this conspicuous accidental merit only awoke new jealousy in
Knut. Knut, finding nothing pass the Sound worth much blockading, went
ashore; "and the day before Michaelmas," says Snorro, "rode with a great
retinue to Roeskilde." Snorro continues his tragic narrative of what
befell there:

"There Knut's brother-in-law, Jarl Ulf, had prepared a great feast for
him. The Jarl was the most agreeable of hosts; but the King was silent
and sullen. The Jarl talked to him in every way to make him cheerful,
and brought forward everything he could think of to amuse him; but the
King remained stern, and speaking little. At last the Jarl proposed a
game of chess, which he agreed to. A chess-board was produced, and they
played together. Jarl Ulf was hasty in temper, stiff, and in nothing
yielding; but everything he managed went on well in his hands: and he
was a great warrior, about whom there are many stories. He was the most
powerful man in Denmark next to the King. Jarl Ulf's sister, Gyda, was
married to Jarl Gudin (Godwin) Ulfnadson; and their sons were, Harald
King of England, and Jarl Tosti, Jarl Walthiof, Jarl Mauro-Kaare, and
Jarl Svein. Gyda was the name of their daughter, who was married to the
English King Edward, the Good (whom we call the Confessor).

"When they had played a while, the King made a false move; on which the
Jarl took a knight from him; but the King set the piece on the board
again, and told the Jarl to make another move. But the Jarl flew angry,
tumbled the chess-board over, rose, and went away. The King said, 'Run
thy ways, Ulf the Fearful.' The Jarl turned round at the door and said,
'Thou wouldst have run farther at Helge river hadst thou been left to
battle there. Thou didst not call me Ulf the Fearful when I hastened to
thy help while the Swedes were beating thee like a dog.' The Jarl then
went out, and went to bed.

"The following morning, while the King was putting on his clothes, he
said to his footboy, 'Go thou to Jarl Ulf and kill him.' The lad went,
was away a while, and then came back. The King said, 'Hast thou killed
the Jarl?' 'I did not kill him, for he was gone to St. Lucius's church.'
There was a man called Ivar the White, a Norwegian by birth, who was the
King's courtman and chamberlain. The King said to him, 'Go thou and kill
the Jarl.' Ivar went to the church, and in at the choir, and thrust
his sword through the Jarl, who died on the spot. Then Ivar went to the
King, with the bloody sword in his hand.

"The King said, 'Hast thou killed the Jarl?' 'I have killed him,' said
he. 'Thou hast done well,' answered the King." I

From a man who built so many churches (one on each battlefield where
he had fought, to say nothing of the others), and who had in him such
depths of real devotion and other fine cosmic quality, this does seem
rather strong! But it is characteristic, withal,--of the man, and
perhaps of the times still more. [14] In any case, it is an event worth
noting, the slain Jarl Ulf and his connections being of importance
in the history of Denmark and of England also. Ulf's wife was Astrid,
sister of Knut, and their only child was Svein, styled afterwards "Svein
Estrithson" ("Astrid-son") when he became noted in the world,--at this
time a beardless youth, who, on the back of this tragedy, fled hastily
to Sweden, where were friends of Ulf. After some ten years' eclipse
there, Knut and both his sons being now dead, Svein reappeared in
Denmark under a new and eminent figure, "Jarl of Denmark," highest
Liegeman to the then sovereign there. Broke his oath to said sovereign,
declared himself, Svein Estrithson, to be real King of Denmark; and,
after much preliminary trouble, and many beatings and disastrous flights
to and fro, became in effect such,--to the wonder of mankind; for he had
not had one victory to cheer him on, or any good luck or merit that one
sees, except that of surviving longer than some others. Nevertheless
he came to be the Restorer, so called, of Danish independence; sole
remaining representative of Knut (or Knut's sister), of Fork-beard,
Blue-tooth, and Old Gorm; and ancestor of all the subsequent kings
of Denmark for some 400 years; himself coming, as we see, only by the
Distaff side, all of the Sword or male side having died so soon. Early
death, it has been observed, was the Great Knut's allotment, and all his
posterity's as well;--fatal limit (had there been no others, which
we see there were) to his becoming "Charlemagne of the North" in any
considerable degree! Jarl Ulf, as we have seen, had a sister, Gyda by
name, wife to Earl Godwin ("Gudin Ulfnadsson," as Snorro calls him) a
very memorable Englishman, whose son and hers, King Harald, _Harold_
in English books, is the memorablest of all. These things ought to be
better known to English antiquaries, and will perhaps be alluded to
again.

This pretty little victory or affront, gained over Knut in _Lymfjord_,
was among the last successes of Olaf against that mighty man. Olaf, the
skilful captain he was, need not have despaired to defend his Norway
against Knut and all the world. But he learned henceforth, month by
month ever more tragically, that his own people, seeing softer prospects
under Knut, and in particular the chiefs of them, industriously bribed
by Knut for years past, had fallen away from him; and that his means of
defence were gone. Next summer, Knut's grand fleet sailed, unopposed,
along the coast of Norway; Knut summoning a Thing every here and
there, and in all of them meeting nothing but sky-high acclamation and
acceptance. Olaf, with some twelve little ships, all he now had, lay
quiet in some safe fjord, near Lindenaes, what we now call the Naze,
behind some little solitary isles on the southeast of Norway there;
till triumphant Knut had streamed home again. Home to England again
"Sovereign of Norway" now, with nephew Hakon appointed Jarl and
Vice-regent under him! This was the news Olaf met on venturing out;
and that his worst anticipations were not beyond the sad truth all, or
almost all, the chief Bonders and men of weight in Norway had declared
against him, and stood with triumphant Knut.

Olaf, with his twelve poor ships, steered vigorously along the coast to
collect money and force,--if such could now anywhere be had. He himself
was resolute to hold out, and try. "Sailing swiftly with a fair wind,
morning cloudy with some showers," he passed the coast of Jedderen,
which was Erling Skjalgson's country, when he got sure notice of an
endless multitude of ships, war-ships, armed merchant ships, all kinds
of shipping-craft, down to fishermen's boats, just getting under way
against him, under the command of Erling Skjalgson,--the powerfulest of
his subjects, once much a friend of Olaf's but now gone against him to
this length, thanks to Olaf's severity of justice, and Knut's abundance
in gold and promises for years back. To that complexion had it come with
Erling; sailing with this immense assemblage of the naval people and
populace of Norway to seize King Olaf, and bring him to the great Knut
dead or alive.

Erling had a grand new ship of his own, which far outsailed the general
miscellany of rebel ships, and was visibly fast gaining distance on Olaf
himself,--who well understood what Erling's puzzle was, between the tail
of his game (the miscellany of rebel ships, namely) that could not come
up, and the head or general prize of the game which was crowding all
sail to get away; and Olaf took advantage of the same. "Lower your
sails!" said Olaf to his men (though we must go slower).

"Ho you, we have lost sight of them!" said Erling to his, and put on all
his speed; Olaf going, soon after this, altogether invisible,--behind a
little island that he knew of, whence into a certain fjord or bay (Bay
of Fungen on the maps), which he thought would suit him. "Halt here, and
get out your arms," said Olaf, and had not to wait long till Erling came
bounding in, past the rocky promontory, and with astonishment beheld
Olaf's fleet of twelve with their battle-axes and their grappling-irons
all in perfect readiness. These fell on him, the unready Erling,
simultaneous, like a cluster of angry bees; and in a few minutes cleared
his ship of men altogether, except Erling himself. Nobody asked his
life, nor probably would have got it if he had. Only Erling still
stood erect on a high place on the poop, fiercely defensive, and very
difficult to get at. "Could not be reached at all," says Snorro, "except
by spears or arrows, and these he warded off with untiring dexterity;
no man in Norway, it was said, had ever defended himself so long alone
against many,"--an almost invincible Erling, had his cause been good.
Olaf himself noticed Erling's behavior, and said to him, from the
foredeck below, "Thou hast turned against me to-day, Erling." "The
eagles fight breast to breast," answers he. This was a speech of the
king's to Erling once long ago, while they stood fighting, not as now,
but side by side. The king, with some transient thought of possibility
going through his head, rejoins, "Wilt thou surrender, Erling?" "That
will I," answered he; took the helmet off his head; laid down sword and
shield; and went forward to the forecastle deck. The king pricked, I
think not very harshly, into Erling's chin or beard with the point of
his battle-axe, saying, "I must mark thee as traitor to thy Sovereign,
though." Whereupon one of the bystanders, Aslak Fitiaskalle, stupidly
and fiercely burst up; smote Erling on the head with his axe; so that
it struck fast in his brain and was instantly the death of Erling.
"Ill-luck attend thee for that stroke; thou hast struck Norway out of my
hand by it!" cried the king to Aslak; but forgave the poor fellow, who
had done it meaning well. The insurrectionary Bonder fleet arriving soon
after, as if for certain victory, was struck with astonishment at this
Erling catastrophe; and being now without any leader of authority,
made not the least attempt at battle; but, full of discouragement and
consternation, thankfully allowed Olaf to sail away on his northward
voyage, at discretion; and themselves went off lamenting, with Erling's
dead body.

This small victory was the last that Olaf had over his many enemies
at present. He sailed along, still northward, day after day; several
important people joined him; but the news from landward grew daily more
ominous: Bonders busily arming to rear of him; and ahead, Hakon still
more busily at Trondhjem, now near by, "--and he will end thy days,
King, if he have strength enough!" Olaf paused; sent scouts to a
hill-top: "Hakon's armament visible enough, and under way hitherward,
about the Isle of Bjarno, yonder!" Soon after, Olaf himself saw the
Bonder armament of twenty-five ships, from the southward, sail past in
the distance to join that of Hakon; and, worse still, his own ships, one
and another (seven in all), were slipping off on a like errand! He
made for the Fjord of Fodrar, mouth of the rugged strath called
Valdal,--which I think still knows Olaf and has now an "Olaf's Highway,"
where, nine centuries ago, it scarcely had a path. Olaf entered this
fjord, had his land-tent set up, and a cross beside it, on the small
level green behind the promontory there. Finding that his twelve poor
ships were now reduced to five, against a world all risen upon him, he
could not but see and admit to himself that there was no chance left;
and that he must withdraw across the mountains and wait for a better
time.

His journey through that wild country, in these forlorn and straitened
circumstances, has a mournful dignity and homely pathos, as described
by Snorro: how he drew up his five poor ships upon the beach, packed all
their furniture away, and with his hundred or so of attendants and their
journey-baggage, under guidance of some friendly Bonder, rode up into
the desert and foot of the mountains; scaled, after three days' effort
(as if by miracle, thought his attendants and thought Snorro), the
well-nigh precipitous slope that led across, never without miraculous
aid from Heaven and Olaf could baggage-wagons have ascended that path!
In short, How he fared along, beset by difficulties and the mournfulest
thoughts; but patiently persisted, steadfastly trusted in God; and was
fixed to return, and by God's help try again. An evidently very pious
and devout man; a good man struggling with adversity, such as the gods,
we may still imagine with the ancients, do look down upon as their
noblest sight.

He got to Sweden, to the court of his brother-in-law; kindly and nobly
enough received there, though gradually, perhaps, ill-seen by the now
authorities of Norway. So that, before long, he quitted Sweden; left his
queen there with her only daughter, his and hers, the only child they
had; he himself had an only son, "by a bondwoman," Magnus by name, who
came to great things afterwards; of whom, and of which, by and by. With
this bright little boy, and a selected escort of attendants, he moved
away to Russia, to King Jarroslav; where he might wait secure against
all risk of hurting kind friends by his presence. He seems to have been
an exile altogether some two years,--such is one's vague notion; for
there is no chronology in Snorro or his Sagas, and one is reduced to
guessing and inferring. He had reigned over Norway, reckoning from the
first days of his landing there to those last of his leaving it across
the Dovrefjeld, about fifteen years, ten of them shiningly victorious.

The news from Norway were naturally agitating to King Olaf and, in the
fluctuation of events there, his purposes and prospects varied much.
He sometimes thought of pilgriming to Jerusalem, and a henceforth
exclusively religious life; but for most part his pious thoughts
themselves gravitated towards Norway, and a stroke for his old place and
task there, which he steadily considered to have been committed to him
by God. Norway, by the rumors, was evidently not at rest. Jarl Hakon,
under the high patronage of his uncle, had lasted there but a little
while. I know not that his government was especially unpopular, nor
whether he himself much remembered his broken oath. It appears, however,
he had left in England a beautiful bride; and considering farther that
in England only could bridal ornaments and other wedding outfit of a
sufficiently royal kind be found, he set sail thither, to fetch her and
them himself. One evening of wildish-looking weather he was seen
about the northeast corner of the Pentland Frith; the night rose to be
tempestuous; Hakon or any timber of his fleet was never seen more. Had
all gone down,--broken oaths, bridal hopes, and all else; mouse and
man,--into the roaring waters. There was no farther Opposition-line; the
like of which had lasted ever since old heathen Hakon Jarl, down to this
his grandson Hakon's _finis_ in the Pentland Frith. With this Hakon's
disappearance it now disappeared.

Indeed Knut himself, though of an empire suddenly so great, was but a
temporary phenomenon. Fate had decided that the grand and wise Knut was
to be short-lived; and to leave nothing as successors but an ineffectual
young Harald Harefoot, who soon perished, and a still stupider
fiercely-drinking Harda-Knut, who rushed down of apoplexy (here in
London City, as I guess), with the goblet at his mouth, drinking health
and happiness at a wedding-feast, also before long.

Hakon having vanished in this dark way, there ensued a pause, both on
Knut's part and on Norway's. Pause or interregnum of some months, till
it became certain, first, whether Hakon were actually dead, secondly,
till Norway, and especially till King Knut himself, could decide what to
do. Knut, to the deep disappointment, which had to keep itself silent,
of three or four chief Norway men, named none of these three or four
Jarl of Norway; but bethought him of a certain Svein, a bastard son of
his own,--who, and almost still more his English mother, much desired a
career in the world fitter for him, thought they indignantly, than
that of captain over Jomsburg, where alone the father had been able to
provide for him hitherto. Svein was sent to Norway as king or vice-king
for Father Knut; and along with him his fond and vehement mother.
Neither of whom gained any favor from the Norse people by the kind of
management they ultimately came to show.

Olaf on news of this change, and such uncertainty prevailing everywhere
in Norway as to the future course of things, whether Svein would
come, as was rumored of at last, and be able to maintain himself if he
did,--thought there might be something in it of a chance for himself
and his rights. And, after lengthened hesitation, much prayer, pious
invocation, and consideration, decided to go and try it. The final
grain that had turned the balance, it appears, was a half-waking morning
dream, or almost ocular vision he had of his glorious cousin Olaf
Tryggveson, who severely admonished, exhorted, and encouraged him; and
disappeared grandly, just in the instant of Olaf's awakening; so that
Olaf almost fancied he had seen the very figure of him, as it melted
into air. "Let us on, let us on!" thought Olaf always after that. He
left his son, not in Russia, but in Sweden with the Queen, who proved
very good and carefully helpful in wise ways to him:--in Russia Olaf had
now nothing more to do but give his grateful adieus, and get ready.

His march towards Sweden, and from that towards Norway and the passes
of the mountains, down Vaerdal, towards Stickelstad, and the crisis
that awaited, is beautifully depicted by Snorro. It has, all of it,
the description (and we see clearly, the fact itself had), a kind of
pathetic grandeur, simplicity, and rude nobleness; something Epic or
Homeric, without the metre or the singing of Homer, but with all the
sincerity, rugged truth to nature, and much more of piety, devoutness,
reverence for what is forever High in this Universe, than meets us
in those old Greek Ballad-mongers. Singularly visual all of it, too,
brought home in every particular to one's imagination, so that it stands
out almost as a thing one actually saw.

Olaf had about three thousand men with him; gathered mostly as he fared
along through Norway. Four hundred, raised by one Dag, a kinsman whom he
had found in Sweden and persuaded to come with him, marched usually in
a separate body; and were, or might have been, rather an important
element. Learning that the Bonders were all arming, especially in
Trondhjem country, Olaf streamed down towards them in the closest order
he could. By no means very close, subsistence even for three thousand
being difficult in such a country. His speech was almost always free
and cheerful, though his thoughts always naturally were of a high and
earnest, almost sacred tone; devout above all. Stickelstad, a small
poor hamlet still standing where the valley ends, was seen by Olaf, and
tacitly by the Bonders as well, to be the natural place for offering
battle. There Olaf issued out from the hills one morning: drew himself
up according to the best rules of Norse tactics, rules of little
complexity, but perspicuously true to the facts. I think he had a clear
open ground still rather raised above the plain in front; he could see
how the Bonder army had not yet quite arrived, but was pouring forward,
in spontaneous rows or groups, copiously by every path. This was thought
to be the biggest army that ever met in Norway; "certainly not much
fewer than a hundred times a hundred men," according to Snorro; great
Bonders several of them, small Bonders very many,--all of willing
mind, animated with a hot sense of intolerable injuries. "King Olaf had
punished great and small with equal rigor," says Snorro; "which appeared
to the chief people of the country too severe; and animosity rose to the
highest when they lost relatives by the King's just sentence, although
they were in reality guilty. He again would rather renounce his dignity
than omit righteous judgment. The accusation against him, of being
stingy with his money, was not just, for he was a most generous man
towards his friends. But that alone was the cause of the discontent
raised against him, that he appeared hard and severe in his
retributions. Besides, King Knut offered large sums of money, and the
great chiefs were corrupted by this, and by his offering them greater
dignities than they had possessed before." On these grounds, against the
intolerable man, great and small were now pouring along by every path.

Olaf perceived it would still be some time before the Bonder army was
in rank. His own Dag of Sweden, too, was not yet come up; he was to have
the right banner; King Olaf's own being the middle or grand one; some
other person the third or left banner. All which being perfectly ranked
and settled, according to the best rules, and waiting only the arrival
of Dag, Olaf bade his men sit down, and freshen themselves with a little
rest. There were religious services gone through: a matins-worship such
as there have been few; sternly earnest to the heart of it, and deep as
death and eternity, at least on Olaf's own part. For the rest Thormod
sang a stave of the fiercest Skaldic poetry that was in him; all the
army straightway sang it in chorus with fiery mind. The Bonder of the
nearest farm came up, to tell Olaf that he also wished to fight for him
"Thanks to thee; but don't," said Olaf; "stay at home rather, that the
wounded may have some shelter." To this Bonder, Olaf delivered all the
money he had, with solemn order to lay out the whole of it in masses
and prayers for the souls of such of his enemies as fell. "Such of thy
enemies, King?" "Yes, surely," said Olaf, "my friends will all either
conquer, or go whither I also am going."

At last the Bonder army too was got ranked; three commanders, one of
them with a kind of loose chief command, having settled to take charge
of it; and began to shake itself towards actual advance. Olaf, in
the mean while, had laid his head on the knees of Finn Arneson, his
trustiest man, and fallen fast asleep. Finn's brother, Kalf Arneson,
once a warm friend of Olaf, was chief of the three commanders on the
opposite side. Finn and he addressed angry speech to one another from
the opposite ranks, when they came near enough. Finn, seeing the enemy
fairly approach, stirred Olaf from his sleep. "Oh, why hast thou wakened
me from such a dream?" said Olaf, in a deeply solemn tone. "What dream
was it, then?" asked Finn. "I dreamt that there rose a ladder here
reaching up to very Heaven," said Olaf; "I had climbed and climbed,
and got to the very last step, and should have entered there hadst thou
given me another moment." "King, I doubt thou art _fey_; I do not quite
like that dream."

The actual fight began about one of the clock in a most bright last day
of July, and was very fierce and hot, especially on the part of Olaf's
men, who shook the others back a little, though fierce enough they too;
and had Dag been on the ground, which he wasn't yet, it was thought
victory might have been won. Soon after battle joined, the sky grew of
a ghastly brass or copper color, darker and darker, till thick night
involved all things; and did not clear away again till battle was near
ending. Dag, with his four hundred, arrived in the darkness, and made a
furious charge, what was afterwards, in the speech of the people, called
"Dag's storm." Which had nearly prevailed, but could not quite; victory
again inclining to the so vastly larger party. It is uncertain still how
the matter would have gone; for Olaf himself was now fighting with his
own hand, and doing deadly execution on his busiest enemies to right
and to left. But one of these chief rebels, Thorer Hund (thought to have
learnt magic from the Laplanders, whom he long traded with, and made
money by), mysteriously would not fall for Olaf's best strokes. Best
strokes brought only dust from the (enchanted) deer-skin coat of the
fellow, to Olaf's surprise,--when another of the rebel chiefs rushed
forward, struck Olaf with his battle-axe, a wild slashing wound, and
miserably broke his thigh, so that he staggered or was supported back to
the nearest stone; and there sat down, lamentably calling on God to
help him in this bad hour. Another rebel of note (the name of him long
memorable in Norway) slashed or stabbed Olaf a second time, as did then
a third. Upon which the noble Olaf sank dead; and forever quitted this
doghole of a world,--little worthy of such men as Olaf one sometimes
thinks. But that too is a mistake, and even an important one, should we
persist in it.

With Olaf's death the sky cleared again. Battle, now near done, ended
with complete victory to the rebels, and next to no pursuit or result,
except the death of Olaf everybody hastening home, as soon as the big
Duel had decided itself. Olaf's body was secretly carried, after dark,
to some out-house on the farm near the spot; whither a poor blind
beggar, creeping in for shelter that very evening, was miraculously
restored to sight. And, truly with a notable, almost miraculous, speed,
the feelings of all Norway for King Olaf changed themselves, and were
turned upside down, "within a year," or almost within a day. Superlative
example of _Extinctus amabitur idem._ Not "Olaf the Thick-set" any
longer, but "Olaf the Blessed" or Saint, now clearly in Heaven; such the
name and character of him from that time to this. Two churches dedicated
to him (out of four that once stood) stand in London at this moment.
And the miracles that have been done there, not to speak of Norway and
Christendom elsewhere, in his name, were numerous and great for long
centuries afterwards. Visibly a Saint Olaf ever since; and, indeed, in
_Bollandus_ or elsewhere, I have seldom met with better stuff to make a
Saint of, or a true World-Hero in all good senses.

Speaking of the London Olaf Churches, I should have added that from one
of these the thrice-famous Tooley Street gets its name,--where those
Three Tailors, addressing Parliament and the Universe, sublimely styled
themselves, "We, the People of England." Saint Olave Street, Saint Oley
Street, Stooley Street, Tooley Street; such are the metamorphoses of
human fame in the world!

The battle-day of Stickelstad, King Olaf's death-day, is generally
believed to have been Wednesday, July 31, 1033. But on investigation, it
turns out that there was no total eclipse of the sun visible in Norway
that year; though three years before, there was one; but on the 29th
instead of the 31st. So that the exact date still remains uncertain;
Dahlmann, the latest critic, inclining for 1030, and its indisputable
eclipse. [15]



CHAPTER XI. MAGNUS THE GOOD AND OTHERS.

St. Olaf is the highest of these Norway Kings, and is the last that much
attracts us. For this reason, if a reason were not superfluous, we might
here end our poor reminiscences of those dim Sovereigns. But we will,
nevertheless, for the sake of their connection with bits of English
History, still hastily mention the Dames of one or two who follow,
and who throw a momentary gleam of life and illumination on events and
epochs that have fallen so extinct among ourselves at present, though
once they were so momentous and memorable.

The new King Svein from Jomsburg, Knut's natural son, had no success in
Norway, nor seems to have deserved any. His English mother and he were
found to be grasping, oppressive persons; and awoke, almost from the
instant that Olaf was suppressed and crushed away from Norway into
Heaven, universal odium more and more in that country. Well-deservedly,
as still appears; for their taxings and extortions of malt, of herring,
of meal, smithwork and every article taxable in Norway, were extreme;
and their service to the country otherwise nearly imperceptible. In
brief their one basis there was the power of Knut the Great; and that,
like all earthly things, was liable to sudden collapse,--and it suffered
such in a notable degree. King Knut, hardly yet of middle age, and
the greatest King in the then world, died at Shaftesbury, in 1035, as
Dahlmann thinks [16],--leaving two legitimate sons and a busy, intriguing
widow (Norman Emma, widow of Ethelred the Unready), mother of the
younger of these two; neither of whom proved to have any talent or any
continuance. In spite of Emma's utmost efforts, Harald, the elder son of
Knut, not hers, got England for his kingdom; Emma and her Harda-Knut
had to be content with Denmark, and go thither, much against their will.
Harald in England,--light-going little figure like his father before
him,--got the name of Harefoot here; and might have done good work among
his now orderly and settled people; but he died almost within year and
day; and has left no trace among us, except that of "Harefoot," from his
swift mode of walking. Emma and her Harda-Knut now returned joyful
to England. But the violent, idle, and drunken Harda-Knut did no good
there; and, happily for England and him, soon suddenly ended, by stroke
of apoplexy at a marriage festival, as mentioned above. In Denmark he
had done still less good. And indeed,--under him, in a year or two, the
grand imperial edifice, laboriously built by Knut's valor and wisdom,
had already tumbled all to the ground, in a most unexpected and
remarkable way. As we are now to indicate with all brevity.



Svein's tyrannies in Norway had wrought such fruit that, within the four
years after Olaf's death, the chief men in Norway, the very slayers of
King Olaf, Kalf Arneson at the head of them, met secretly once or twice;
and unanimously agreed that Kalf Arneson must go to Sweden, or to Russia
itself; seek young Magnus, son of Olaf home: excellent Magnus, to be
king over all Norway and them, instead of this intolerable Svein. Which
was at once done,--Magnus brought home in a kind of triumph, all Norway
waiting for him. Intolerable Svein had already been rebelled against:
some years before this, a certain young Tryggve out of Ireland,
authentic son of Olaf Tryggveson, and of that fine Irish Princess who
chose him in his low habiliments and low estate, and took him over to
her own Green Island,--this royal young Tryggve Olafson had invaded the
usurper Svein, in a fierce, valiant, and determined manner; and though
with too small a party, showed excellent fight for some time; till
Svein, zealously bestirring himself, managed to get him beaten and
killed. But that was a couple of years ago; the party still too small,
not including one and all as now! Svein, without stroke of sword this
time, moved off towards Denmark; never showing face in Norway again. His
drunken brother, Harda-Knut, received him brother-like; even gave him
some territory to rule over and subsist upon. But he lived only a short
while; was gone before Harda-Knut himself; and we will mention him no
more.

Magnus was a fine bright young fellow, and proved a valiant, wise, and
successful King, known among his people as Magnus the Good. He was only
natural son of King Olaf but that made little difference in those times
and there. His strange-looking, unexpected Latin name he got in this
way: Alfhild, his mother, a slave through ill-luck of war, though nobly
born, was seen to be in a hopeful way; and it was known in the King's
house how intimately Olaf was connected with that occurrence, and
how much he loved this "King's serving-maid," as she was commonly
designated. Alfhild was brought to bed late at night; and all the world,
especially King Olaf was asleep; Olaf's strict rule, then and always,
being, Don't awaken me:--seemingly a man sensitive about his sleep. The
child was a boy, of rather weakly aspect; no important person present,
except Sigvat, the King's Icelandic Skald, who happened to be still
awake; and the Bishop of Norway, who, I suppose, had been sent for in
hurry. "What is to be done?" said the Bishop: "here is an infant in
pressing need of baptism; and we know not what the name is: go, Sigvat,
awaken the King, and ask." "I dare not for my life," answered Sigvat;
"King's orders are rigorous on that point." "But if the child die
unbaptized," said the Bishop, shuddering; too certain, he and everybody,
where the child would go in that case! "I will myself give him a name,"
said Sigvat, with a desperate concentration of all his faculties; "he
shall be namesake of the greatest of mankind,--imperial Carolus Magnus;
let us call the infant Magnus!" King Olaf, on the morrow, asked rather
sharply how Sigvat had dared take such a liberty; but excused Sigvat,
seeing what the perilous alternative was. And Magnus, by such accident,
this boy was called; and he, not another, is the prime origin and
introducer of that name Magnus, which occurs rather frequently, not
among the Norman Kings only, but by and by among the Danish and Swedish;
and, among the Scandinavian populations, appears to be rather frequent
to this day.

Magnus, a youth of great spirit, whose own, and standing at his
beck, all Norway now was, immediately smote home on Denmark; desirous
naturally of vengeance for what it had done to Norway, and the sacred
kindred of Magnus. Denmark, its great Knut gone, and nothing but a
drunken Harda-Knut, fugitive Svein and Co., there in his stead, was
become a weak dislocated Country. And Magnus plundered in it, burnt it,
beat it, as often as he pleased; Harda-Knut struggling what he could to
make resistance or reprisals, but never once getting any victory over
Magnus. Magnus, I perceive, was, like his Father, a skilful as well
as valiant fighter by sea and land; Magnus, with good battalions, and
probably backed by immediate alliance with Heaven and St. Olaf, as
was then the general belief or surmise about him, could not easily be
beaten. And the truth is, he never was, by Harda-Knut or any other.
Harda-Knut's last transaction with him was, To make a firm Peace and
even Family-treaty sanctioned by all the grandees of both countries, who
did indeed mainly themselves make it; their two Kings assenting: That
there should be perpetual Peace, and no thought of war more, between
Denmark and Norway; and that, if either of the Kings died childless
while the other was reigning, the other should succeed him in both
Kingdoms. A magnificent arrangement, such as has several times been
made in the world's history; but which in this instance, what is very
singular, took actual effect; drunken Harda-Knut dying so speedily, and
Magnus being the man he was. One would like to give the date of this
remarkable Treaty; but cannot with precision. Guess somewhere about
1040: [17] actual fruition of it came to Magnus, beyond question, in
1042, when Harda-Knut drank that wassail bowl at the wedding in Lambeth,
and fell down dead; which in the Saxon Chronicle is dated 3d June of
that year. Magnus at once went to Denmark on hearing this event; was
joyfully received by the headmen there, who indeed, with their fellows
in Norway, had been main contrivers of the Treaty; both Countries
longing for mutual peace, and the end of such incessant broils.

Magnus was triumphantly received as King in Denmark. The only
unfortunate thing was, that Svein Estrithson, the exile son of Ulf,
Knut's Brother-in-law, whom Knut, as we saw, had summarily killed twelve
years before, emerged from his exile in Sweden in a flattering form;
and proposed that Magnus should make him Jarl of Denmark, and general
administrator there, in his own stead. To which the sanguine Magnus, in
spite of advice to the contrary, insisted on acceding. "Too powerful a
Jarl," said Einar Tamberskelver--the same Einar whose bow was heard to
break in Olaf Tryggveson's last battle ("Norway breaking from thy hand,
King!"), who had now become Magnus's chief man, and had long been
among the highest chiefs in Norway; "too powerful a Jarl," said Einar
earnestly. But Magnus disregarded it; and a troublesome experience had
to teach him that it was true. In about a year, crafty Svein, bringing
ends to meet, got himself declared King of Denmark for his own behoof,
instead of Jarl for another's: and had to be beaten and driven out by
Magnus. Beaten every year; but almost always returned next year, for a
new beating,--almost, though not altogether; having at length got one
dreadful smashing-down and half-killing, which held him quiet for a
while,--so long as Magnus lived. Nay in the end, he made good his point,
as if by mere patience in being beaten; and did become King himself,
and progenitor of all the Kings that followed. King Svein Estrithson;
so called from Astrid or Estrith, his mother, the great Knut's sister,
daughter of Svein Forkbeard by that amazing Sigrid the Proud, who
_burnt_ those two ineligible suitors of hers both at once, and got a
switch on the face from Olaf Tryggveson, which proved the death of that
high man.

But all this fine fortune of the often beaten Estrithson was posterior
to Magnus's death; who never would have suffered it, had he been alive.
Magnus was a mighty fighter; a fiery man; very proud and positive,
among other qualities, and had such luck as was never seen before. Luck
invariably good, said everybody; never once was beaten,--which proves,
continued everybody, that his Father Olaf and the miraculous power of
Heaven were with him always. Magnus, I believe, did put down a great
deal of anarchy in those countries. One of his earliest enterprises
was to abolish Jomsburg, and trample out that nest of pirates. Which
he managed so completely that Jomsburg remained a mere reminiscence
thenceforth; and its place is not now known to any mortal.

One perverse thing did at last turn up in the course of Magnus: a new
Claimant for the Crown of Norway, and he a formidable person withal.
This was Harald, half-brother of the late Saint Olaf; uncle or
half-uncle, therefore, of Magnus himself. Indisputable son of the
Saint's mother by St. Olaf's stepfather, who was, himself descended
straight from Harald Haarfagr. This new Harald was already much heard of
in the world. As an ardent Boy of fifteen he had fought at King Olaf's
side at Stickelstad; would not be admonished by the Saint to go away.
Got smitten down there, not killed; was smuggled away that night from
the field by friendly help; got cured of his wounds, forwarded to
Russia, where he grew to man's estate, under bright auspices and
successes. Fell in love with the Russian Princess, but could not get
her to wife; went off thereupon to Constantinople as _Vaeringer_
(Life-Guardsman of the Greek Kaiser); became Chief Captain of the
Vaeringers, invincible champion of the poor Kaisers that then were,
and filled all the East with the shine and noise of his exploits. An
authentic _Waring_ or _Baring_, such the surname we now have derived
from these people; who were an important institution in those Greek
countries for several ages: Vaeringer Life-Guard, consisting of
Norsemen, with sometimes a few English among them. Harald had
innumerable adventures, nearly always successful, sing the Skalds;
gained a great deal of wealth, gold ornaments, and gold coin; had even
Queen Zoe (so they sing, though falsely) enamored of him at one time;
and was himself a Skald of eminence; some of whose verses, by no means
the worst of their kind, remain to this day.

This character of Waring much distinguishes Harald to me; the only
Vaeringer of whom I could ever get the least biography, true or
half-true. It seems the Greek History-books but indifferently correspond
with these Saga records; and scholars say there could have been no
considerable romance between Zoe and him, Zoe at that date being 60
years of age! Harald's own lays say nothing of any Zoe, but are still
full of longing for his Russian Princess far away.

At last, what with Zoes, what with Greek perversities and perfidies, and
troubles that could not fail, he determined on quitting Greece; packed
up his immensities of wealth in succinct shape, and actually returned
to Russia, where new honors and favors awaited him from old friends, and
especially, if I mistake not, the hand of that adorable Princess, crown
of all his wishes for the time being. Before long, however, he decided
farther to look after his Norway Royal heritages; and, for that purpose,
sailed in force to the Jarl or quasi-King of Denmark, the often-beaten
Svein, who was now in Sweden on his usual winter exile after beating.
Svein and he had evidently interests in common. Svein was charmed to see
him, so warlike, glorious and renowned a man, with masses of money about
him, too. Svein did by and by become treacherous; and even attempted,
one night, to assassinate Harald in his bed on board ship: but Harald,
vigilant of Svein, and a man of quick and sure insight, had providently
gone to sleep elsewhere, leaving a log instead of himself among the
blankets. In which log, next morning, treacherous Svein's battle-axe was
found deeply sticking: and could not be removed without difficulty! But
this was after Harald and King Magnus himself bad begun treating; with
the fairest prospects,--which this of the $vein battle-axe naturally
tended to forward, as it altogether ended the other copartnery.

Magnus, on first hearing of Vaeringer Harald and his intentions, made
instant equipment, and determination to fight his uttermost against
the same. But wise persons of influence round him, as did the like
sort round Vaeringer Harald, earnestly advised compromise and peaceable
agreement. Which, soon after that of Svein's nocturnal battle-axe,
was the course adopted; and, to the joy of all parties, did prove
a successful solution. Magnus agreed to part his kingdom with Uncle
Harald; uncle parting his treasures, or uniting them with Magnus's
poverty. Each was to be an independent king, but they were to govern in
common; Magnus rather presiding. He, to sit, for example, in the High
Seat alone; King Harald opposite him in a seat not quite so high, though
if a stranger King came on a visit, both the Norse Kings were to sit
in the High Seat. With various other punctilious regulations; which the
fiery Magnus was extremely strict with; rendering the mutual relation a
very dangerous one, had not both the Kings been honest men, and Harald
a much more prudent and tolerant one than Magnus. They, on the whole,
never had any weighty quarrel, thanks now and then rather to Harald
than to Magnus. Magnus too was very noble; and Harald, with his wide
experience and greater length of years, carefully held his heat of
temper well covered in.

Prior to Uncle Harald's coming, Magnus had distinguished himself as a
Lawgiver. His Code of Laws for the Trondhjem Province was considered
a pretty piece of legislation; and in subsequent times got the name of
_Gray-goose_ (Gragas); one of the wonderfulest names ever given to a
wise Book. Some say it came from the gray color of the parchment, some
give other incredible origins; the last guess I have heard is, that
the name merely denotes antiquity; the witty name in Norway for a man
growing old having been, in those times, that he was now "becoming a
gray-goose." Very fantastic indeed; certain, however, that Gray-goose is
the name of that venerable Law Book; nay, there is another, still more
famous, belonging to Iceland, and not far from a century younger, the
Iceland _Gray-goose._ The Norway one is perhaps of date about 1037, the
other of about 1118; peace be with them both! Or, if anybody is inclined
to such matters let him go to Dahlmann, for the amplest information and
such minuteness of detail as might almost enable him to be an Advocate,
with Silk Gown, in any Court depending on these Gray-geese.

Magnus did not live long. He had a dream one night of his Father Olaf's
coming to him in shining presence, and announcing, That a magnificent
fortune and world-great renown was now possible for him; but that
perhaps it was his duty to refuse it; in which case his earthly life
would be short. "Which way wilt thou do, then?" said the shining
presence. "Thou shalt decide for me, Father, thou, not I!" and told his
Uncle Harald on the morrow, adding that he thought he should now
soon die; which proved to be the fact. The magnificent fortune, so
questionable otherwise, has reference, no doubt, to the Conquest
of England; to which country Magnus, as rightful and actual King of
_Denmark_, as well as undisputed heir to drunken Harda-Knut, by treaty
long ago, had now some evident claim. The enterprise itself was reserved
to the patient, gay, and prudent Uncle Harald; and to him it did prove
fatal,--and merely paved the way for Another, luckier, not likelier!

Svein Estrithson, always beaten during Magnus's life, by and by got an
agreement from the prudent Harald to _be_ King of Denmark, then; and end
these wearisome and ineffectual brabbles; Harald having other work to
do. But in the autumn of 1066, Tosti, a younger son of our English
Earl Godwin, came to Svein's court with a most important announcement;
namely, that King Edward the Confessor, so called, was dead, and that
Harold, as the English write it, his eldest brother would give him,
Tosti, no sufficient share in the kingship. Which state of matters, if
Svein would go ahead with him to rectify it, would be greatly to the
advantage of Svein. Svein, taught by many beatings, was too wise for
this proposal; refused Tosti, who indignantly stepped over into
Norway, and proposed it to King Harald there. Svein really had acquired
considerable teaching, I should guess, from his much beating and hard
experience in the world; one finds him afterwards the esteemed friend
of the famous Historian Adam of Bremen, who reports various wise
humanities, and pleasant discoursings with Svein Estrithson.

As for Harald Hardrade, "Harald the Hard or Severe," as he was now
called, Tosti's proposal awakened in him all his old Vaeringer ambitious
and cupidities into blazing vehemence. He zealously consented; and at
once, with his whole strength, embarked in the adventure. Fitted out two
hundred ships, and the biggest army he could carry in them; and sailed
with Tosti towards the dangerous Promised Land. Got into the Tyne and
took booty; got into the Humber, thence into the Ouse; easily subdued
any opposition the official people or their populations could make;
victoriously scattered these, victoriously took the City of York in a
day; and even got himself homaged there, "King of Northumberland,"
as per covenant,--Tosti proving honorable,--Tosti and he going with
faithful strict copartnery, and all things looking prosperous and
glorious. Except only (an important exception!) that they learnt for
certain, English Harold was advancing with all his strength; and, in
a measurable space of hours, unless care were taken, would be in York
himself. Harald and Tosti hastened off to seize the post of Stamford
Bridge on Derwent River, six or seven miles east of York City, and
there bar this dangerous advent. Their own ships lay not far off in
Ouse River, in case of the worst. The battle that ensued the next day,
September 20, 1066, is forever memorable in English history.

Snorro gives vividly enough his view of it from the Icelandic side: A
ring of stalwart Norsemen, close ranked, with their steel tools in hand;
English Harold's Army, mostly cavalry, prancing and pricking all around;
trying to find or make some opening in that ring. For a long time trying
in vain, till at length, getting them enticed to burst out somewhere
in pursuit, they quickly turned round, and quickly made an end, of that
matter. Snorro represents English Harold, with a first party of these
horse coming up, and, with preliminary salutations, asking if Tosti were
there, and if Harald were; making generous proposals to Tosti; but,
in regard to Harald and what share of England was to be his, answering
Tosti with the words, "Seven feet of English earth, or more if he
require it, for a grave." Upon which Tosti, like an honorable man and
copartner, said, "No, never; let us fight you rather till we all die."
"Who is this that spoke to you?" inquired Harald, when the cavaliers had
withdrawn. "My brother Harold," answers Tosti; which looks rather like a
Saga, but may be historical after all. Snorro's history of the battle is
intelligible only after you have premised to it, what he never hints at,
that the scene was on the east side of the bridge and of the Derwent;
the great struggle for the bridge, one at last finds, was after the
fall of Harald; and to the English Chroniclers, said struggle, which was
abundantly severe, is all they know of the battle.

Enraged at that breaking loose of his steel ring of infantry, Norse
Harald blazed up into true Norse fury, all the old Vaeringer and
Berserkir rage awakening in him; sprang forth into the front of the
fight, and mauled and cut and smashed down, on both hands of him,
everything he met, irresistible by any horse or man, till an arrow cut
him through the windpipe, and laid him low forever. That was the end of
King Harald and of his workings in this world. The circumstance that
he was a Waring or Baring and had smitten to pieces so many Oriental
cohorts or crowds, and had made love-verses (kind of iron madrigals) to
his Russian Princess, and caught the fancy of questionable Greek queens,
and had amassed such heaps of money, while poor nephew Magnus had
only one gold ring (which had been his father's, and even his father's
_mother's_, as Uncle Harald noticed), and nothing more whatever of that
precious metal to combine with Harald's treasures:--all this is new to
me, naturally no hint of it in any English book; and lends some gleam of
romantic splendor to that dim business of Stamford Bridge, now fallen
so dull and torpid to most English minds, transcendently important as it
once was to all Englishmen. Adam of Bremen says, the English got as
much gold plunder from Harald's people as was a heavy burden for twelve
men; [18] a thing evidently impossible, which nobody need try to believe.
Young Olaf, Harald's son, age about sixteen, steering down the Ouse at
the top of his speed, escaped home to Norway with all his ships, and
subsequently reigned there with Magnus, his brother. Harald's body did
lie in English earth for about a year; but was then brought to Norway
for burial. He needed more than seven feet of grave, say some;
Laing, interpreting Snorro's measurements, makes Harald eight feet in
stature,--I do hope, with some error in excess!



CHAPTER XII. OLAF THE TRANQUIL, MAGNUS BAREFOOT, AND SIGURD THE
CRUSADER.

The new King Olaf, his brother Magnus having soon died, bore rule in
Norway for some five-and-twenty years. Rule soft and gentle, not like
his father's, and inclining rather to improvement in the arts and
elegancies than to anything severe or dangerously laborious. A
slim-built, witty-talking, popular and pretty man, with uncommonly
bright eyes, and hair like floss silk: they called him Olaf _Kyrre_ (the
Tranquil or Easygoing).

The ceremonials of the palace were much improved by him. Palace still
continued to be built of huge logs pyramidally sloping upwards, with
fireplace in the middle of the floor, and no egress for smoke or ingress
for light except right overhead, which, in bad weather, you could shut,
or all but shut, with a lid. Lid originally made of mere opaque board,
but changed latterly into a light frame, covered (_glazed_, so to speak)
with entrails of animals, clarified into something of pellucidity. All
this Olaf, I hope, further perfected, as he did the placing of the court
ladies, court officials, and the like; but I doubt if the luxury of a
glass window were ever known to him, or a cup to drink from that was
not made of metal or horn. In fact it is chiefly for his son's sake I
mention him here; and with the son, too, I have little real concern, but
only a kind of fantastic.

This son bears the name of Magnus _Barfod_ (Barefoot, or Bareleg); and
if you ask why so, the answer is: He was used to appear in the streets
of Nidaros (Trondhjem) now and then in complete Scotch Highland dress.
Authentic tartan plaid and philibeg, at that epoch,--to the wonder of
Trondhjem and us! The truth is, he had a mighty fancy for those Hebrides
and other Scotch possessions of his; and seeing England now quite
impossible, eagerly speculated on some conquest in Ireland as next
best. He did, in fact, go diligently voyaging and inspecting among
those Orkney and Hebridian Isles; putting everything straight there,
appointing stringent authorities, jarls,--nay, a king, "Kingdom of the
Suderoer" (Southern Isles, now called _Sodor_),--and, as first king,
Sigurd, his pretty little boy of nine years. All which done, and some
quarrel with Sweden fought out, he seriously applied himself to visiting
in a still more emphatic manner; namely, to invading, with his best
skill and strength, the considerable virtual or actual kingdom he had
in Ireland, intending fully to enlarge it to the utmost limits of the
Island if possible. He got prosperously into Dublin (guess A.D. 1102).
Considerable authority he already had, even among those poor Irish
Kings, or kinglets, in their glibs and yellow-saffron gowns; still more,
I suppose, among the numerous Norse Principalities there. "King Murdog,
King of Ireland," says the Chronicle of Man, "had obliged himself, every
Yule-day, to take a pair of shoes, hang them over his shoulder, as your
servant does on a journey, and walk across his court, at bidding and in
presence of Magnus Barefoot's messenger, by way of homage to the said
King." Murdog on this greater occasion did whatever homage could be
required of him; but that, though comfortable, was far from satisfying
the great King's ambitious mind. The great King left Murdog; left his
own Dublin; marched off westward on a general conquest of Ireland.
Marched easily victorious for a time; and got, some say, into the wilds
of Connaught, but there saw himself beset by ambuscades and wild Irish
countenances intent on mischief; and had, on the sudden, to draw up for
battle;--place, I regret to say, altogether undiscoverable to me; known
only that it was boggy in the extreme. Certain enough, too certain and
evident, Magnus Barefoot, searching eagerly, could find no firm footing
there; nor, fighting furiously up to the knees or deeper, any result but
honorable death! Date is confidently marked "24 August, 1103,"--as if
people knew the very day of the month. The natives did humanely give
King Magnus Christian burial. The remnants of his force, without further
molestation, found their ships on the Coast of Ulster; and sailed
home,--without conquest of Ireland; nay perhaps, leaving royal Murdog
disposed to be relieved of his procession with the pair of shoes.

Magnus Barefoot left three sons, all kings at once, reigning peaceably
together. But to us, at present, the only noteworthy one of them was
Sigurd; who, finding nothing special to do at home, left his brothers
to manage for him, and went off on a far Voyage, which has rendered him
distinguishable in the crowd. Voyage through the Straits of Gibraltar,
on to Jerusalem, thence to Constantinople; and so home through Russia,
shining with such renown as filled all Norway for the time being. A
King called Sigurd Jorsalafarer (Jerusalemer) or Sigurd the Crusader
henceforth. His voyage had been only partially of the Viking type;
in general it was of the Royal-Progress kind rather; Vikingism only
intervening in cases of incivility or the like. His reception in
the Courts of Portugal, Spain, Sicily, Italy, had been honorable and
sumptuous. The King of Jerusalem broke out into utmost splendor and
effusion at sight of such a pilgrim; and Constantinople did its
highest honors to such a Prince of Vaeringers. And the truth is, Sigurd
intrinsically was a wise, able, and prudent man; who, surviving both his
brothers, reigned a good while alone in a solid and successful way. He
shows features of an original, independent-thinking man; something
of ruggedly strong, sincere, and honest, with peculiarities that are
amiable and even pathetic in the character and temperament of him;
as certainly, the course of life he took was of his own choosing, and
peculiar enough. He happens furthermore to be, what he least of all
could have chosen or expected, the last of the Haarfagr Genealogy that
had any success, or much deserved any, in this world. The last of the
Haarfagrs, or as good as the last! So that, singular to say, it is in
reality, for one thing only that Sigurd, after all his crusadings and
wonderful adventures, is memorable to us here: the advent of an
Irish gentleman called "Gylle Krist" (Gil-christ, Servant of Christ),
who,--not over welcome, I should think, but (unconsciously) big with the
above result,--appeared in Norway, while King Sigurd was supreme. Let us
explain a little.

This Gylle Krist, the unconsciously fatal individual, who "spoke Norse
imperfectly," declared himself to be the natural son of whilom Magnus
Barefoot; born to him there while engaged in that unfortunate "Conquest
of Ireland." "Here is my mother come with me," said Gilchrist, "who
declares my real baptismal name to have been Harald, given me by that
great King; and who will carry the red-hot ploughshares or do any
reasonable ordeal in testimony of these facts. I am King Sigurd's
veritable half-brother: what will King Sigurd think it fair to do with
me?" Sigurd clearly seems to have believed the man to be speaking truth;
and indeed nobody to have doubted but he was. Sigurd said, "Honorable
sustenance shalt thou have from me here. But, under pain of extirpation,
swear that, neither in my time, nor in that of my young son Magnus,
wilt thou ever claim any share in this Government." Gylle swore; and
punctually kept his promise during Sigurd's reign. But during Magnus's,
he conspicuously broke it; and, in result, through many reigns, and
during three or four generations afterwards, produced unspeakable
contentions, massacrings, confusions in the country he had adopted.
There are reckoned, from the time of Sigurd's death (A.D. 1130), about a
hundred years of civil war: no king allowed to distinguish himself by a
solid reign of well-doing, or by any continuing reign at all,--sometimes
as many as four kings simultaneously fighting;--and in Norway, from sire
to son, nothing but sanguinary anarchy, disaster and bewilderment;
a Country sinking steadily as if towards absolute ruin. Of all which
frightful misery and discord Irish Gylle, styled afterwards King
Harald Gylle, was, by ill destiny and otherwise, the visible origin: an
illegitimate Irish Haarfagr who proved to be his own destruction, and
that of the Haarfagr kindred altogether!

Sigurd himself seems always to have rather favored Gylle, who was a
cheerful, shrewd, patient, witty, and effective fellow; and had at first
much quizzing to endure, from the younger kind, on account of his Irish
way of speaking Norse, and for other reasons. One evening, for example,
while the drink was going round, Gylle mentioned that the Irish had a
wonderful talent of swift running and that there were among them people
who could keep up with the swiftest horse. At which, especially from
young Magnus, there were peals of laughter; and a declaration from the
latter that Gylle and he would have it tried to-morrow morning! Gylle in
vain urged that he had not himself professed to be so swift a runner
as to keep up with the Prince's horses; but only that there were men in
Ireland who could. Magnus was positive; and, early next morning, Gylle
had to be on the ground; and the race, naturally under heavy bet,
actually went off. Gylle started parallel to Magnus's stirrup; ran like
a very roe, and was clearly ahead at the goal. "Unfair," said Magnus;
"thou must have had hold of my stirrup-leather, and helped thyself
along; we must try it again." Gylle ran behind the horse this second
time; then at the end, sprang forward; and again was fairly in ahead.
"Thou must have held by the tail," said Magnus; "not by fair running was
this possible; we must try a third time!" Gylle started ahead of Magnus
and his horse, this third time; kept ahead with increasing distance,
Magnus galloping his very best; and reached the goal more palpably
foremost than ever. So that Magnus had to pay his bet, and other
damage and humiliation. And got from his father, who heard of it soon
afterwards, scoffing rebuke as a silly fellow, who did not know the
worth of men, but only the clothes and rank of them, and well deserved
what he had got from Gylle. All the time King Sigurd lived, Gylle seems
to have had good recognition and protection from that famous man; and,
indeed, to have gained favor all round, by his quiet social demeanor and
the qualities he showed.



CHAPTER XIII. MAGNUS THE BLIND, HARALD GYLLE, AND MUTUAL EXTINCTION OF
THE HAARFAGRS.

On Sigurd the Crusader's death, Magnus naturally came to the throne;
Gylle keeping silence and a cheerful face for the time. But it was not
long till claim arose on Gylle's part, till war and fight arose between
Magnus and him, till the skilful, popular, ever-active and shifty Gylle
had entirely beaten Magnus; put out his eyes, mutilated the poor body
of him in a horrid and unnamable manner, and shut him up in a convent as
out of the game henceforth. There in his dark misery Magnus lived now
as a monk; called "Magnus the Blind" by those Norse populations; King
Harald Gylle reigning victoriously in his stead. But this also was only
for a time. There arose avenging kinsfolk of Magnus, who had no Irish
accent in their Norse, and were themselves eager enough to bear rule
in their native country. By one of these,--a terribly stronghanded,
fighting, violent, and regardless fellow, who also was a Bastard of
Magnus Barefoot's, and had been made a Priest, but liked it unbearably
ill, and had broken loose from it into the wildest courses at home and
abroad; so that his current name got to be "Slembi-diakn," Slim or Ill
Deacon, under which he is much noised of in Snorro and the Sagas: by
this Slim-Deacon, Gylle was put an end to (murdered by night, drunk in
his sleep); and poor blind Magnus was brought out, and again set to act
as King, or King's Cloak, in hopes Gylle's posterity would never rise to
victory more. But Gylle's posterity did, to victory and also to defeat,
and were the death of Magnus and of Slim-Deacon too, in a frightful way;
and all got their own death by and by in a ditto. In brief, these two
kindreds (reckoned to be authentic enough Haarfagr people, both kinds of
them) proved now to have become a veritable crop of dragon's teeth;
who mutually fought, plotted, struggled, as if it had been their life's
business; never ended fighting and seldom long intermitted it, till they
had exterminated one another, and did at last all rest in death. One
of these later Gylle temporary Kings I remember by the name of Harald
Herdebred, Harald of the Broad Shoulders. The very last of them I
think was Harald Mund (Harald of the _Wry-Mouth_), who gave rise to two
Impostors, pretending to be Sons of his, a good while after the poor
Wry-Mouth itself and all its troublesome belongings were quietly
underground. What Norway suffered during that sad century may be
imagined.



CHAPTER XIV. SVERRIR AND DESCENDANTS, TO HAKON THE OLD.

The end of it was, or rather the first abatement, and _beginnings_ of
the end, That, when all this had gone on ever worsening for some forty
years or so, one Sverrir (A.D. 1177), at the head of an armed mob of
poor people called _Birkebeins_, came upon the scene. A strange enough
figure in History, this Sverrir and his Birkebeins! At first a mere
mockery and dismal laughing-stock to the enlightened Norway public.
Nevertheless by unheard-of fighting, hungering, exertion, and endurance,
Sverrir, after ten years of such a death-wrestle against men and things,
got himself accepted as King; and by wonderful expenditure of ingenuity,
common cunning, unctuous Parliamentary Eloquence or almost Popular
Preaching, and (it must be owned) general human faculty and valor
(or value) in the over-clouded and distorted state, did victoriously
continue such. And founded a new Dynasty in Norway, which ended only
with Norway's separate existence, after near three hundred years.

This Sverrir called himself a Son of Harald Wry-Mouth; but was in
reality the son of a poor Comb-maker in some little town of Norway;
nothing heard of Sonship to Wry-Mouth till after good success otherwise.
His Birkebeins (that is to say, _Birchlegs;_ the poor rebellious
wretches having taken to the woods; and been obliged, besides their
intolerable scarcity of food, to thatch their bodies from the cold with
whatever covering could be got, and their legs especially with birch
bark; sad species of fleecy hosiery; whence their nickname),--his
Birkebeins I guess always to have been a kind of Norse _Jacquerie_:
desperate rising of thralls and indigent people, driven mad by their
unendurable sufferings and famishings,--theirs the _deepest_ stratum
of misery, and the densest and heaviest, in this the general misery of
Norway, which had lasted towards the third generation and looked as if
it would last forever:--whereupon they had risen proclaiming, in this
furious dumb manner, unintelligible except to Heaven, that the same
could not, nor would not, be endured any longer! And, by their Sverrir,
strange to say, they did attain a kind of permanent success; and, from
being a dismal laughing-stock in Norway, came to be important, and for
a time all-important there. Their opposition nicknames, "_Baglers_ (from
Bagall, _baculus_, bishop's staff; Bishop Nicholas being chief Leader),"
"_Gold-legs_," and the like obscure terms (for there was still a
considerable course of counter-fighting ahead, and especially of
counter-nicknaming), I take to have meant in Norse prefigurement seven
centuries ago, "bloated Aristocracy," "tyrannous-_Bourgeoisie_,"--till,
in the next century, these rents were closed again!

King Sverrir, not himself bred to comb-making, had, in his fifth year,
gone to an uncle, Bishop in the Faroe Islands; and got some considerable
education from him, with a view to Priesthood on the part of Sverrir.
But, not liking that career, Sverrir had fled and smuggled himself
over to the Birkebeins; who, noticing the learned tongue, and other
miraculous qualities of the man, proposed to make him Captain of them;
and even threatened to kill him if he would not accept,--which thus at
the sword's point, as Sverrir says, he was obliged to do. It was after
this that he thought of becoming son of Wry-Mouth and other higher
things.

His Birkebeins and he had certainly a talent of campaigning which has
hardly ever been equalled. They fought like devils against any odds
of number; and before battle they have been known to march six days
together without food, except, perhaps, the inner barks of trees, and in
such clothing and shoeing as mere birch bark:--at one time, somewhere in
the Dovrefjeld, there was serious counsel held among them whether
they should not all, as one man, leap down into the frozen gulfs and
precipices, or at once massacre one another wholly, and so finish. Of
their conduct in battle, fiercer than that of _Baresarks_, where was
there ever seen the parallel? In truth they are a dim strange object to
one, in that black time; wondrously bringing light into it withal; and
proved to be, under such unexpected circumstances, the beginning of
better days!

Of Sverrir's public speeches there still exist authentic specimens;
wonderful indeed, and much characteristic of such a Sverrir. A
comb-maker King, evidently meaning several good and solid things;
and effecting them too, athwart such an element of Norwegian
chaos-come-again. His descendants and successors were a comparatively
respectable kin. The last and greatest of them I shall mention is Hakon
VII., or Hakon the Old; whose fame is still lively among us, from the
Battle of Largs at least.



CHAPTER XV. HAKON THE OLD AT LARGS.

In the Norse annals our famous Battle of Largs makes small figure, or
almost none at all among Hakon's battles and feats. They do say indeed,
these Norse annalists, that the King of Scotland, Alexander III. (who
had such a fate among the crags about Kinghorn in time coming), was
very anxious to purchase from King Hakon his sovereignty of the Western
Isles, but that Hakon pointedly refused; and at length, being again
importuned and bothered on the business, decided on giving a refusal
that could not be mistaken. Decided, namely, to go with a big
expedition, and look thoroughly into that wing of his Dominions; where
no doubt much has fallen awry since Magnus Barefoot's grand visit
thither, and seems to be inviting the cupidity of bad neighbors! "All
this we will put right again," thinks Hakon, "and gird it up into a safe
and defensive posture." Hakon sailed accordingly, with a strong fleet;
adjusting and rectifying among his Hebrides as he went long, and landing
withal on the Scotch coast to plunder and punish as he thought fit.
The Scots say he had claimed of them Arran, Bute, and the Two Cumbraes
("given my ancestors by Donald Bain," said Hakon, to the amazement
of the Scots) "as part of the Sudoer" (Southern Isles):--so far from
selling that fine kingdom!--and that it was after taking both Arran and
Bute that he made his descent at Largs.

Of Largs there is no mention whatever in Norse books. But beyond any
doubt, such is the other evidence, Hakon did land there; land and fight,
not conquering, probably rather beaten; and very certainly "retiring to
his ships," as in either case he behooved to do! It is further certain
he was dreadfully maltreated by the weather on those wild coasts; and
altogether credible, as the Scotch records bear, that he was so at Largs
very specially. The Norse Records or Sagas say merely, he lost many
of his ships by the tempests, and many of his men by land fighting in
various parts,--tacitly including Largs, no doubt, which was the last
of these misfortunes to him. "In the battle here he lost 15,000 men, say
the Scots, we 5,000"! Divide these numbers by ten, and the excellently
brief and lucid Scottish summary by Buchanan may be taken as the
approximately true and exact. [19] Date of the battle is A.D. 1263.

To this day, on a little plain to the south of the village, now town,
of Largs, in Ayrshire, there are seen stone cairns and monumental heaps,
and, until within a century ago, one huge, solitary, upright stone;
still mutely testifying to a battle there,--altogether clearly, to this
battle of King Hakon's; who by the Norse records, too, was in these
neighborhoods at that same date, and evidently in an aggressive, high
kind of humor. For "while his ships and army were doubling the Mull
of Cantire, he had his own boat set on wheels, and therein, splendidly
enough, had himself drawn across the Promontory at a flatter part," no
doubt with horns sounding, banners waving. "All to the left of me is
mine and Norway's," exclaimed Hakon in his triumphant boat progress,
which such disasters soon followed.

Hakon gathered his wrecks together, and sorrowfully made for Orkney.
It is possible enough, as our Guide Books now say, he may have gone
by Iona, Mull, and the narrow seas inside of Skye; and that the
_Kyle-Akin_, favorably known to sea-bathers in that region, may actually
mean the Kyle (narrow strait) of Hakon, where Hakon may have dropped
anchor, and rested for a little while in smooth water and beautiful
environment, safe from equinoctial storms. But poor Hakon's heart was
now broken. He went to Orkney; died there in the winter; never beholding
Norway more.

He it was who got Iceland, which had been a Republic for four centuries,
united to his kingdom of Norway: a long and intricate operation,--much
presided over by our Snorro Sturleson, so often quoted here, who indeed
lost his life (by assassination from his sons-in-law) and out of great
wealth sank at once into poverty of zero,--one midnight in his own
cellar, in the course of that bad business. Hakon was a great Politician
in his time; and succeeded in many things before he lost Largs. Snorro's
death by murder had happened about twenty years before Hakon's by broken
heart. He is called Hakon the Old, though one finds his age was
but fifty-nine, probably a longish life for a Norway King. Snorro's
narrative ceases when Snorro himself was born; that is to say, at the
threshold of King Sverrir; of whose exploits and doubtful birth it is
guessed by some that Snorro willingly forbore to speak in the hearing of
such a Hakon.



CHAPTER XVI. EPILOGUE.

Haarfagr's kindred lasted some three centuries in Norway; Sverrir's
lasted into its third century there; how long after this, among the
neighboring kinships, I did not inquire. For, by regal affinities,
consanguinities, and unexpected chances and changes, the three
Scandinavian kingdoms fell all peaceably together under Queen Margaret,
of the Calmar Union (A.D. 1397); and Norway, incorporated now with
Denmark, needed no more kings.

The History of these Haarfagrs has awakened in me many thoughts: Of
Despotism and Democracy, arbitrary government by one and self-government
(which means no government, or anarchy) by all; of Dictatorship with
many faults, and Universal Suffrage with little possibility of
any virtue. For the contrast between Olaf Tryggveson, and a
Universal-Suffrage Parliament or an "Imperial" Copper Captain has, in
these nine centuries, grown to be very great. And the eternal Providence
that guides all this, and produces alike these entities with their
epochs, is not its course still through the great deep? Does not it
still speak to us, if we have ears? Here, clothed in stormy enough
passions and instincts, unconscious of any aim but their own
satisfaction, is the blessed beginning of Human Order, Regulation,
and real Government; there, clothed in a highly different, but again
suitable garniture of passions, instincts, and equally unconscious as
to real aim, is the accursed-looking ending (temporary ending) of Order,
Regulation, and Government;--very dismal to the sane onlooker for the
time being; not dismal to him otherwise, his hope, too, being steadfast!
But here, at any rate, in this poor Norse theatre, one looks with
interest on the first transformation, so mysterious and abstruse, of
human Chaos into something of articulate Cosmos; witnesses the wild
and strange birth-pangs of Human Society, and reflects that without
something similar (little as men expect such now), no Cosmos of human
society ever was got into existence, nor can ever again be.

The violences, fightings, crimes--ah yes, these seldom fail, and they
are very lamentable. But always, too, among those old populations, there
was one saving element; the now want of which, especially the unlamented
want, transcends all lamentation. Here is one of those strange,
piercing, winged-words of Ruskin, which has in it a terrible truth for
us in these epochs now come:--

"My friends, the follies of modern Liberalism, many and great though
they be, are practically summed in this denial or neglect of the quality
and intrinsic value of things. Its rectangular beatitudes, and spherical
benevolences,--theology of universal indulgence, and jurisprudence which
will hang no rogues, mean, one and all of them, in the root, incapacity
of discerning, or refusal to discern, worth and unworth in anything,
and least of all in man; whereas Nature and Heaven command you, at your
peril, to discern worth from unworth in everything, and most of all in
man. Your main problem is that ancient and trite one, 'Who is best man?'
and the Fates forgive much,--forgive the wildest, fiercest, cruelest
experiments,--if fairly made for the determination of that.

"Theft and blood-guiltiness are not pleasing in their sight; yet the
favoring powers of the spiritual and material world will confirm to you
your stolen goods, and their noblest voices applaud the lifting of Your
spear, and rehearse the sculpture of your shield, if only your robbing
and slaying have been in fair arbitrament of that question, 'Who is best
man?' But if you refuse such inquiry, and maintain every man for his
neighbor's match,--if you give vote to the simple and liberty to the
vile, the powers of those spiritual and material worlds in due time
present you inevitably with the same problem, soluble now only wrong
side upwards; and your robbing and slaying must be done then to find
out, 'Who is worst man?' Which, in so wide an order of merit, is,
indeed, not easy; but a complete Tammany Ring, and lowest circle in the
Inferno of Worst, you are sure to find, and to be governed by." [20]

All readers will admit that there was something naturally royal in these
Haarfagr Kings. A wildly great kind of kindred; counts in it two Heroes
of a high, or almost highest, type: the first two Olafs, Tryggveson and
the Saint. And the view of them, withal, as we chance to have it, I have
often thought, how essentially Homeric it was:--indeed what is "Homer"
himself but the _Rhapsody_ of five centuries of Greek Skalds and
wandering Ballad-singers, done (i.e. "stitched together") by somebody
more musical than Snorro was? Olaf Tryggveson and Olaf Saint please me
quite as well in their prosaic form; offering me the truth of them as
if seen in their real lineaments by some marvellous opening (through
the art of Snorro) across the black strata of the ages. Two high, almost
among the highest sons of Nature, seen as they veritably were; fairly
comparable or superior to god-like Achilleus, goddess-wounding Diomedes,
much more to the two Atreidai, Regulators of the Peoples.

I have also thought often what a Book might be made of Snorro, did there
but arise a man furnished with due literary insight, and indefatigable
diligence; who, faithfully acquainting himself with the topography,
the monumental relies and illustrative actualities of Norway, carefully
scanning the best testimonies as to place and time which that
country can still give him, carefully the best collateral records and
chronologies of other countries, and who, himself possessing the highest
faculty of a Poet, could, abridging, arranging, elucidating, reduce
Snorro to a polished Cosmic state, unweariedly purging away his much
chaotic matter! A modern "highest kind of Poet," capable of unlimited
slavish labor withal;--who, I fear, is not soon to be expected in this
world, or likely to find his task in the _Heimskringla_ if he did appear
here.




FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1: J. G. Dahlmann, _Geschichte von Dannemark_, 3 vols. 8vo.
Hamburg, 1840-1843.]

[Footnote 2: "Settlement," dated 912, by Munch, Henault, &c. The Saxon
Chronicle says (anno 876): "In this year Rolf overran Normandy with his
army, and he reigned fifty winters."]

[Footnote 3: Dahlmann, ii. 87.]

[Footnote 4: Dahlmann, ii. 93.]

[Footnote 5: _Laing's Snorro_, i. 344.]

[Footnote 6: G. Buchanani _Opera Omnia_, i. 103, 104 (Curante Ruddimano,
Edinburgi, 1715).]

[Footnote 7: His Long Serpent, judged by some to be of the size of a
frigate of forty-five guns (Laing).]

[Footnote 8: This sermon was printed by Hearne; and is given also by
Langebek in his excellent Collection, _Rerum Danicarum Scriptores Medii
AEri._ Hafniae. 1772-1834.]

[Footnote 9: Kennet, i. 67; Rapin, i. 119, 121 (from the _Saxon
Chronicle_ both).]

[Footnote 10: Knut born A.D. 988 according to Munch's calculation (ii.
126).]

[Footnote 11: Snorro, Laing's Translation, ii. p. 31 et seq., will
minutely specify.]

[Footnote 12: Snorro, ii. pp. 24, 25.]

[Footnote 13: Snorro, ii. pp. 156-161.]

[Footnote 14: Snorro, ii. pp. 252, 253.]

[Footnote 15: _Saxon Chronicle_ says expressly, under A.D. 1030: "In
this year King Olaf was slain in Norway by his own people, and was
afterwards sainted."]

[Footnote 16: _Saxon Chronicle_ says: "1035. In this year died King
Cnut.... He departed at Shaftesbury, November 12, and they conveyed him
thence to Winchester, and there buried him."]

[Footnote 17: Munch gives the date 1038 (ii. 840), Adam of Bremen 1040.]

[Footnote 18: Camden, Rapin, &c. quote.]

[Footnote 19: _Buchanani Hist._ i. 130.]

[Footnote 20: _Fors Clavigera_, Letter XIV. Pp. 8-10.]

========================================
========================================

HISTORY OF FRIEDRICH II. OF PRUSSIA

FREDERICK THE GREAT

By Thomas Carlyle




BOOK XIX.--FRIEDRICH LIKE TO BE OVERWHELMED IN THE SEVEN-YEARS
WAR.--1759-1760.




Chapter I.--PRELIMINARIES TO A FOURTH CAMPAIGN.

The posting of the Five Armies this Winter--Five of them in Germany, not
counting the Russians, who have vanished to Cimmeria over the horizon,
for their months of rest--is something wonderful, and strikes the
picturesque imagination. Such a Chain of Posts, for length, if for
nothing else! From the centre of Bohemia eastward, Daun's Austrians are
spread all round the western Silesian Border and the southeastern
Saxon; waited on by Prussians, in more or less proximity. Next are
the Reichsfolk; scattered over Thuringen and the Franconian Countries;
fronting partly into Hessen and Duke Ferdinand's outskirts:--the main
body of Duke Ferdinand is far to westward, in Munster Country, vigilant
upon Contades, with the Rhine between. Contades and Soubise,--adjoining
on the Reichsfolk are these Two French Armies: Soubise's, some 25,000,
in Frankfurt-Ems Country, between the Mayn and the Lahn, with its back
to the Rhine; then Contades, onward to Maes River and the Dutch Borders,
with his face to the Rhine,--and Duke Ferdinand observant of him on the
other side. That is the "CORDON of Posts" or winter-quarters this Year.
"From the Giant Mountains and the Metal Mountains, to the Ocean;--to the
mouth of Rhine," may we not say; "and back again to the Swiss Alps or
springs of Rhine, that Upper-Rhine Country being all either French or
Austrian, and a basis for Soubise?" [Archenholtz, i. 306.] Not to speak
of Ocean itself, and its winged War-Fleets, lonesomely hovering and
patrolling; or of the Americas and Indies beyond!

"This is such a Chain of mutually vigilant Winter-quarters," says
Archenholtz, "as was never drawn in Germany, or in Europe, before."
Chain of about 300,000 fighting men, poured out in that lengthy manner.
Taking their winter siesta there, asleep with one eye open, till
reinforced for new business of death and destruction against Spring.
Pathetic surely, as well as picturesque. "Three Campaigns there have
already been," sighs the peaceable observer: "Three Campaigns, surely
furious enough; Eleven Battles in them," [Stenzel, v. 185. This,
I suppose, would be his enumeration: LOBOSITZ (1756); PRAG, KOLIN,
Hastenbeck, Gross-Jagersdorf, ROSSBACH, Breslau, LEUTHEN, (1757);
Crefeld, ZORNDORF, HOCHKIRCH (1758): "eleven hitherto in all."] a Prag,
a Kolin, Leuthen, Rossbach;--must there still be others, then, to
the misery of poor mankind?" thus sigh many peaceful persons. Not
considering what are, and have been, the rages, the iniquities, the loud
and silent deliriums, the mad blindnesses and sins of mankind; and what
amount, of CALCINING these may reasonably take. Not calcinable in three
Campaigns at all, it would appear! Four more Campaigns are needed: then
there will be innocuous ashes in quantity; and a result unexpected, and
worth marking in World-History.

It is notably one of Friedrich's fond hopes,--of which he keeps up
several, as bright cloud-hangings in the haggard inner world he now
has,--that Peace is just at hand; one right struggle more, and Peace
must come! And on the part of Britannic George and him, repeated
attempts were made,--one in the end of this Year 1759;--but one and all
of them proved futile, and, unless for accidental reasons, need not be
mentioned here. Many men, in all nations, long for Peace; but there are
Three Women at the top of the world who do not; their wrath, various in
quality, is great in quantity, and disasters do the reverse of appeasing
it.

The French people, as is natural, are weary of a War which yields them
mere losses and disgraces; "War carried on for Austrian whims, which
likewise seem to be impracticable!" think they. And their Bernis
himself, Minister of Foreign Affairs, who began this sad French-Austrian
Adventure, has already been remonstrating with Kaunitz, and grumbling
anxiously, "Could not the Swedes, or somebody, be got to mediate? Such
a War is too ruinous!" Hearing which, the Pompadour is shocked at the
favorite creature of her hands; hastens to dismiss him ("Be Cardinal
then, you ingrate of a Bernis; disappear under that Red Hat!")--and
appoints, in his stead, one Choiseul (known hitherto as STAINVILLE,
Comte de Stainville, French Excellency at Vienna, but now made Duke on
this promotion), Duc de Choiseul; [Minister of Foreign Affairs,
"11th November, 1758" (Barbier, iv. 294).] who is a Lorrainer, or
Semi-Austrian, by very birth; and probably much fitter for the place. A
swift, impetuous kind of man, this Choiseul, who is still rather young
than otherwise; plenty of proud spirit in him, of shifts, talent of the
reckless sort; who proved very notable in France for the next twenty
years.

French trade being ruined withal, money is running dreadfully low:
but they appoint a new Controller-General; a M. de Silhouette, who is
thought to have an extraordinary creative genius in Finance. Had he but
a Fortunatus-Purse, how lucky were it! With Fortunatus Silhouette as
purse-holder, with a fiery young Choiseul on this hand, and a fiery
old Belleisle on that, Pompadour meditates great things this
Year,--Invasions of England; stronger German Armies; better German
Plans, and slashings home upon Hanover itself, or the vital point;--and
flatters herself, and her poor Louis, that there is on the anvil, for
1759, such a French Campaign as will perhaps astonish Pitt and another
insolent King. Very fixed, fell and feminine is the Pompadour's humor
in this matter. Nor is the Czarina's less so; but more, if possible;
unappeasable except by death. Imperial Maria Theresa has masculine
reasons withal; great hopes, too, of late. Of the War's ending till flat
impossibility stop it, there is no likelihood.

To Pitt this Campaign 1759, in spite of bad omens at the outset, proved
altogether splendid: but greatly the reverse on Friedrich's side; to
whom it was the most disastrous and unfortunate he had yet made, or did
ever make. Pitt at his zenith in public reputation; Friedrich never so
low before, nothing seemingly but extinction near ahead, when this Year
ended. The truth is, apart from his specific pieces of ill-luck, there
had now begun for Friedrich a new rule of procedure, which much altered
his appearance in the world. Thrice over had he tried by the aggressive
or invasive method; thrice over made a plunge at the enemy's heart,
hoping so to disarm or lame him: but that, with resources spent to such
a degree, is what he cannot do a fourth time: he is too weak henceforth
to think of that.

Prussia has always its King, and his unrivalled talent; but that is
pretty much the only fixed item: Prussia VERSUS France, Austria, Russia,
Sweden and the German Reich, what is it as a field of supplies for war!
Except its King, these are failing, year by year; and at a rate fatally
SWIFT in comparison. Friedrich cannot now do Leuthens, Rossbachs;
far-shining feats of victory, which astonish all the world. His fine
Prussian veterans have mostly perished; and have been replaced by new
levies and recruits; who are inferior both in discipline and native
quality;--though they have still, people say, a noteworthy taste of the
old Prussian sort in them; and do, in fact, fight well to the last. But
"it is observable," says Retzow somewhere, and indeed it follows from
the nature of the case, "that while the Prussian Army presents always
its best kind of soldiers at the beginning of a war, Austria, such are
its resources in population, always improves in that particular, and its
best troops appear in the last campaigns." In a word, Friedrich stands
on the defensive henceforth; disputing his ground inch by inch: and is
reduced, more and more, to battle obscurely with a hydra-coil of enemies
and impediments; and to do heroisms which make no noise in the Gazettes.
And, alas, which cannot figure in History either,--what is more a sorrow
to me here!

Friedrich, say all judges of soldiership and human character who have
studied Friedrich sufficiently, "is greater than ever," in these four
Years now coming. [Berenhorst, in _Kriegskunst;_ Retzow; &c.] And
this, I have found more and more to be a true thing; verifiable and
demonstrable in time and place,--though, unluckily for us, hardly in
this time or this place at all! A thing which cannot, by any method,
be made manifest to the general reader; who delights in shining
summary feats, and is impatient of tedious preliminaries and
investigations,--especially of MAPS, which are the indispensablest
requisite of all. A thing, in short, that belongs peculiarly to
soldier-students; who can undergo the dull preliminaries, most dull but
most inexorably needed; and can follow out, with watchful intelligence,
and with a patience not to be wearied, the multifarious topographies,
details of movements and manoeuvrings, year after year, on such a
Theatre of War. What is to be done with it here! If we could, by
significant strokes, indicate, under features true so far as they went,
the great wide fire-flood that was raging round the world; if we could,
carefully omitting very many things, omit of the things intelligible and
decipherable that concern Friedrich himself, nothing that had meaning:
IF indeed--! But it is idle preluding. Forward again, brave reader,
under such conditions as there are!

Friedrich's Winter in Breslau was of secluded, silent, sombre character,
this time; nothing of stir in it but from work only: in marked contrast
with the last, and its kindly visitors and gayeties. A Friedrich given
up to his manifold businesses, to his silent sorrows. "I have passed my
winter like a Carthusian monk," he writes to D'Argens: "I dine alone; I
spend my life in reading and writing; and I do not sup. When one is sad,
it becomes at last too burdensome to hide one's grief continually; and
it is better to give way to it by oneself, than to carry one's gloom
into society. Nothing solaces me but the vigorous application required
in steady and continuous labor. This distraction does force one to put
away painful ideas, while it lasts: but, alas, no sooner is the work
done, than these fatal companions present themselves again, as if
livelier than ever. Maupertuis was right: the sum of evil does certainly
surpass that of good:--but to me it is all one; I have almost nothing
more to lose; and my few remaining days, what matters it much of what
complexion they be?" ["Breslau, 1st March, 1759," To D'Argens (_OEuvres
de Frederic,_ xix. 56).]

The loss of his Wilhelmina, had there been no other grief, has darkened
all his life to Friedrich. Readers are not prepared for the details of
grief we could give, and the settled gloom of mind they indicate. A loss
irreparable and immeasurable; the light of life, the one loved heart
that loved him, gone. His passionate appeals to Voltaire to celebrate
for him in verse his lost treasure, and at least make her virtues
immortal, are perhaps known to readers: [ODE SUR LA MORT DE S. A. S.
MADAME LA PRINCESSE DE BAREITH (in _OEuvres de Voltaire,_ xviii. 79-86):
see Friedrich's Letter to him (6th November, 1758); with Voltaire's
VERSES in Answer (next month); Friedrich's new Letter (Breslau, 23d
January 1759), demanding something more,--followed by the ODE just
cited (Ib. lxxii. 402; lxxviii. 82, 92; or _OEuvres de Frederic,_
xxiii. 20-24: &c.) alas, this is a very feeble kind of immortality, and
Friedrich too well feels it such. All Winter he dwells internally on the
sad matter, though soon falling silent on it to others.

The War is ever more dark and dismal to him; a wearing, harassing,
nearly disgusting task; on which, however, depends life or death. This
Year, he "expects to have 300,000 enemies upon him;" and "is, with his
utmost effort, getting up 150,000 to set against them." Of business,
in its many kinds, there can be no lack! In the intervals he also wrote
considerably: one of his Pieces is a SERMON ON THE LAST JUDGMENT; handed
to Reader De Catt, one evening:--to De Catt's surprise, and to ours; the
Voiceless in a dark Friedrich trying to give itself some voice in this
way! [_OEuvres de Frederic,_ xv. 1-10 (see Preuss's PREFACE there;
Formey, _SOUVENIRS,_ i. 37; &c. &c.)] Another Piece, altogether
practical, and done with excellent insight, brevity, modesty, is ON
TACTICS; [REFLEXIONS SUR LA TACTIQUE: in _OEuvres de Frederic,_ xxviii.
153-166.]--properly it might be called, "Serious very Private Thoughts,"
thrown on paper, and communicated only to two or three, "On the new kind
of Tactics necessary with those Austrians and their Allies," who are
in such overwhelming strength. "To whose continual sluggishness, and
strange want of concert, to whose incoherency of movements, languor of
execution, and other enormous faults, we have owed, with some excuse for
our own faults, our escaping of destruction hitherto,"--but had better
NOT trust that way any longer! Fouquet is one of the highly select,
to whom he communicates this Piece; adding along with it, in Fouquet's
case, an affectionate little Note, and, in spite of poverty, some
New-year's Gift, as usual,--the "Widow's Mite [300 pounds, we find];
receive it with the same heart with which it was set apart for you: a
small help, which you may well have need of, in these calamitous times."
["Breslau, 23d December, 1758;" with Fouquet's Answer, 2d January, 1759:
in _OEuvres de Frederic,_ xx. 114-117.] Fouquet much admires the new
Tactical Suggestions;--seems to think, however, that the certainly
practicable one is, in particular, the last, That of "improving our
Artillery to some equality with theirs." For which, as may appear, the
King has already been taking thought, in more ways than one.

Finance is naturally a heavy part of Friedrich's Problem; the part which
looks especially impossible, from our point of vision! In Friedrich's
Country, the War Budget does not differ from the Peace one. Neither is
any borrowing possible; that sublime Art, of rolling over on you know
not whom the expenditure, needful or needless, of your heavy-laden self,
had not yet--though England is busy at it--been invented among Nations.
Once, or perhaps twice, from the STANDE of some willing Province,
Friedrich negotiated some small Loan; which was punctually repaid when
Peace came, and was always gratefully remembered. But these are as
nothing, in face of such expenses; and the thought how he did contrive
on the Finance side, is and was not a little wonderful. An ingenious
Predecessor, whom I sometimes quote, has expressed himself in these
words:--

"Such modicum of Subsidy [he is speaking of the English Subsidy in
1758], how useful will it prove in a Country bred everywhere to Spartan
thrift, accustomed to regard waste as sin, and which will lay out no
penny except to purpose! I guess the Prussian Exchequer is, by this
time, much on the ebb; idle precious metals tending everywhere towards
the melting-pot. At what precise date the Friedrich-Wilhelm balustrades,
and enormous silver furnitures, were first gone into, Dryasdust has
not informed me: but we know they all went; as they well might. To me
nothing is so wonderful as Friedrich's Budget during this War. One day
it will be carefully investigated, elucidated and made conceivable and
certain to mankind: but that as yet is far from being the case. We
walk about in it with astonishment; almost, were it possible, with
incredulity. Expenditure on this side, work done on that: human nature,
especially British human nature, refuses to conceive it. Never in this
world, before or since, was the like. The Friedrich miracles in War are
great; but those in Finance are almost greater. Let Dryasdust bethink
him; and gird his flabby loins to this Enterprise; which is very
behooveful in these Californian times!"--

The general Secret of Prussian Thrift, I do fear, is lost from the
world. And how an Army of about 200,000, in field and garrison, could
be kept on foot, and in some ability to front combined Europe, on about
Three Million Sterling annually ("25 million THALERS"=3,150,000
pounds, that is the steady War-Budget of those years), remains to us
inconceivable enough;--mournfully miraculous, as it were; and growing
ever more so in the Nugget-generations that now run. Meanwhile, here are
what hints I could find, on the Origins of that modest Sum, which also
are a wonder: [Preuss, ii. 388-392; Stenzel, v. 137-141.]--

"The hoarded Prussian Moneys, or 'TREASURES' [two of them, KLEINE
SCHATZ, GROSSE SCHATZ, which are rigidly saved in Peace years, for
incidence of War], being nearly run out, there had come the English
Subsidy: this, with Saxony, and the Home revenues and remnants of SCHATZ
had sufficed for 1758; but will no longer suffice. Next to Saxony,
the English Subsidy (670,000 pounds due the second time this year) was
always Friedrich's principal resource: and in the latter years of the
War, I observe, it was nearly twice the amount of what all his Prussian
Countries together, in their ravaged and worn-out state, could yield
him. In and after 1759, besides Home Income, which is gradually
diminishing, and English Subsidy, which is a steady quantity,
Friedrich's sources of revenue are mainly Two:--

"FIRST, there is that of wringing money from your Enemies, from those
that have deserved ill of you,--such of them as you can come at.
Enemies, open or secret, even Ill-wishers, we are not particular,
provided only they lie within arm's-length. Under this head fall
principally three Countries (and their three poor Populations, in lieu
of their Governments): Saxony, Mecklenburg (or the main part of it,
Mecklenburg-SCHWERIN), and Anhalt; from these three there is a continual
forced supply of money and furnishings. Their demerits to Friedrich
differ much in intensity; nor is his wringing of them--which in the
cases of Mecklenburg and Saxony increases year by year to the nearly
intolerable pitch--quite in the simple ratio of their demerits; but in a
compound ratio of that and of his indignation and of his wants.

"Saxony, as Prime Author of this War, was from the first laid hold of,
collared tightly: 'Pay the shot, then, what you can' (in the end it was
almost what you cannot)! As to Mecklenburg-Schwerin, the grudge against
Prussia was of very old standing, some generations now; and the present
Duke, not a very wise Sovereign more than his Ancestors, had always
been ill with Friedrich; willing to spite and hurt him when possible:
in Reichs Diet he, of all German Princes, was the first that voted for
Friedrich's being put to Ban of the Reich,--he; and his poor People know
since whether that was a wise step! The little Anhalt Princes, too,
all the Anhalts, Dessau, Bernburg, Cothen, Zerbst [perhaps the latter
partially excepted, for a certain Russian Lady's sake], had voted, or
at least had ambiguously half-voted, in favor of the Ban, and done other
unfriendly things; and had now to pay dear for their bits of enmities.
Poor souls, they had but One Vote among them all Four;--and they only
half gave it, tremulously pulling it back again. I should guess it was
their terrors mainly, and over-readiness to reckon Friedrich a sinking
ship; and to leap from the deck of him,--with a spurn which he took for
insolent! The Anhalt-Dessauers particularly, who were once of his very
Army, half Prussians for generations back, he reckoned to have used him
scandalously ill.

"This Year the requisition on the Four Anhalts--which they submit to
patiently, as people who have leapt into the wrong ship--is, in precise
tale: of money, 330,000 thalers (about 50,000 pounds); recruits, 2,200;
horses, 1,800. In Saxony, besides the fixed Taxes, strict confiscation
of Meissen Potteries and every Royalty, there were exacted heavy
'Contributions,' more and more heavy, from the few opulent Towns,
chiefly from Leipzig; which were wrung out, latterly, under great
severities,--'chief merchants of Leipzig all clapt in prison, kept
on bread-and-water till they yielded,'--AS great severities as would
suffice, but NOT greater; which also was noted. Unfortunate chief
merchants of Leipzig,--with Bruhl and Polish Majesty little likely to
indemnify them! Unfortunate Country altogether. An intelligent Saxon,
who is vouched for as impartial, bears witness as follows: 'And this
I know, that the oppressions and plunderings of the Austrians and
Reichsfolk, in Saxony, turned all hearts away from them; and it was
publicly said, We had rather bear the steady burden of the Prussians
than such help as these our pretended Deliverers bring.' [Stenzel
(citing from KRIEGSKANZLEI, which I have not), v. 137 n.] Whereby, on
the whole, the poor Country got its back broken, and could never look up
in the world since. Resource FIRST was abundantly severe.

"Resource SECOND is strangest of all;--and has given rise to criticism
enough! It is no other than that of issuing base money; mixing your gold
and silver coin with copper,--this, one grieves to say, is the Second
and extreme resource. A rude method--would we had a better--of
suspending Cash-payments, and paying by bank-notes instead!' thinks
Friedrich, I suppose. From his Prussian Mints, from his Saxon [which are
his for the present], and from the little Anhalt-Bernburg Mint [of which
he expressly purchased the sad privilege,--for we are not a Coiner,
we are a King reduced to suspend Cash-payments, for the time being],
Friedrich poured out over all Germany, in all manner of kinds, huge
quantities of bad Coin. This, so long as it would last, is more and
more a copious fountain of supply. This, for the first time, has had to
appear as an item in War-Budget 1759: and it fails in no following,
but expands more and more. It was done through Ephraim, the not lovely
Berlin Jew, whom we used to hear of in Voltaire's time;--through Ephraim
and two others, Ephraim as President: in return for a net Sum, these
shall have privilege to coin such and such amounts, so and so alloyed;
shall pay to General Tauentzien, Army Treasurer, at fixed terms, the
Sums specified: 'Go, and do it; our Mint-Officers sharply watching you;
Mint-Officers, and General Tauentzien [with a young Herr Lessing, as
his Chief Clerk, of whom the King knows nothing]; Go, ye unlovely!' And
Ephraim and Company are making a great deal of money by the unlovely
job. Ephraim is the pair of tongs, the hand, and the unlovely job, are a
royal man's. Alas, yes. And none of us knows better than King Friedrich,
perhaps few of us as well, how little lovely a job it was; how
shockingly UNkingly it was,--though a practice not unknown to German
Kings and Kinglets before his time, and since down almost to ours. [In
STENZEL (v. 141) enumeration of eight or nine unhappy Potentates, who
were busy with it in those same years.] In fact, these are all unkingly
practices;--and the English Subsidy itself is distasteful to a proud
Friedrich: but what, in those circumstances, can any Friedrich do?

"The first coinages of Ephraim had, it seems, in them about 3-7ths of
copper; something less than the half, and more than the third,"--your
gold sovereign grown to be worth 28s. 6d. "But yearly it grew worse; and
in 1762 [English Subsidy having failed] matters had got inverted;
and there was three times as much copper as silver. Commerce, as was
natural, went rocking and tossing, as on a sea under earthquakes; but
there was always ready money among Friedrich's soldiers, as among no
other: nor did the common people, or retail purchasers, suffer by it.
'Hah, an Ephraimite!' they would say, grinning not ill-humoredly, at
sight of one of these pieces; some of which they had more specifically
named 'BLUE-GOWNS' [owing to a tint of blue perceivable, in spite of
the industrious plating in real silver, or at least "boiling in
some solution" of it]; these they would salute with this rhyme, then
current:--

     "Von aussen schon, van innen schlimm;
      Von aussen Friedrich, von innen Ephraim.
      Outside noble, inside slim:
      Outside Friedrich, inside Ephraim.

"By this time, whatever of money, from any source, can be scraped
together in Friedrich's world, flows wholly into the Army-Chest, as the
real citadel of life. In these latter years of the War, beginning, I
could guess, from 1759, all Civil expenditures, and wages of Officials,
cease to be paid in money; nobody of that kind sees the color even of
bad coin; but is paid only in 'Paper Assignments,' in Promises to Pay
'after the Peace.' These Paper Documents made no pretence to the rank of
Currency: such holders of them as had money, or friends, and could wait,
got punctual payment when the term did arrive; but those that could
not, suffered greatly; having to negotiate their debentures on
ruinous terms,--sometimes at an expense of three-fourths.--I will
add Friedrich's practical Schedule of Amounts from all these various
Sources; and what Friedrich's own view of the Sources was, when he could
survey them from the safe distance.

"SCHEDULE OF AMOUNTS [say for 1761]. To make up the Twenty-five Million
thalers, necessary for the Army, there are:--

     "From our Prussian Countries, ruined, harried as THALERS
      they have been,.......... 4 millions only.
      From Saxony and the other Wringings, ..... 7 millions.
      English Subsidy (4 of good gold; becoppered
      into double),........... 8 "
      From Ephraim and his Farm of the Mint
      (MUNZ-PATENT), .......... 7 "

In sum Twenty-six Millions; leaving you one Million of margin,--and
always a plenty of cash in hand for incidental sundries. [Preuss, ii.
388.]

"Friedrich's own view of these sad matters, as he closes his _History
of the Seven-Years War_ [at "Berlin, 17th December, 1763"], is in these
words: 'May Heaven grant,--if Heaven deign to look down on the paltry
concerns of men,--that the unalterable and flourishing destiny of this
Country preserve the Sovereigns who shall govern it from the scourges
and calamities which Prussia has suffered in these times of trouble and
subversion; that they may never again be forced to recur to the violent
and fatal remedies which we (L'ON) have been obliged to employ in
maintenance of the State against the ambitious hatred of the Sovereigns
of Europe, who wished to annihilate the House of Brandenburg, and
exterminate from the world whatever bore the Prussian name!'" [_OEuvres
de Frederic,_ v. 234.]




OF THE SMALL-WAR IN SPRING, 1759. THERE ARE FIVE DISRUPTIONS OF THAT
GRAND CORDON (February-April); AND FERDINAND OF BRUNSWICK FIGHTS HIS
BATTLE OF BERGEN (April 13th).

Friedrich, being denied an aggressive course this Year, by no means
sits idly expectant and defensive in the interim; but, all the more
vigorously, as is observable, from February onwards, strikes out from
him on every side: endeavoring to spoil the Enemy's Magazines, and
cripple his operations in that way. So that there was, all winter
through, a good deal of Small-War (some of it not Small), of more
importance than usual,--chiefly of Friedrich's originating, with the
above view, or of Ferdinand his Ally's, on a still more pressing score.
And, on the whole, that immense Austrian-French Cordon, which goes from
the Carpathians to the Ocean, had by no means a quiet time; but was
broken into, and violently hurled back, in different parts: some four,
or even five, attacks upon it in all; three of them by Prince Henri,--in
two of which Duke Ferdinand's people co-operated; the business being for
mutual behoof. These latter Three were famous in the world, that Winter;
and indeed are still recognizable as brilliant procedures of their kind;
though, except dates and results, we can afford almost nothing of them
here. These Three, intended chiefly against Reichs people and their
Posts and Magazines, fell out on the western and middle part of
the Cordon. Another attack was in the extreme eastward, and was for
Friedrich's own behoof; under Fouquet's management;--intended against
the Austrian-Moravian Magazines and Preparations, but had little
success. Still another assault, or invasive outroad, northward against
the Russian Magazines, there also was; of which by and by. Besides all
which, and more memorable than all, Duke Ferdinand, for vital reasons of
his own, fought a Battle this Spring, considerable Battle, and did NOT
gain it; which made great noise in the world.

It is not necessary the reader should load his memory with details of
all these preliminary things; on the contrary, it is necessary that he
keep his memory clear for the far more important things that lie ahead
of these, and entertain these in a summary way, as a kind of foreground
to what is coming. Perhaps the following Fractions of Note, which put
matters in something of Chronological or Synoptical form, will suffice
him, or more than suffice. He is to understand that the grand tug of
War, this Year, gradually turns out not to be hereabouts, nor with Daun
and his adjacencies at all, but with the Russians, who arrive from the
opposite Northern quarter; and that all else will prove to be merely
prefatory and nugatory in comparison.

JANUARY 2d, 1759: FRANKFURT-ON-MAYN, THOUGH IT IS A REICHSTADT, FINDS
ITSELF SUDDENLY BECOME FRENCH. "Prince de Soubise lies between Mayn and
Lahn, with his 25,000; beautifully safe and convenient,--though ill off
for a place-of-arms in those parts. Opulent Frankfurt, on his right; how
handy would that be, were not Reichs Law so express! Marburg, Giessen
are outposts of his; on which side one of Ferdinand's people, Prince von
Ysenburg, watches him with an 8 or 10,000, capable of mischief in that
quarter.

"On the Eve of New-year's day, or on the auspicious Day itself, Soubise
requests, of the Frankfurt Authorities, permission for a regiment of his
to march through that Imperial City. To which, by law and theory, the
Imperial City can say Yes or No; but practically cannot, without grave
inconvenience, say other than Yes, though most Frankfurters wish it
could. 'Yes,' answer the Frankfurt Magnates; Yes surely, under the known
conditions. Tuesday, January 2d, about 5 in the morning, while all is
still dark in Frankfurt, regiment Nassau appears, accordingly, at the
Sachsenhausen Gate, Town-guard people all ready to receive it and escort
it through; and is admitted as usual. Quite as usual: but instead
of being escorted through, it orders, in calm peremptory voice, the
Town-guard, To ground arms; with calm rapidity proceeds to admit ten
other regiments or battalions, six of them German; seizes the artillery
on the Walls, seizes all the other Gates:--and poor Frankfurt finds
itself tied hand and foot, almost before it is out of bed! Done with
great exactitude, with the minimum of confusion, and without a hurt skin
to anybody. The Inhabitants stood silent, gazing; the Town-guard laid
down their arms, and went home. Totally against Law; but cleverly done;
perhaps Soubise's chief exploit in the world; certainly the one real
success the French have yet had.

"Soubise made haste to summon the Magistrates: 'Law of Necessity alone,
most honored Sirs! Reichs Law is clear against me. But all the more
shall private liberties, religions, properties, in this Imperial
Free-Town, be sacred to us. Defence against any aggression: and the
strictest discipline observed. Depend on me, I bid you!'--And kept his
word to an honorable degree, they say; or in absence, made it be kept,
during the Four Years that follow. Most Frankfurters are, at heart,
Anti-French: but Soubise's affability was perfect; and he gave evening
parties of a sublime character; the Magistrates all appearing there, in
their square perukes and long gowns, with a mournful joy." [Tempelhof,
iii. 7-8; Stenzel, v. 198-200.]

Soubise soon went home, to assist in important businesses,--Invasion of
England, no less; let England look to itself this Summer!--and Broglio
succeeded him, as Army-Captain in the Frankfurt parts; with laurels
accruing, more or less. Soubise, like Broglio, began with Rossbach;
Soubise ends with Frankfurt, for the present; where Broglio also gains
his chief laurels, as will shortly be seen. Frankfurt is a great gain to
France, though an illicit one. It puts a bar on Duke Ferdinand in that
quarter; secures a starting-point for attacks on Hessen, Hanover; for
co-operation with Contades and the Lower Rhine. It is the one success
France has yet had in this War, or pretty much that it ever had in it.
Due to Prince de Soubise, in that illegal fashion.--A highly remarkable
little Boy, now in his tenth year, Johann Wolfgang Goethe, has his
wondering eyes on these things: and, short while hence, meets daily, on
the stairs and lobbies at home, a pleasant French Official Gentlemen who
is quartered there; between whom and Papa occur rubs,--as readers may
remember, and shall hear in April coming.

GRAND CORDON DISRUPTED: ERFURT COUNTRY, 16th FEBRUARY-2d MARCH. "About
six weeks after this Frankfurt achievement, certain Reichsfolk and
Austrian Auxiliaries are observed to be cutting down endless timber,
'18,800 palisades, 6,000 trees of 60 feet,' and other huge furnishings,
from the poor Duke of Gotha's woods; evidently meaning to fortify
themselves in Erfurt. Upon which Prince Henri detaches a General
Knobloch thitherward, Duke Ferdinand contributing 4,000 to meet him
there; which combined expedition, after some sharp knocking and shoving,
entirely disrooted the Austrians and Reichsfolk, and sent them packing.
Had them quite torn out by the end of the month; and had planned to
'attack them on two sides at once' (March 2d), with a view of swallowing
them whole,--when they (these Reichs Volscians, in such a state of
flutter) privately hastened off, one and all of them, the day before."
[Narrative, in _Helden-Geschichte,_ v. 1022 et seq.]

This was BREAKAGE FIRST of the Grand Cordon; an explosive hurling of
it back out of those Erfurt parts. Done by Prince Henri's people, in
concert with Duke Ferdinand's,--who were mutually interested in the
thing.

BREAKAGE SECOND: ERFURT-FULDA COUNTRY, 31st MARCH-8th APRIL. "About the
end of March, these intrusive Austrian Reichsfolk made some attempt to
come back into those Countries; but again got nothing but hard knocks;
and gave up the Erfurt project. For, close following on this FIRST,
there was a SECOND still deeper and rougher Breakage, in those same
regions; the Hereditary Prince of Brunswick dashing through, on a
special Errand of Ferdinand's own [of which presently], with an 8 or
10,000, in his usual fiery manner; home into the very bowels of the
Reich (April 3d, and for a week onward); and returning with 'above
2,000 prisoners' in hand; especially with a Reich well frightened behind
him;--still in time for Duke Ferdinand's Adventure [in fact, for his
Battle of Bergen, of which we are to hear]. Had been well assisted by
Prince Henri, who 'made dangerous demonstrations in the distance,' and
was extremely diligent--though the interest was chiefly Ferdinand's this
time." [Tempelhof, iii. 19-22.]--Contemporary with that FIRST Erfurt
Business, there went on, 300 miles away from it, in the quite opposite
direction, another of the same;--too curious to be omitted.

ACROSS THE POLISH FRONTIER: FEBRUARY, 24th-MARCH 4th. "In the end of
February, General Wobersnow, an active man, was detached from Glogau,
over into Poland, Posen way, To overturn the Russian provision
operations thereabouts; in particular, to look into a certain
high-flying Polack, a Prince Sulkowski of those parts; who with all
diligence is gathering food, in expectation of the Russian advent; and
indeed has formally 'declared War against the King of Prussia;' having
the right, he says, as a Polish Magnate, subject only to his own
high thought in such affairs. The Russians and their wars are dear to
Sulkowski. He fell prisoner in their cause, at Zorndorf, last Autumn;
was stuck, like all the others, Soltikoff himself among them, into the
vaulted parts of Custrin Garrison: 'I am sorry I have no Siberia for
you,' said Friedrich, looking, not in a benign way, on the captive
Dignitaries, that hot afternoon; 'go to Custrin, and see what you have
provided for yourselves!' Which they had to do; nothing, for certain
days, but cellarage to lodge in; King inexorable, deaf to remonstrance.
Which possibly may have contributed to kindle Sulkowski into these
extremely high proceedings.

"At any rate, Wobersnow punctually looks in upon him: seizes his
considerable stock of Russian proviants; his belligerent force, his high
person itself; and in one luckless hour snuffs him out from the list
of potentates. His belligerent force, about 1,000 Polacks, were all
compelled, 'by the cudgel, say my authorities, to take Prussian service
[in garrison regiments, and well scattered about, I suppose]; his
own high person found itself sitting locked in Glogau, left to its
reflections. Sat thus 'till the War ended,' say some; certainly till
the Sulkowski War had been sufficiently exploded by the laughter of
mankind." Here are, succinctly, the dates of this small memorability:--

"End of February, Wobersnow gathers, at Glogau, a force of about 8,000
horse and foot. Marches, 24th FEBRUARY, over Oder Bridge, straight
into Poland; that same night, to the neighborhood of Lissa and Reisen
(Sulkowski's dominion), about thirty miles northeast of Glogau.
Sulkowski done next day;--part of the capture is 'fifteen small guns.'
Wobersnow goes, next, for Posen; arrives, 28th FEBRUARY; destroys
Russian Magazine, ransoms Jews. Shoots out other detachments on the
Magazine Enterprise;--detaches Platen along the Warta, where are picked
up various items, among others 'eighty tuns of brandy,'--but himself
proceeds no farther than Posen. MARCH 4th, sets out again from Posen,
homewards." [NACHRICHT VON DER UNTERNEHMUNG DES GENERAL-MAJORS VON
WOBERSNOW IN POLEN, IM FEB. UND MARZ. 1759: in Seyfarth, _Beylagen,_ ii.
526-529. _Helden-Geschichte,_ v. 829.] We shall hear again of Wobersnow,
in a much more important way, before long.

To the Polish Republic so called, Friedrich explained politely, not
apologetically: "Since you allow the Russians to march through you in
attack of me, it is evident to your just minds that the attacked party
must have similar privilege." "Truly!" answered they, in their just
minds, generally; and I made no complaint about Sulkowski (though Polish
Majesty and Primate endeavored to be loud about "Invasion" and the
like):--and indeed Polish Republic was lying, for a long while past, as
if broken-backed, on the public highway, a Nation anarchic every fibre
of it, and under the feet and hoofs of travelling Neighbors, especially
of Russian Neighbors; and is not now capable of saying much for itself
in such cases, or of doing anything at all.

FRANKFURT COUNTRY, APRIL 13th: DUKE FERDINAND'S BATTLE OF BERGEN. "Duke
Ferdinand, fully aware what a stroke that seizure of Frankfurt was to
him, resolved to risk a long march at this bad season, and attempt
to drive the French out. Contades was absent in Paris,--no fear of an
attack from Contades's Army; Broglio's in Frankfurt, grown now to about
35,000, can perhaps be beaten if vigorously attacked. Ferdinand appoints
a rendezvous at Fulda, of various Corps, Prince Ysenburg's and others,
that lie nearest, Hessians many of them, Hanoverians others; proceeds,
himself, to Fulda, with a few attendants [a drive of about 200
miles];--having left Lord George Sackville [mark the sad name
of him!]--Sackville, head of the English, and General Sporken, a
Hanoverian,--to take charge in Munster Country, during his absence. It
was from Fulda that he shot out the Hereditary Prince on that important
Errand we lately spoke of, under the head of 'BREAKAGE SECOND,'--namely,
to clear his right flank, and scare the Reich well off him, while he
should be marching on Frankfurt. All which, Henri assisting from the
distance, the Hereditary Prince performed to perfection,--and was back
(APRIL 8th) in excellent time for the Battle.

"Ferdinand stayed hardly a day in Fulda, ranking himself and getting on
the road. Did his long march of above 100 miles without accident or loss
of time;--of course, scaring home the Broglio Outposts in haste enough,
and awakening Broglio's attention in a high degree;--and arrives,
Thursday, April 12th, at Windecken, a Village about fifteen miles
northeast of Frankfurt; where he passes the night under arms; intending
Battle on the morrow. Broglio is all assembled, 35,000 strong; his
Assailant, with the Hereditary Prince come in, counts rather under
30,000. Broglio is posted in, and on both sides of, Bergen, a high-lying
Village, directly on Ferdinand's road to Frankfurt. Windecken is about
fifteen miles from Frankfurt; Bergen about six:--idle Tourists of our
time, on their return from Homburg to that City, leave Bergen a little
on their left. The ground is mere hills, woody dales, marshy brooks;
Broglio's position, with its Village, and Hill, and ravines and
advantages, is the choicest of the region; and Broglio's methods,
procedures and arrangements in it are applauded by all judges.

"FRIDAY, 13th APRIL, 1759, Ferdinand is astir by daybreak; comes on,
along one of those woody balleys, pickeering, reconnoitring;--in the
end, directly up the Hill of Bergen; straight upon the key-point. It is
about 10 A.M., when the batteries and musketries awaken there; very loud
indeed, for perhaps two hours or more. Prince von Ysenburg is leader of
Ferdinand's attacking party. Their attack is hot and fierce, and they
stick to it steadily; though garden-hedges, orchards and impediments are
many, and Broglio, with, much cannon helping, makes vigorous defence.
These Ysenburgers fought till their cartridges were nearly spent, and
Ysenburg himself lay killed; but could not take Bergen. Nor could the
Hereditary Prince; who, in aid of them, tried it in flank, with his own
usual impetuosity rekindling theirs, and at first with some success; but
was himself taken in flank by Broglio's Reserve, and obliged to desist.
No getting of Bergen by that method.

"Military critics say coolly, 'You should have smashed it well with
cannon, first [which Ferdinand had not in stock here]; and especially
have flung grenadoes into it, till it was well in flame: impossible
otherwise!' [Mauvillon, ii. 19.] The Ysenburgers and Hereditary Prince
withdraw. No pursuit of them; or almost less than none; for the one or
two French regiments that tried it (against order), nearly got cut up.
Broglio, like a very Daun at Kolin, had strictly forbidden all such
attempts: 'On no temptation quit your ground!'

"The Battle, after this, lay quiet all afternoon; Ferdinand still in
sight; motioning much, to tempt French valor into chasing of him. But
all in vain: Broglio, though his subalterns kept urging, remonstrating,
was peremptory not to stir. Whereupon, towards evening, across certain
woody Heights, perhaps still with some hope of drawing him out,
Ferdinand made some languid attempt on Broglio's wing, or wings;--and
this also failing, had to give up the affair. He continued cannonading
till deep in the night; withdrew to Windecken: and about two next
morning, marched for home,--still with little or no pursuit: but without
hope of Frankfurt henceforth. And, in fact, has a painful Summer ahead.

"Ferdinand had lost 5 cannon, and of killed and wounded 2,500; the
French counted their loss at about 1,900. [Mauvillon, ii. 10-19;
Tempelhof, iii. 26-31.] The joy of France over this immense victory was
extraordinary. Broglio was made Prince of the Reich, Marechal de France;
would have been raised to the stars, had one been able,--for the time
being. 'And your immense victory,' so sneered the by-standers, 'consists
in not being beaten, under those excellent conditions;--perhaps victory
is a rarity just now!'"

This is the Battle which our Boy-Friend Johann Wolfgang watched with
such interest, from his garret-window, hour after hour; all Frankfurt
simmering round him, in such a whirlpool of self-contradictory emotions;
till towards evening, when, in long rows of carts, poor wounded Hessians
and Hanoverians came jolting in, and melted every heart into pity, into
wailing sorrow, and eagerness to help. A little later, Papa Goethe,
stepping downstairs, came across the Official French Gentleman; who said
radiantly: "Doubtless you congratulate yourself and us on this victory
to his Majesty's arms." "Not a whit (KEINESWEGS)," answers Papa Goethe,
a stiff kind of man, nowise in the mood of congratulating: "on the
contrary, I wish they had chased you to the Devil, though I had had to
go too!" Which was a great relief to his feelings, though a dangerous
one in the circumstances. [Goethe's WERKE (Stuttgart und Tubingen,
1829), xxiv. (DICHTUNG UND WAHRHEIT, i.), 153-157.]

BREAKAGE THIRD: OVER THE METAL MOUNTAINS INTO BOHMEN (APRIL 14th-20th).
"Ferdinand's Battle was hardly ending, when Prince Henri poured across
the Mountains,--in two columns, Hulsen leading the inferior or rightmost
one,--into Leitmeritz-Eger Country; and made a most successful business
of the Austrian Magazines he found there. Magazines all filled; Enemy
all galloping for Prag:--Daun himself, who is sitting vigilant, far in
the interior, at Jaromirtz this month past, was thrown into huge flurry,
for some days! Speedy Henri (almost on the one condition of BEING
speedy) had his own will of the Magazines: burnt, Hulsen and he, 'about
600,000 pounds worth' of Austrian provender in those parts, 'what would
have kept 50,000 men five months in bread' (not to mention hay at all);
gave the Enemy sore slaps (caught about 3,000 of him, NOT yet got on
gallop for Prag); burnt his 200 boats on the Elbe:--forced him to begin
anew at the beginning; and did, in effect, considerably lame and retard
certain of his operations through the Summer. Speedy Henri marched
for home April 20th; and was all across the Mountains April 23d: a
profitable swift nine days." [Tempelhof iii. 47-53; _Helden-Geschichte,_
v. 963-966.]--And on the sixth day hence he will have something similar,
and still more important, on foot. A swift man, when he must!

BREAKAGE FOURTH: INTO MAHREN (APRIL 16th-21st). "This is Fouquet's
attempt, alluded to above; of which--as every reader must be satisfied
with Small-War--we will give only the dates. Fouquet, ranking at
Leobschutz, in Neisse Country, did break through into Mahren, pushing
the Austrians before him; but found the Magazines either emptied, or too
inaccessible for any worth they had;--could do nothing on the Magazines;
and returned without result; home at Leobschutz again on the fifth
day." [_ Helden-Geschichte,_ v. 958-963; Tempelhof, iii. 44-47.] This,
however, had a sequel for Fouquet; which, as it brought the King himself
into those neighborhoods, we shall have to mention, farther on.

BREAKAGE FIFTH: INTO FRANKEN (MAY 5th-JUNE 1st). "This was Prince
Henri's Invasion of the Bamberg-Nurnberg Countries; a much sharper thing
than in any former Year. Much the most famous, and," luckily for us,
"the last of the Small-War affairs for the present. Started,--from
Tschopau region, Bamberg way,--April 29th-May 5th. In Three Columns:
Finck leftmost, and foremost (Finck had marched April 29th, pretending
to mean for Bohemia); after whom Knobloch; and (May 5th) the Prince
himself. Who has an eye to the Reichs Magazines and Preparations, as
usual;--nay, an eye to their Camp of Rendezvous, and to a fight with
their miscellaneous Selves and Auxiliaries, if they will stand fight.
'You will have to leave Saxony, and help us with the Russians, soon:
beat those Reichs people first!' urged the King; 'well beaten, they
will not trouble Saxony for a while.' If they will stand fight? But they
would not at all. They struck their tents everywhere; burnt their
own Magazines, in some cases; and only went mazing hither and
thither,--gravitating all upon Nurnberg, and an impregnable Camp which
they have in that neighborhood. Supreme Zweibruck was himself with
them; many Croats, Austrians, led by Maguire and others; all marching,
whirling at a mighty rate; with a countenance sometimes of vigor, but
always with Nurnberg Camp in rear. There was swift marching, really
beautiful manoeuvring here and there; sharp bits of fighting, too,
almost in the battle-form:--Maguire tried, or was for trying, a stroke
with Finck; but made off hastily, glad to get away. [Templehof, iii.
64.] May 11th, at Himmelskron in Baireuth, one Riedesel of theirs had
fairly to ground arms, self and 2,500, and become prisoners of war."
Much of this manoeuvring and scuffling was in Baireuth Territory. Twice,
or even thrice, Prince Henri was in Baireuth Town: "marched through
Baireuth," say the careless Old Books. Through Baireuth:--No Wilhelmina
now there, with her tremulous melodies of welcome! Wilhelminn's loves,
and terrors for her loved, are now all still. Perhaps her poor Daughter
of Wurtemberg, wandering unjustly disgraced, is there; Papa, the
Widower Margraf, is for marrying again: [Married 20th September, 1759
(a Brunswick Princess, Sister's-daughter of his late Wife); died within
four years.]--march on, Prince Henri!

"In Bamberg," says a Note from Archenholtz, "the Reichs troops burnt
their Magazine; and made for Nurnberg, as usual; but left some thousand
or two of Croats, who would not yet. Knobloch and his Prussians appeared
shortly after; summoned Bamberg, which agreed to receive them; and were
for taking possession; but found the Croats determined otherwise. Fight
ensued; fight in the streets; which, in hideousness of noises, if in
nothing else, was beyond parallel. The inhabitants sat all quaking in
their cellars; not an inhabitant was to be seen: a City dead,--and given
up to the demons, in this manner. Not for some hours were the Croats
got entirely trampled out. Bamberg, as usual, became a Prussian
place-of-arms; was charged to pay ransom of 40,000 pounds;--'cannot
possibly!'--did pay some 14,000 pounds, and gave bills for the
remainder." [Archenholtz. i. 371-373.] Which bills, let us mark withal,
the Kaiser in Reichs Diet decreed to be invalid: "Don't pay them!"
A thing not forgotten by Friedrich;--though it is understood the
Bambergers, lest worse might happen, privately paid their bills. "The
Expedition lasted, in whole, not quite four weeks: June 1st, Prince
Henri was at the Saxon frontier again; the German world all ringing
loud,--in jubilation, counter-jubilation and a great variety of
tones,--with the noise of what he had done. A sharp swift man; and,
sure enough, has fluttered the Reichs Volscians in their Corioli to an
unexpected degree." [Seyfarth, _Beylagen,_ ii. 537-563; BERICHT VON
DER UNTERNEHMUNG DES PRINZEN HEINRICH IN FRANKEN, IM JAHR, 1759;
_Helden-Geschichte,_ v. 1033-1039; Tempelhof,????, et seq.]---[COPY
ILLEGIBLE PAGE 203,]

A Colonel Wunsch (Lieutenant-Colonel of the Free Corps WUNSCH)
distinguished himself in this Expedition; The beginning of notably great
things to him in the few following months. Wunsch is a Wurtemberger by
birth; has been in many services, always in subaltern posts, and, this
year, will testify strangely how worthy he was of the higher. What a
Year, this of 1759, to stout old Wunsch! In the Spring, here has he just
seen his poor son, Lieutenant Wunsch, perish in one of these scuffles;
in Autumn, he will see himself a General, shining suddenly bright, to
his King and to all the world; before Winter, he will be Prisoner to
Austria, and eclipsed for the rest of this war!--Kleist, of the GREEN
HUSSARS, also made a figure here; and onwards rapidly ever higher; to
the top of renown in his business:--fallen heir to Mayer's place, as it
were. A Note says: "Poor Mayer of the Free Corps does not ride with
the Prince on this occasion. Mayer, dangerously worn down with the hard
services of last Year, and himself a man of too sleepless temper, caught
a fever in the New-year time; and died within few days: burnt away
before his time; much regretted by his Brethren of the Army, and some
few others. Gone in this way; with a high career just opening on him at
the long last! Mayer was of Austrian, of half Spanish birth; a musical,
really melodious, affectionate, but indignant, wildly stormful mortal;
and had had adventures without end. Something of pathos, of tragedy,
in the wild Life of him. [Still worth reading: in Pauli (our old watery
BRANDENBURG-HISTORY Friend). _Leben grosser Helden_ (Halle, 1759-1764,
9 vols.), iii. 142-188;--much the best Piece in that still rather
watery (or windy) Collection, which, however, is authentic, and has
some tolerable Portraits.] A man of considerable genius, military
and other:--genius in the sleepless kind, which is not the best kind;
sometimes a very bad kind. The fame of Friedrich invites such people
from all sides of the world; and this was no doubt a sensible help to
him."--But enough of all this.

Here, surely, is abundance of preliminary Small-War, on the part of a
Friedrich reduced to the defensive!--Fouquet's Sequel, hinted at above,
was to this effect. On Fouquet's failing to get hold of the Moravian
Magazines, and returning to his Post at Leobschutz, a certain rash
General Deville, who is Austrian chief in those parts, hastily rushed
through the Jagerndorf Hills, and invaded Fouquet. Only for a few days;
and had very bad success, in that bit of retaliation. The King, who is
in Landshut, in the middle of his main cantonments, hastened over
to Leobschutz with reinforcement to Fouquet; in the thought that a
finishing-stroke might be done on this Deville;--and would have done it,
had not the rash man plunged off again (May 1st, or the night before);
homewards, at full speed. So that Friedrich, likewise at full speed,
could catch nothing of him; but merely cannonade him in the Passes
of Zuckmantel, and cut off his rear-guard of Croats. Poor forlorn of
Croats, whom he had left in some bushy Chasm; to gain him a little time,
and then to perish if THEY must! as Tempelhof remarks. [Tempelhof, iii.
56.] Upon which Friedrich returned to Landshut; and Fouquet had peace
again.

It was from this Landshut region, where his main cantonments are,
that Friedrich had witnessed all these Inroads, or all except the very
earliest of them; the first Erfurt one, and the Wobersnow-Sulkowski. He
had quitted Breslau in the end of March, and gone to his cantonments;
quickened thither, probably, by a stroke that had befallen him at
Griefenberg, on his Silesian side of the Cordon. At Griefenberg
stood the Battalion Duringshofen, with its Colonel of the same
name,--grenadier people of good quality, perhaps near 1,000 in whole.
Which Battalion, General Beck, after long preliminary study of it,
from his Bohemian side,--marching stealthily on it, one night (March
25-26th), by two or more roads, with 8,000 men, and much preliminary
Croat-work,--contrived to envelop wholly, and carry off with him, before
help could come up. This, I suppose, had quickened Friedrich's arrival.
He has been in that region ever since,--in Landshut for the last week or
two; and returns thither after the Deville affair.

And at Landshut,--which is the main Pass into Bohemia or from it, and is
the grand observatory-point at present,--he will have to remain till the
first days of July; almost three months. Watching, and waiting on the
tedious Daun, who has the lifting of the curtain this Year! Daun
had come to Jaromirtz, to his cantonments, "March 24th" (almost
simultaneously with Friedrich to his); expecting Friedrich's Invasion,
as usual. Long days sat Daun, expecting the King in Bohemia:--"There
goes he, at last!" thought Daun, on Prince Henri's late flamy appearance
there (BREAKAGE THIRD we labelled it);--and Daun had hastily pushed a
Division thitherward, double-quick, to secure Prag; but found it was
only the Magazines. "Above four millions worth [600,000 pounds, counting
the THALERS into sterling], above four millions worth of bread
and forage gone to ashes, and the very boats burnt? Well; the
poor Reichsfolk, or our poor Auxiliaries to them, will have empty
haversacks:--but it is not Prag!" thinks Daun.

At what exact point of time Daun came to see that Friedrich was not
intending Invasion, and would, on the contrary, require to be invaded, I
do not know. But it must have been an interesting discovery to Daun, if
he foreshadowed to himself what results it would have on him: "Taking
the defensive, then? And what is to become of one's Cunctatorship in
that case!" Yes, truly. Cunctatorship is not now the trade needed; there
is nothing to be made of playing Fabius-Cunctator:--and Daun's fame
henceforth is a diminishing quantity. The Books say he "wasted above
five weeks in corresponding with the Russian Generals." In fact, he
had now weeks enough on hand; being articulately resolved (and even
commanded by Kriegshofrath) to do nothing till the Russians came
up;--and also (INarticulately and by command of Nature) to do as little
as possible after! This Year, and indeed all years following, the
Russians are to be Daun's best card.

Waiting for three months here till the curtain rose, it was Friedrich
that had to play Cunctator. A wearisome task to him, we need not doubt.
But he did it with anxious vigilance; ever thinking Daun would try
something, either on Prince Henri or on him, and that the Play would
begin. But the Play did not. There was endless scuffling and
bickering of Outposts; much hitching and counter-hitching, along that
Bohemian-Silesian Frontier,--Daun gradually hitching up, leftwards,
northwards, to be nearer his Russians; Friedrich counter-hitching,
and, in the end, detaching against the Russians, as they approached in
actuality. The details of all which would break the toughest patience.
Not till July came, had both parties got into the Lausitz; Daun into
an impregnable Camp near Mark-Lissa (in Gorlitz Country); Friedrich,
opposite and eastward of him, into another at Schmottseifen:--still
after which, as the Russians still were not come, the hitching (if we
could concern ourselves with it), the maze of strategic shuffling and
counter-dancing, as the Russians get nearer, will become more intricate
than ever.

Except that of General Beck on Battalion Duringshofen,--if that was
meant as retaliatory, and was not rather an originality of Beck's, who
is expert at such strokes,--Daun, in return for all these injurious
Assaults and Breakages, tried little or no retaliation; and got
absolutely none. Deville attempted once, as we saw; Loudon once, as
perhaps we shall see: but both proved futile. For the present absolutely
none. Next Year indeed, Loudon, on Fouquet at Landshut--But let us not
anticipate! Just before quitting Landshut for Schmottseifen, Friedrich
himself rode into Bohemia, to look more narrowly; and held Trautenau, at
the bottom of the Pass, for a day or two--But the reader has had enough
of Small-War! Of the present Loudon attempt, Friedrich, writing to
Brother Henri, who is just home from his Franconian Invasion (BREAKAGE
FIFTH), has a casual word, which we will quote. "Reich-Hennersdorf" is
below Landshut, farther down the Pass; "Liebau" still farther down,--and
its "Gallows," doubtless, is on some knoll in the environs!

REICH-HENNERSDORF, 9th JUNE. "My congratulations on the excellent
success you have had [out in Frankenland yonder]! Your prisoners, we
hear, are 3,000; the desertion and confusion in the Reichs Army are
affirmed to be enormous:--I give those Reichs fellows two good months
[scarcely took so long] to be in a condition to show face again. As for
ourselves, I can send you nothing but contemptibilities. We have never
yet had the beatific vision of Him with the Hat and Consecrated
Sword [Papal Daun, that is]; they amuse us with the Sieur Loudon
instead;--who, three days ago [7th July, two days] did us the honor of
a visit, at the Gallows of Liebau. He was conducted out again, with all
the politeness imaginable, on to near Schatzlar," well over the Bohemian
Border; "where we flung a score of cannon volleys into the"--into the
"DERRIERE of him, and everybody returned home." [In SCHONING, ii. 65:
"9th June, 1759."]

Perhaps the only points now noticeable in this tedious Landshut interim,
are Two, hardly noticed then at all by an expectant world. The first is:
That in the King's little inroad down to Trautenau, just mentioned, four
cannon drawn by horses were part of the King's fighting gear,--the first
appearance of Horse Artillery in the world. "A very great invention,"
says the military mind: "guns and carriages are light, and made of the
best material for strength; the gunners all mounted as postilions to
them. Can scour along, over hill and dale, wherever horse can; and burst
out, on the sudden, where nobody was expecting artillery. Devised in
1758; ready this Year, four light six-pounders; tried first in the
King's raid down to Trautenau [June 29th-30th]. Only four pieces as
yet. But these did so well, there were yearly more. Imitated by the
Austrians, and gradually by all the world." [Seyfarth, ii. 543.]

The second fact is: That Herr Guichard (Author of that fine Book on the
War-methods of the Greeks and Romans) is still about Friedrich, as he
has been for above a year past, if readers remember; and, during those
tedious weeks, is admitted to a great deal of conversation with the
King. Readers will consent to this Note on Guichard; and this shall be
our ultimatum on the wearisome Three Months at Landshut.

MAJOR QUINTUS ICILIUS. "Guichard is by birth a Magdeburger, age now
thirty-four; a solid staid man, with a good deal of hard faculty in him,
and of culture unusual for a soldier. A handy, sagacious, learned and
intelligent man; whom Friedrich, in the course of a year's experience,
has grown to see willingly about him. There is something of positive in
Guichard, of stiff and, as it were, GRITTY, which might have offended a
weaker taste; but Friedrich likes the rugged sense of the man; his real
knowledge on certain interesting heads; and the precision with which
the known and the not rightly known are divided from one another, in
Guichard.

"Guichard's business about the King has been miscellaneous, not worth
mention hitherto; but to appearance was well done. Of talk they are
beginning to have more and more; especially at Landshut here, in these
days of waiting; a great deal of talk on the Wars of the Ancients,
Guichard's Book naturally leading to that subject. One night, datable
accidentally about the end of May, the topic happened to be Pharsalia,
and the excellent conduct of a certain Centurion of the Tenth Legion,
who, seeing Pompey's people about to take him in flank, suddenly flung
himself into oblique order [SCHRAGE STELLUNG, as we did at Leutheu],
thereby outflanking Pompey's people, and ruining their manoeuvre and
them. 'A dexterous man, that Quintus Icilius the Centurion!' observed
Friedrich. 'Ah, yes: but excuse me, your Majesty, his name was Quintus
Caecilius,' said Guichard. 'No, it was Icilius,' said the King, positive
to his opinion on that small point; which Guichard had not the art to
let drop; though, except assertion and counter-assertion, what could be
made of it there? Or of what use was it anywhere?

"Next day, Guichard came with the book [what "Book" nobody would ever
yet tell me], and putting his finger on the passage, 'See, your Majesty:
Quintus CAEcilius!' extinguished his royal opponent. 'Hm,' answered
Friedrich: 'so?--Well, you shall be Quintus Icilius, at any rate!'
And straightway had him entered on the Army Books 'as Major Quintus
Icilius;' his Majorship is to be dated '10th April, 1758' (to give him
seniority); and from and after this '26th May, 1759,' he is to
command the late Du Verger's Free-Battalion. All which was done:--the
War-Offices somewhat astonished at such advent of an antique Roman
among them; but writing as bidden, the hand being plain, and the man an
undeniable article. Onward from which time there is always a 'Battalion
Quintus' on their Books, instead of Battalion Du Verger; by degrees
two Batallions Quintus, and at length three, and Quintus become a
Colonel:--at which point the War ended; and the three Free-Battalions
Quintus, like all others of the same type, were discharged." This is
the authentic origin of the new name Quintus, which Guichard got, to
extinction of the old; substantially this, as derived from Quintus
himself,--though in the precise details of it there are obscurities,
never yet solved by the learned. Nicolai, for example, though he had
the story from Quintus in person, who was his familiar acquaintance, and
often came to see him at Berlin, does not, with his usual punctuality,
say, nor even confess that he has forgotten, what Book it was that
Quintus brought with him to confute the King on their Icilius-Caecilius
controversy; Nicolai only says, that he, for his part, in the fields of
Roman Literature and History, knows only three Quintus-Iciliuses,
not one of whom is of the least likelihood; and in fact, in the above
summary, I have had to INVERT my Nicolai on one point, to make the story
stick together. [Nicolai, _Anekdoten,_ vi. 129-145.]

"Quintus had been bred for the clerical profession; carefully, at
various Universities, Leyden last of all; and had even preached, as
candidate for license,--I hope with moderate orthodoxy;--though he soon
renounced that career. Exchanged it for learned and vigorous general
study, with an eye to some College Professorship instead. He was still
hardly twenty-three, when, in 1747, the new Stadtholder," Prince of
Orange, whom we used to know, "who had his eye upon him as a youth of
merit, graciously undertook to get him placed at Utrecht, in a vacancy
which had just occurred there,--whither the Prince was just bound, on
some ceremonial visit of a high nature. The glad Quintus, at that time
Guichard and little thinking of such an alias, hastened to set off in
the Prince's train; but could get no conveyance, such was the press of
people all for Utrecht. And did not arrive till next day,--and found
quarter, with difficulty, in the garret of some overflowing Inn.

"In the lower stories of his Inn, solitary Guichard, when night fell,
heard a specific GAUDEAMUS going on; and inquired what it was.
'A company of Professors, handselling a newly appointed
Professor;'--appointed, as the next question taught, to the very Chair
poor Quintus had come for! Serene Highness could not help himself; the
Utrechters were so bent on the thing. Quintus lay awake, all night, in
his truckle-bed; and gloomily resolved to have done with Professorships,
and become a soldier. 'If your Serene Highness do still favor me,'
said Quintus next day, 'I solicit, as the one help for me, an ensign's
commission!'--And persisted rigorously, in spite of all counsellings,
promises and outlooks on the professorial side of things. So that Serene
Highness had to grant him his commission; and Quintus was a soldier
thenceforth. Fought, more or less, in the sad remainder of that
Cumberland-Saxe War; and after the Peace of 1748 continued in the Dutch
service. Where, loath to be idle, he got his learned Books out again,
and took to studying thoroughly the Ancient Art of War. After years of
this, it had grown so hopeful that he proceeded to a Book upon it; and,
by degrees, determined that he must get to certain Libraries in
England, before finishing. In 1754, on furlough, graciously allowed and
continued, he came to London accordingly; finished his manuscript there
(printed at the Hague 1757 [_Memoires Militaires sur les &c._ (a La
Haye, 1757: 2 vols. 4to);--was in the 5th edition when I last heard of
it.]): and new War having now begun, went over (probably with English
introductions) as volunteer to Duke Ferdinand. By Duke Ferdinand he
was recommended to Friedrich, the goal of all his efforts, as of every
vagrant soldier's in those times:--and here at last, as Quintus
Icilius, he has found permanent billet, a Battalion and gradually three
Battalions, and will not need to roam any farther.

"They say, what is very credible, that Quintus proved an active, stout
and effectual soldier, in his kind; and perhaps we may hear of some of
his small-war adventures by and by: that he was a studious, hard-headed,
well-informed man, and had written an excellent Book on his subject,
is still abundantly clear. Readers may look in the famous Gibbon's
_Autobiography,_ or still better in the Guichard Book itself, if
they want evidence. The famous Gibbon was drilling and wheeling, very
peaceably indeed, in the Hampshire Militia, in those wild years of
European War. Hampshire Militia served as key, or glossary in a sort,
to this new Book of Guichard's, which Gibbon eagerly bought and studied;
and it, was Guichard, ALIAS Quintus Icilius, who taught Gibbon all he
ever knew of Ancient War, at least all the teaching he ever had of it,
for his renowned DECLINE AND FALL." [See Gibbon's _Works_ (4to, London,
1796: _Memoirs of my Life and Writings_], i. 97; and (_Extraits de mes
Lectures_), ii. 52-54, of dates May 14th-26th, 1762,--during which days
Gibbon is engaged in actual reading of the _Memoires Militaires;_ and
already knows the Author by his ALIAS of Quintus Icilius, "a man of
eminent sagacity and insight, who was in the Dutch, and is now, I
believe, in the Prussian service."

It was in the last days of June that Daun, after many litchings, got
into more decisive general movement northward; and slowly but steadily
planted himself at Mark-Lissa in the Lausitz: upon which, after some
survey of the phenomenon, Friedrich got to Schmottseifen, opposite
him, July 10th. Friedrich, on noticing such stir, had ridden down to
Trautenau (June 29th-30th), new Horse-Artillery attending, to look
closer into Daun's affairs; and, seeing what they were, had thereupon
followed. Above a month before this, Friedrich had detached a
considerable force against the Russians,--General Dohna, of whom in next
Chapter:--and both Daun and he again sit waiting, till they see farther.
Rapid Friedrich is obliged to wait; watching Daun and the Dohna-Russian
adventure: slow Daun will continue to wait and watch there, long weeks
and months, after that is settled, that and much else, fully to his
mind! Each is in his impregnable Camp; and each, Daun especially,
has his Divisions and Detachments hovering round him, near or far, on
different strategic errands; each Main-Camp like a planet with various
moons--Mark-Lissa especially, a kind of sun with planets and comets and
planetary moons:--of whose intricate motions and counter-motions, mostly
unimportant to us, we promised to take no notice, in face of such a
crisis just at hand.

By the 6th of July, slow Daun had got hitched into his Camp of
Mark-Lissa; and four days after, Friedrich attending him, was in
Schmottseifen: where again was pause; and there passed nothing
mentionable, even on Friedrich's score; and till July was just ending,
the curtain did not fairly rise. Panse of above two weeks on Friedrich's
part, and of almost three months on Daun's. Mark-Lissa, an impregnable
Camp, is on the Lausitz Border; with Saxony, Silesia, Bohemia all
converging hereabouts, and Brandenburg itself in the vicinity,--there is
not a better place for waiting on events. Here, accordingly, till
well on in September, Daun sat immovable; not even hitching now,--only
shooting out Detachments, planetary, cometary, at a great rate, chiefly
on his various Russian errands.

Daun, as we said, had been uncomfortably surprised to find, by degrees,
that Invasion was not Friedrich's plan this Year; that the dramatic
parts are redistributed, and that the playing of Fabius-Cunctator will
not now serve one's turn. Daun, who may well be loath to believe such
a thing, clings to his old part, and seems very lazy to rise and try
another. In fact, he does not rise, properly speaking, or take up his
new part at all. This Year, and all the following, he waits carefully
till the Russian Lion come; will then endeavor to assist,--or even do
jackal, which will be safer still. The Russians he intends shall act
lion; he himself modestly playing the subaltern but much safer part!
Diligent to flatter the lion; will provide him guidances, and fractional
sustenances, in view of the coming hunt; will eat the lion's leavings,
once the prey is slaughtered. This really was, in some sort, Daun's
yearly game, so long as it would last!--

July ending, and the curtain fairly risen, we shall have to look at
Friedrich with our best eyesight. Preparatory to which, there is, on
Friedrich's part, ever since the middle of June, this Anti-Russian Dohna
adventure going on:--of which, at first, and till about the time of
getting to Schmottseifen, he had great hopes; great, though of late
rapidly sinking again:--into which we must first throw a glance, as
properly the opening scene.

Fouquet has been left at Landshut, should the Daun remnants still in
Bohemia think of invading. Fouquet is about rooting himself rather
firmly into that important Post; fortifying various select Hills round
Landshut, with redoubts, curtains, communications; so as to keep ward
there, inexpugnable to a much stronger force. There for about a year,
with occasional short sallies, on errands that arise, Fouquet sat
successfully vigilant; resisting the Devilles, Becks, Harsches;
protecting Glatz and the Passes of Silesia: in about a year we shall
hear of his fortunes worsening, and of a great catastrophe to him in
that Landshut Post.

Friedrich allowed the Reichsfolk "two good months," after all that
flurrying and havoc done on them, "before they could show face in
Saxony." They did take about that time; and would have taken more,
had not Prince Henri been called away by other pressing occasions in
Friedrich's own neighborhood; and Saxony, for a good while (end of June
to beginning of September), been left almost bare of Prussian troops.
Which encourages the Reichs Army to hurry afield in very unprepared
condition,--still rather within the two months. End of July, Light
people of them push across to Halberstadt or Halle Country; and are
raising Contributions, and plundering diligently, if nothing else. Of
which we can take no notice farther: if the reader can recollect it,
well; if not, also well. The poor Reichs Army nominally makes a figure
this Year, but nominally only; the effective part of it, now and
henceforth, being Austrian Auxiliaries, and the Reichs part as flaccid
and insignificant as ever.

Prince Henri's call to quit Saxony was this. Daun, among the numerous
Detachments he was making, of which we can take no notice, had shot
out Two (rather of COMETARY type, to use our old figure),--which every
reader must try to keep in mind. Two Detachments, very considerable:
Haddick (who grew at last to 20,000), and Loudon (16,000); who are
hovering about mysteriously over the Lausitz;--intending what? Their
intention, Friedrich thinks, especially Haddick's intention, may be
towards Brandenburg, and even Berlin: wherefore he has summoned Henri to
look after it. Henri, resting in cantonments about Tschopau and Dresden,
after the late fatigues, and idle for the moment, hastens to obey;
and is in Bautzen neighborhood, from about the end of June and onward.
Sufficiently attentive to Haddick and Loudon: who make no attempt on
Brandenburg; having indeed, as Friedrich gradually sees, and as all of
us shall soon see, a very different object in view!--





Chapter II.--GENERAL DOHNA; DICTATOR WEDELL: BATTLE OF ZULLICHAU.

The Russian Lion, urged by Vienna and Versailles, made his entry, this
Year, earlier than usual,--coming now within wind of Mark-Lissa, as we
see;--and has stirred Daun into motion, Daun and everybody. From the
beginning of April, the Russians, hibernating in the interior parts
of Poland, were awake, and getting slowly under way. April 24th, the
Vanguard of 10,000 quitted Thorn; June 1st, Vanguard is in Posen;
followed by a First Division and a Second, each of 30,000. They called
it "Soltikof crossing the Weichsel with 100,000 men;" but, exclusive
of the Cossack swarms, there were not above 76,000 regulars: nor was
Soltikof their Captain just at first; our old friend Fermor was, and
continued to be till Soltikof, in a private capacity, reached Posen
(June 29th), and produced his new commission. At Fermor's own request,
as Fermor pretended,--who was skilled in Petersburg politics, and with a
cheerful face served thenceforth as Soltikof's second.

At Posen, as on the road thither, they find Sulkowski's and the other
burnt provenders abundantly replaced: it is evident they intend, in
concert with Daun, to enclose Friedrich between two fires, and do
something considerable. Whether on Brandenburg or Silesia, is not yet
known to Friedrich. Friedrich, since the time they crossed Weichsel,
has given them his best attention; and more than once has had schemes on
their Magazines and them,--once a new and bigger Scheme actually afoot,
under Wobersnow again, our Anti-Sulkowski friend; but was obliged to
turn the force elsewhither, on alarms that rose. He himself cannot quit
the centre of the work; his task being to watch Daun, and especially,
should Daun attempt nothing else, to prevent junction of Soltikof and
him.

Daun still lies torpid, or merely hitching about; but now when
the Russians are approaching Posen, and the case becomes pressing,
Friedrich, as is usual to him, draws upon the Anti-Swedish resource,
upon the Force he has in Pommern. That is to say, orders General Dohna,
who has the Swedes well driven in at present, to quit Stralsund Country,
to leave the ineffectual Swedes with some very small attendance; and to
march--with certain reinforcements that are arriving (Wobersnow already,
Hulsen with 10,000 out of Saxony in few days)--direct against the
Russians; and at once go in upon them. Try to burn their Magazines
again; or, equally good, to fall vigorously on some of their separate
Divisions, and cut them off in the vagrant state;--above all, to be
vigorous, be rapid, sharp, and do something effectual in that quarter.
These were Dohna's Instructions. Dohna has 18,000; Hulsen, with his
10,000, is industriously striding forward, from the farther side of
Saxony; Wobersnow, with at least his own fine head, is already there.
Friedrich, watching in the Anti-Junction position, ready for the least
chance that may turn up.

Dohna marched accordingly; but was nothing like rapid enough: an old
man, often in ill health too; and no doubt plenty of impediments about
him. He consumed some time rallying at Stargard; twelve days more at
Landsberg, on the Warta, settling his provision matters: in fine, did
not get to Posen neighborhood till June 23d, three weeks after the
Russian Vanguard of 10,000 had fixed itself there, and other Russian
parties were daily dropping in. Dohna was 15,000, a Wobersnow with him:
had he gone at once on Posen, as Wobersnow urged, it is thought he might
perhaps have ruined this Vanguard and the Russian Magazine; which would
have been of signal service for the remaining Campaign. But he preferred
waiting for Hulsen and the 10,000, who did not arrive for seven or eight
days more; by which time Soltikof and most of the Russian Divisions had
got in;--and the work was become as good as hopeless, on those languid
terms. Dohna did try upon the Magazine, said to be ill guarded in some
Suburb of Posen; crossed the Warta with that view, found no Magazine;
recrossed the Warta; and went manoeuvring about, unable to do the least
good on Soltikof or his Magazines or operations. Friedrich was still in
Landshut region, just about quitting it,--just starting on that little
Trautenau Expedition, with his Four Pieces of Horse-Artillery (June
29th), when the first ill news of Dohna came in; which greatly
disappointed Friedrich, and were followed by worse, instead of better.

The end was, Soltikof, being now all ready, winded himself out of Posen
one day, veiled by Cossacks; and, to Dohna's horror, had got, or was in
the act of getting, between Dohna and Brandenburg; which necessitated
new difficult manoeuvres from Dohna. Soltikof too can manoeuvre a
little: Soltikof edges steadily forward; making for Crossen-on-Oder,
where he expects to find Austrians (Haddick and Loudon, if Friedrich
could yet guess it), with 30,000 odd, especially with provision,
which is wearing scarce with him. Twice or so there was still a pretty
opportunity for Dohna on him; but Dohna never could resolve about it
in time. Back and ever back goes Dohna; facing Soltikof; but always
hitching back; latterly in Brandenburg ground, the Russians and
he;--having no provision, he either. In fine, July 17th (one week after
Friedrich had got to Schmottseifen), Dohna finds himself at the little
Town of Zullichau (barely in time to snatch it before Soltikof could),
within thirty miles of Crossen; and nothing but futility behind and
before. [Tempelhof, iii, 78-88; _ Helden-Geschichte,_ v. 835-847.]

We can imagine Friedrich's daily survey of all this; his gloomy
calculations what it will soon amount to if it last. He has now no
Winterfeld, Schwerin, no Keith, Retzow, Moritz:--whom has he? His
noblest Captains are all gone; he must put up with the less noble. One
Wedell, Lieutenant-General, had lately recommended himself to the royal
mind by actions of a prompt daring. The royal mind, disgusted with these
Dohna hagglings, and in absolute necessity of finding somebody that had
resolution, and at least ordinary Prussian skill, hoped Wedell was the
man. And determined, the crisis being so urgent, to send Wedell in the
character of ALTER-EGO, or "with the powers of a Roman Dictator," as the
Order expressed it. [Given in Preuss, ii. 207, 208; in Stenzel, v. 212,
other particulars.] Dictator Wedell is to supersede Dohna; shall go,
at his own swift pace, fettered by nobody;--and, at all hazards, shall
attack Soltikof straightway, and try to beat him. "You are grown too
old for that intricate hard work; go home a little, and recover your
health," the King writes to Dohna. And to the Dohna Army, "Obey this
man, all and sundry of you, as you would myself;" the man's private
Order being, "Go in upon Soltikof; attack him straightway; let us have
done with this wriggling and haggling." Date of this Order is "Camp at
Schmottseifen, 20th July, 1759." The purpose of such high-flown Title,
and solemnity of nomination, was mainly, it appears, to hush down any
hesitation or surprise among the Dohna Generals, which, as Wedell was
"the youngest Lieutenant-General of the Army," might otherwise have been
possible.

Wedell, furnished with some small escort and these Documents, arrives
in Camp Sunday Evening, 22d July:--poor Dohna has not the least word
or look of criticism; and every General, suppressing whatever thoughts
there may be, prepares to yield loyal obedience to Dictator Wedell.
"Wobersnow was the far better soldier of the two!" murmured the
Opposition party, then and long afterwards, [Retzow, &c.]--all the more,
as Wobersnow's behavior under it was beautiful, and his end tragical, as
will be seen. Wobersnow I perceive to have been a valiant sharp-striking
man, with multifarious resources in his head; who had faithfully helped
in these operations, and I believe been urgent to quicken them. But
what I remember best of him is his hasty admirable contrivance for
field-bakery in pressing circumstances,--the substance of which shall
not be hidden from a mechanical age:--

"You construct six slight square iron frames, each hinged to the other;
each, say, two feet square, or the breadth of two common tiles, and
shaped on the edges so as to take in tiles;--tiles are to be found on
every human cottage. This iron frame, when you hook it together, becomes
the ghost of a cubic box, and by the help of twelve tiles becomes a
compact field-oven; and you can bake with it, if you have flour and
water, and a few sticks. The succinctest oven ever heard of; for your
operation done, and your tiles flung out again, it is capable of all
folding flat like a book." [Retzow, ii. 82 n.] Never till now had
Wobersnow's oven been at fault: but in these Polish Villages, all of
mere thatched hovels, there was not a tile to be found; and the Bakery,
with astonishment, saw itself unable to proceed.

Wedell arrived Sunday evening, 22d July; had crossed Oder at
Tschischerzig,--some say by Crossen Bridge; no matter which. Dohna's
Camp is some thirty miles west of Crossen; in and near the small
Town called Zullichau, where his head-quarter is. In those dull
peaty Countries, on the right, which is thereabouts the NORTHERN (not
eastern), bank of Oder; between the Oder and the Warta; some seventy
miles south-by-east of Landsberg, and perhaps as far southwest of Posen:
thither has Dohna now got with his futile manoeuvrings. Soltikof, drawn
up amid scrubby woods and sluggish intricate brooks, is about a mile to
east of him.

Poor Dohna demits at once; and, I could conjecture, vanishes that very
night; glad to be out of such a thing. Painfully has Dohna manoeuvred
for weeks past; falling back daily; only anxious latterly that Soltikof,
who daily tries it, do not get to westward of him on the Frankfurt
road, and so end this sad shuffle. Soltikof as yet has not managed that
ultimate fatality; Dohna, by shuffling back, does at least contrive to
keep between Frankfurt and him;--will not try attacking him, much as
Wobersnow urges it. Has agreed twice or oftener, on Wobersnow's urgency:
"Yes, yes; we have a chance," Dohna would answer; "only let us rest till
to-morrow, and be fresh!" by which time the opportunity was always gone
again.

Wedell had arrived with a grenadier battalion and some horse for escort;
had picked up 150 Russian prisoners by the way. Retzow has understood
he came in with a kind of state; and seemed more or less inflated;
conscious of representing the King's person, and being a Roman
Dictator,--though it is a perilously difficult office too, and requires
more than a Letter of Instructions to qualify you for it! This is not
Leonidas Wedell, whom readers once knew; poor Leonidas is dead long
since, fell in the Battle of Sohr, soon after the heroic feat of
Ziethen's and his at Elbe-Teinitz (Defence of Elbe against an Army);
this is Leonidas's elder Brother. Friedrich had observed his fiery
ways on the day of Leuthen: "Hah, a new Winterfeld perhaps?" thought
Friedrich, "All the Winterfeld I now have!"--which proved a fond hope.
Wedell's Dictatorship began this Sunday towards sunset; and lasted--in
practical fact, it lasted one day.




DICTATOR WEDELL FIGHTS HIS BATTLE (Monday, 23d July, 1759), WITHOUT
SUCCESS.

Monday morning early, Wedell is on the heights, reconnoitring Soltikof;
cannot see much of him, the ground being so woody; does see what he
takes to be Soltikof's left wing; and judges that Soltikof will lie
quiet for this day. Which was far from a right reading of Soltikof; the
fact being that Soltikof, in long columns and divisions, beginning with
his right wing, was all on march since daybreak; what Wedell took for
Soltikof's "left wing" being Soltikof's rear-guard and baggage, waiting
till the roads cleared. Wedell, having settled everything on the above
footing, returns to Zullichau about 10 o'clock; and about 11, Soltikof,
miles long, disengaged from the bushy hollows, makes his appearance on
the open grounds of Palzig: he, sure enough (though Wedell can hardly
believe it),--five or six miles to northeast yonder; tramping diligently
along, making for Crossen and the Oder Bridge;--and is actually got
ahead of us, at last!

This is what Wedell cannot suffer, cost what it may. Wedell's orders
were, in such case, Attack the Russians. Wedell instantly took his
measures; not unskilfully, say judges,--though the result proved
disappointing; and Wobersnow himself earnestly dissuaded: "Too
questionable, I should doubt! Soltikof is 70,000, and has no end of
Artillery; we are 26,000, and know not if we can bring a single gun to
where Soltikof is!" [Tempelhof, iii. 132-134.]

Wedell's people have already, of their own accord, got to arms again;
stand waiting his orders on this new emergency. No delay in Wedell or in
them. "May not it be another Rossbach (if we are lucky)?" thinks Wedell:
"Cannot we burst in on their flank, as they march yonder, those awkward
fellows; and tumble them into heaps?" The differences were several-fold:
First, that Friedrich and Seidlitz are not here. Many brave men we have,
and skilful; but not a master and man like these Two. Secondly, that
there is no Janus Hill to screen our intentions; but that the Russians
have us in full view while we make ready. Thirdly, and still
more important, that we do not know the ground, and what hidden
inaccessibilities lie ahead. This last is judged to have been the
killing circumstance. Between the Russians and us there is a paltry
little Brook, or line of quagmire; scarcely noticeable here, but
passable nowhere except at the Village-Mill of Kay, by one poor Bridge
there. And then, farther inwards, as shelter of the Russians, there
is another quaggy Brook, branch of the above, which is without bridge
altogether. Hours will be required to get 26,000 people marched up
there, not to speak of heavy guns at all.

The 26,000 march with their usual mathematical despatch: Manteuffel and
the Vanguard strike in with their sharpest edge, foot and horse, direct
on the Head of the Russian Column, Manteuffel leading on, so soon as his
few battalions and squadrons are across. Head means BRAIN (or life)
to this Russian Column; and these Manteuffel people go at it with
extraordinary energy. The Russian Head gives way; infantry and
cavalry:--their cavalry was driven quite to rear, and never came in
sight again after this of Manteuffel. But the Russians have abundance
of Reserves; also of room to manoeuvre in,--no lack of ground open, and
ground defensible (Palzig Village and Churchyard, for example);--above
all, they have abundance of heavy guns.

Well in recoil from Manteuffel and his furies, the beaten Russians
succeed in forming "a long Line behind Palzig Village," with that
Second, slighter or Branch Quagmire between them and us; they get the
Village beset, and have the Churchyard of it lined with batteries,--say
seventy guns. Manteuffel, unsupported, has to fall back;--unwillingly,
and not chased or in disorder,--towards Kay-Mill again; where many
are by this time across. Hulsen, with the Centre, attacks now, as the
Vanguard had done; with a will, he too: Wobersnow, all manner of people
attack; time after time, for about four hours coming: and it proves
all in vain, on that Churchyard and new Line. Without cannon, we are
repulsed, torn away by those Russian volcano-batteries; never enough of
us at once!

Hulsen, Wobersnow, everybody in detail is repulsed, or finds his success
unavailing. Poor Wobersnow did wonders; but he fell, killed. Gone he;
and has left so few of his like: a man that could ill be spared at
present!--Day is sinking; we find we have lost, in killed, wounded and
prisoners, some 6,000 men. "About sunset,"--flaming July sun going down
among the moorlands on such a scene,--Wedell gives it up; retires slowly
towards Kay Bridge. Slowly; not chased, or molested; Soltikof too glad
to be rid of him. Soltikof's one aim is, and was, towards Crossen;
towards Austrian Junction, and something to live upon. Soltikof's loss
of men is reckoned to be heavier even than Wedell's: but he could far
better afford it. He has gained his point; and the price is small in
comparison. Next day he enters Crossen on triumphant terms.

Poor Wedell had returned over Kay-Mill Bridge, in the night-time after
his Defeat. On the morrow (Tuesday, 24th, day of Soltikof's glad entry),
Wedell crosses Oder; at Tschischerzig, the old place of Sunday evening
last,--in how different a humor, this time!--and in a day more, posts
himself opposite to Crossen Bridge, five or six miles south; and again
sits watchful of Soltikof there. At Crossen, triumphant Soltikof has
found no Austrian Junction, nor anything additional to live upon. A
very disappointing circumstance to Soltikof; "Austrian Junction still
a problem, then; a thing in the air? And perhaps the King of Prussia
taking charge of it now!" Soltikof, more and more impatient, after
waiting some days, decided Not to cross Oder by that Bridge;--"shy of
crossing anywhere [think the French Gentlemen, Montazet, Montalembert],
to the King of Prussia's side!" [Stenzel, iv. 215 (indistinct, and
giving a WRONG citation of "Montalembert, ii. 87").] Which is not
unlikely, though the King is above 100 miles off him, and has Daun
on his hands. Certain enough, keeping the River between him and any
operations of the King, Soltikof set out for Frankfurt, forty or fifty
miles farther down. In the hope probably of finding something of human
provender withal? July 30th, one week after his Battle, the vanguard of
him is there.

Thus, in two days, or even in one, has Wedell's Dictatorship ended. Easy
to say scoffingly, "Would it had never begun!" Friedrich knows that,
and Wedell knows it;--AFTER the event everybody knows it! Friedrich said
nothing of reproachful; the reverse rather,--"I dreaded something of the
kind; it is not your fault;" [TO WEDELL, FROM THE KING, "Schmottseifen,
July 24th. 1759" (in Schoning, ii. 118).]--ordered Wedell to watch
diligently at Crossen Bridge, and be ready on farther signal. The Wedell
Problem, in such ruined condition, has now fallen to Friedrich himself.

This is the BATTLE OF ZULLICHAU (afternoon of 23d July, 1759); the
beginning of immense disasters in this Campaign. Battle called also of
KAY and of PALZIG, those also being main localities in it. It was lost,
not by fault of Wedell's people, who spent themselves nobly upon it, nor
perhaps by fault of Wedell himself, but principally, if not solely,
by those two paltry Brooks, or threads of Quagmire, one of which turns
Kay-Mill; memorable Brooks in this Campaign, 1759. [Tempelhof, iii.
125-131.]

Close in the same neighborhood, there is another equally contemptible
Brook, making towards Oder, and turning the so-called Krebsmuhle, which
became still more famous to the whole European Public twenty years
hence. KREBS-MUHLE (Crab-Mill), as yet quite undistinguished among
Mills; belonging to a dusty individual called Miller Arnold, with a
dusty Son of his own for Miller's Lad: was it at work this day? Or had
the terrible sound from Palzig quenched its clacking?--

Some three weeks ago (4th-6th JULY), there occurred a sudden sharp thing
at Havre-de-Grace on the French Coast, worth a word from us in this
place. The Montazets, Montalemberts, watching, messaging about, in the
Austrian-Russian Courts and Camps, assiduously keeping their Soltikofs
in tune, we can observe how busy they are. Soubise with his Invasion of
England, all the French are very busy; they have conquered Hessen from
Duke Ferdinand, and promise themselves a glorious Campaign, after that
Seizure of Frankfurt. Soubise, intent on his new Enterprise, is
really making ardent preparations: at Vanues in the Morbihan,
such rendezvousing and equipping;--especially at Havre, no end of
flat-bottomed boats getting built; and much bluster and agitation among
the weaker sorts in both Nations. Whereupon,--

"JULY 1st [just in the days while Friedrich was first trying Horse
Artillery], Rear-Admiral Rodney sails from Portsmouth with a few
Frigates, and Six Bomb-ketches [FIREDRAKE, BASILISK, BLAST, and such
nomenclatures [List of him, in Beatson, _Naval and Military Memoirs_
(London, 1804), ii. 241; his Despatch excellently brief, ib. ii. 323]];
and in the afternoon of Tuesday, 3d, arrives in the frith or bay of
Havre. Steers himself properly into 'the Channel of Honfleur' before
dark; and therefrom, with his Firedrake, Basilisk and Company, begins
such a bombardment of Havre and the flat-bottomed manufactories as was
quite surprising. Fifty-two incessant hours of it, before he thought
poor Havre had enough. Poor Havre had been on fire six times; the flat
manufactory (unquenchable) I know not how many; all the inhabitants off
in despair; and the Garrison building this battery to no purpose, then
that; no salvation for them but in Rodney's 'mortars getting too hot.'
He had fired of shells 1,900, of carcasses, 1,150: from Wednesday about
sunrise till Friday about 8 A.M.,--about time now for breakfast; which
I hope everybody had, after such a stretch of work. 'No damage to speak
of,' said the French Gazetteers; 'we will soon refit everything!' But
they never did; and nothing came of Havre henceforth. Vannes was always,
and is now still more, to be the main place; only that Hawke--most
unexpectedly, for one fancied all their ships employed in distant
parts--rides there with a Channel Fleet of formidable nature; and the
previous question always is: 'Cannot we beat Hawke? Can we! Or will not
he perhaps go, of himself, when the rough weather comes?'"




Chapter III.--FRIEDRICH IN PERSON ATTEMPTS THE RUSSIAN PROBLEM; NOT WITH
SUCCESS.

Before Wedell's catastrophe, the Affair of those Haddick-Loudon
Detachments had become a little plainer to Friedrich. The intention,
he begins to suspect, is not for Berlin at all; but for junction with
Soltikof,--at Crossen, or wherever it may be. This is in fact their real
purpose; and this, beyond almost Berlin itself, it is in the highest
degree important to prevent! Important; and now as if become impossible!

Prince Henri had come to Bautzen with his Army, specially to look after
Loudon and Haddick; and he has, all this while, had Finck with some
10,000 diligently patrolling to westward of them, guarding Berlin; he
himself watching from the southern side,--where, as on the western,
there was no danger from them. Some time before Wedell's affair,
Friedrich had pushed out Eugen of Wurtemberg to watch these people on
the eastern side;--suspicious that thitherward lay their real errand.
Eugen had but 6,000; and, except in conjunction with Finck and Henri,
could do nothing,--nor can, now when Friedrich's suspicion turns out to
be fatally true. Friedrich had always the angry feeling that Finck and
Prince Henri were the blameworthy parties in what now ensued; that they,
who were near, ought to have divined these people's secret, and spoiled
it in time; not have left it to him who was far off, and so busy
otherwise. To the last, that was his fixed private opinion; by no means
useful to utter,--especially at present, while attempting the now very
doubtful enterprise himself, and needing all about him to be swift
and zealous. This is one of Friedrich's famous labors, this of the
Haddick-Loudon junction with Soltikof; strenuous short spasm of effort,
of about a week's continuance; full of fiery insight, velocity, energy;
still admired by judges, though it was unsuccessful, or only had half
success. Difficult to bring home, in any measure, to the mind of modern
readers, so remote from it.

Friedrich got the news of Zullichau next day, July 24th;--and instantly
made ready. The case is critical; especially this Haddick-Loudon part of
it: add 30 or 36,000 Austrians to Soltikof, how is he then to be dealt
with? A case stringently pressing:--and the resources for it few and
scattered. For several days past, Haddick, and Loudon under him, whose
motions were long enigmatic, have been marching steadily eastward
through the Lausitz,--with the evident purpose of joining
Soltikof; unless Wedell could forbid. Wedell ahead was the grand
opposition;--Finck, Henri, Wurtemberg, as good as useless;--and Wedell
being now struck down, these Austrians will go, especially Loudon will,
at a winged rate. They are understood to be approaching Sagan Country;
happily, as yet, well to westward of it, and from Sagan Town well
NORTH-westward;--but all accounts of them are vague, dim: they are an
obscure entity to Friedrich, but a vitally important one. Sagan Town may
be about 70 miles northward of where Friedrich now is: from Sagan, were
they once in the meridian of Sagan, their road is free eastward and
northward;--to Crossen is about 60 miles north-by-east from Sagan, to
Frankfurt near 100 north. Sagan is on the Bober; Bober, in every event,
is between the Austrians and their aim.

Friedrich feels that, however dangerous to quit Daun's neighborhood, he
must, he in person, go at once. And who, in the interim, will watch Daun
and his enterprises? Friedrich's reflections are: "Well, in the crisis
of the moment, Saxony--though there already are marauding Bodies of
Reichsfolk in it--must still be left to itself for a time; or cannot
Finck and his 10,000 look to it? Henri, with his Army, now useless at
Bautzen, shall instantly rendezvous at Sagan; his Army to go with me,
against the Russians and their Haddick-Loudons; Henri to Schmottseifen,
instead of me, and attend to Daun; Henri, I have no other left! Finck
and his 10,000 must take charge of Saxony, such charge as he can:--how
lucky those Spring Forays, which destroyed the Reichs Magazines! Whereby
there is no Reichs Army yet got into Saxony (nothing but preliminary
pulses and splashings of it); none yet, nor like to be quite at once."
That is Friedrich's swift plan.

Henri rose on the instant, as did everybody concerned: July 29th, Henri
and Army were at Sagan; Army waiting for the King; Henri so far on his
road to Schmottseifen. He had come to Sagan "by almost the rapidest
marches ever heard of,"--or ever till some others of Henri's own, which
he made in that neighborhood soon. Punctual, he, to his day; as are
Eugen of Wurtemberg's people, and all Detachments and Divisions:
Friedrich himself arrives at Sagan that same 29th, "about
midnight,"--and finds plenty of work waiting: no sleep these two nights
past; and none coming just yet! A most swift rendezvous. The speed of
everybody has been, and needs still to be, intense.

This rendezvous at Sagan--intersection of Henri and Friedrich, bound
different roads (the Brothers, I think, did not personally meet, Henri
having driven off for Schmottseifen by a shorter road)--was SUNDAY, JULY
29th. Following which, are six days of such a hunt for those Austrian
reynards as seldom or never was! Most vehement, breathless, baffling
hunt; half of it spent in painfully beating cover, in mere finding and
losing. Not rightly successful, after all. So that, on the eighth day
hence, AUGUST 6th, at Mullrose, near Frankfurt, 80 miles from Sagan,
there is a second rendezvous,--rendezvous of Wedell and Friedrich, who
do not now "intersect," but meet after the hunt is done;--and in the
interim, there has been a wonderful performance, though an unsuccessful.
Friedrich never could rightly get hold of his Austrians. Once only, at
Sommerfeld, a long march northwest of Sagan, he came upon some outskirts
of them. And in general, in those latter eight days, especially in
the first six of them, there is, in that Kotbus-Sagan Country, such an
intersecting, checking, pushing and multifarious simmering of marches,
on the part of half a dozen Strategic Entities, Friedrich the centre
of them, as--as, I think, nobody but an express soldier-student, well
furnished with admiration for this particular Soldier, would consent to
have explained to him. One of the maziest, most unintelligible whirls
of marching; inextricable Sword Dance, or Dance of the Furies,--five
of them (that is the correct number: Haddick, Loudon, Friedrich,
Wurtemberg, Wedell);--and it is flung down for us, all in a huddle, in
these inhuman Books (which have several errors of the press, too): let
no man rashly insist with himself on understanding it, unless he have
need! Humanly pulled straight, not inhumanly flung down at random, here
the essentials of it are,--in very brief state:--

"SAGAN, MONDAY, 30th JULY. Friedrich is at Sagan, since midnight last,
busier and busier;" beating cover, as we termed it, and getting his
hounds (his new Henri-Army) in leash; "endeavoring, especially, to get
tidings of those Austrian people; who are very enigmatic,--Loudon a
dexterous man,--and have hung up such a curtain of Pandours between
Friedrich and them as is nearly impenetrable. In the course of this
Monday Friedrich ascertains that they are verily on the road; coming
eastward, for Sommerfeld,--'thence for Crossen!' he needs no ghost to
tell him. Wherefore,

"TUESDAY, SAGAN TO NAUMBURG. Tuesday before daybreak Friedrich too is
on the road: northwestward; in full march towards Naumburg on Bober,
meaning to catch the Bridge from them there. March of the swiftest;
he himself is ahead, as usual, with the Vanguard of Horse. He reaches
Naumburg (northward, a march of 20 miles); finds, not Haddick or Loudon,
but a Detachment of theirs: which he at once oversets with his cavalry,
and chases,--marking withal that 'westward is the way they run.'
Westward; and that we are still ahead, thank Heaven!

"Before his Infantry are all up, or are well rested in Naumburg,
Friedrich ascertains, on more precise tidings, that the Austrians are in
Sommerfeld, to westward (again a 20 miles); and judges That, no doubt,
they will bear off more to leftward, by Guben probably, and try to avoid
him,--unless he can still catch them in Sommerfeld. About nightfall
he marches for Sommerfeld, at his swiftest; arrives Wednesday early;
finds--alas!--

"SOMMERFELD, WEDNESDAY MORNING, AUGUST 1st, Friedrich finds that Loudon
was there last night,--preterite tense, alas; the question now being,
Where is he!" In fact, Loudon had written yesterday to Daun (Letter
still extant, "Sommerfeld, July 31st"), That "being swift and light,"
consisting of horse for most part, "he may probably effect Junction
this very night;"--but has altered his mind very much, on sight of these
fugitives from Naumburg, since! And has borne off more to leftward.
Straight north now, and at a very brisk pace; being now all of
horse;--and has an important conference with Haddick at Guben, when
they arrive there. "Not in Sommerfeld?" thinks Friedrich (earnestly
surveying, through this slit he has made in the Pandour veil): "Gone
to Guben most likely, bearing off from us to leftward?"--Which was
the fact; though not the whole fact. And indeed the chase is now again
fallen uncertain, and there has to be some beating of covers. For one
thing, he learns to-day (August 1st) that the Russians are gone to
Frankfurt: "Follow them, you Wedell,"--orders Friedrich: them we shall
have to go into,--however this hunt end!--

"To Markersdorf, Thursday, August 2d. Friedrich takes the road for
Guben; reaches Markersdorf (twenty miles' march, still seven or eight
from Guben); falls upon--What phenomenon is this? The Austrian heavy
Train; meal-wagons not a few, and a regiment of foot in charge of
it;--but going the wrong way, not TOWARDS the Russians, but from them!
What on earth can this be? This is Haddick,--if Friedrich could yet
clearly know it,--Haddick and Train, who for his own part has given up
the junction enterprise. At Guben, some hours ago, he had conference
with Loudon; and this was the conclusion arrived at: 'Impossible, with
that King so near! You, Herr Loudon, push on, without heavy baggage, and
with the Cavalry altogether: you can get in, almost 20,000 strong; I,
with the Infantry, with the meal and heavy guns, will turn, and make for
the Lausitz again!'

"This mysterious Austrian Train, going the wrong way, Friedrich
attacks, whatever it be (hoping, I suppose, it might be the Austrians
altogether); chases it vigorously; snatches all the meal-wagons, and
about 1,000 prisoners. Uncertain still what it is,--if not the Austrians
altogether? To his sorrow, he finds, on pushing farther into it, that
it is only Haddick and the Infantry; that Loudon, with the 20,000
Horse, will have gone off for Frankfurt;--irretrievably ahead, the swift
Loudon,--ever careering northward all this while, since that
afternoon at Sommerfeld, when the fugitives altered his opinion: a now
unattainable Loudon. In the course of Thursday night, Friedrich has
satisfied himself that the Loudon junction is a thing as good as
done;--in effect, Loudon did get to Frankfurt, morning of August 3d, and
joined the Russians there; and about the same time, or only a few hours
sooner, Friedrich, by symptoms, has divined that his hunt has ended,
in this rather unsuccessful way; and that chasing of Haddick is not the
road to go." [Tempelhof, iii. 135-139.]

Not Haddick now; with or without their Austrians, it shall be the
Russians now! Two days ago (Wednesday, as was mentioned), before sight
of those enigmatic meal-wagons, Friedrich had learned that the
Russians were to be in Frankfurt again; and had ordered Wedell to march
thitherward, at any rate. Which Wedell is doing, all this Thursday
and the four following days. As does likewise, from and after "FRIDAY,
AUGUST 3d, 1 A.M." (hunt then over), Friedrich himself,--renouncing
Haddick and the hunt. Straight towards Frankfurt thenceforth;
head-quarters Beeskow that night; next night, Mullrose, whither Wedell
is appointed, within twelve miles of Frankfurt. This is the end of
Friedrich's sore Chase and March; burnt deeply into his own weary brain,
if ours still refuse it admittance! Here, of utterly fatigued tone, is a
Note of his, chiefly on business, to Minister Finkenstein. Indeed there
are, within the next ten days, Three successive Notes to Finkenstein,
which will be worth reading in their due places. This is the First of
them:--

THE KING TO GRAF VON FINKENSTEIN (at Berlin).

"BEESKOW, 3d August,1759."

"I am just arrived here, after cruel and frightful marchings [CHECKS
HIMSELF, HOWEVER]. There is nothing desperate in all that; and I believe
the noise and disquietude this hurly-burly has caused will be the worst
of it. Show this Letter to everybody, that it may be known the State is
not undefended. I have made above 1,000 prisoners from Haddick. All his
meal-wagons have been taken. Finck, I believe, will keep an eye on him,"
and secure Berlin from attempts of his. "This is all I can say.

"To-morrow I march to within two leagues of Frankfurt [to Mullrose,
namely]. Katte [the Minister who has charge of such things] must send
me instantly Two Hundred Wispels [say tons] of Meal, and Bakers One
Hundred, to Furstenwalde. I shall encamp at Wulkow. I am very tired. For
six nights I have not closed an eye. Farewell.--F."

During the above intricate War-Dance of Five,--the day while Friedrich
was at Sommerfeld, the day before he came in sight of Haddick's
meal-wagons going the wrong road,--there went on, at Minden, on the
Weser, three hundred miles away, a beautiful feat of War, in the highest
degree salutary to Duke Ferdinand and Britannic Majesty's Ministry; feat
which requires a word from us here. A really splendid Victory, this of
Minden, August 1st: French driven headlong through the Passes there;
their "Conquest of Hanover and Weser Country" quite exploded and flung
over the horizon; and Duke Ferdinand relieved from all his distresses,
and lord of the ascendant again in those parts. Highly interesting
to Friedrich;--especially to Prince Henri; whose apprehensions about
Ferdinand and the old Richelieu Hastenbeck-Halberstadt time returning
on us, have been very great; and who now, at Schmottseifen, fires
FEU-DE-JOIE for it with all his heart. This is a Battle still of some
interest to English readers. But can English readers consent to halt
in this hot pinch of the Friedrich crisis; and read the briefest thing
which is foreign to it? Alas, I fear they can;--and will insert the Note
here:--

BATTLE OF MINDEN: WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 1st, 1759.---"Ever since Bergen,
things have gone awry with Ferdinand, and in spite of skilful
management, of hard struggles and bright sparkles of success, he has
had a bad Campaign of it. The French, it would seem, are really got into
better fighting order; Belleisle's exertions as War-Minister have
been almost wonderful,--in some respects, TOO wonderful, as we shall
hear!--and Broglio and Contades, in comparison with Clermont and
Soubise, have real soldier qualities. Contades, across Rhine again, in
those Weser Countries, who is skilful in his way, and is pricked on
by emulation of Broglio, has been spreading himself out steadily
progressive there; while Broglio, pushing along from Frankfurt-on-Mayn,
has conquered Hessen; is into Hanover; on the edge of conquering
Hanover,--which how is Ferdinand to hinder? Ferdinand has got two, if
not three Armies to deal with, and in number is not much superior
to one. If he run to save Hanover from Broglio, he loses Westphalia:
Osnabruck (his magazine)? Munster, Lippstadt,--Contades, if left to
himself, will take these, after short siege; and will nestle himself
there, and then advance, not like a transitory fever-fit, but like
visible death, on Hanover. Ferdinand, rapid yet wary, manoeuvred his
very best among those interests of his, on the left bank of Weser; but
after the surprisal of Minden from him (brilliantly done by Broglio,
and the aid of a treacherous peasant), especially after the capture of
Osnabruck, his outlooks are gloomy to a degree: and at Versailles,
and at Minden where Contades has established himself, 'the Conquest
of Hanover' (beautiful counterweight to all one's losses in America or
elsewhere) is regarded as a certainty of this Year.

"For the last ten days of July, about Minden, the manoeuvring,
especially on Ferdinand's part, had been intense; a great idea in the
head of Ferdinand, more or less unintelligible to Contades. Contades,
with some 30,000, which is the better half of his force, has taken one
of the unassailablest positions. He lies looking northward, his
right wing on the Weser with posts to Minden (Minden perhaps a mile
northeastward there), on his left impassable peat-bogs and quagmires;
in front a quaggy River or impassable black Brook, called the Bastau,
coming from the westward, which disembogues at Minden: [Sketch of Plan,
p. 238]--there lies Contades, as if in a rabbit-hole, say military men;
for defence, if that were the sole object, no post can be stronger.
Contades has in person say 30,000; and round him, on both sides of the
Weser, are Broglio with 20,000; besides other Divisions, I know not
how many, besieging Munster, capturing Osnabruck (our hay magazine),
attempting Lippstadt by surprise (to no purpose), and diligently working
forward, day by day, to Ferdinand's ruin in those Minden regions. Three
or four Divisions busy in that manner;--and above all, we say, he has
Broglio with a 20,000 on the right or east bank of the Weser,--who, if
Ferdinand quit him even for a day, seems to have Hanover at discretion,
and can march any day upon Hanover City, where his light troops have
already been more than once. Why does n't Ferdinand cross Weser,
re-cross Weser; coerce Broglio back; and save Hanover? cry the
Gazetteers and a Public of weak judgment. Pitt's Public is inclined
to murmur about Ferdinand; Pitt himself never. Ferdinand persists in
sticking by Minden neighborhood,--and, in a scarcely accountable way,
manoeuvring there, shooting out therefrom what mischief he can upon the
various Contades people in their sieges and the like.

"On Contades himself he can pretend to do nothing,--except hoodwink
him, entice him out, and try to get a chance on him. But for his own
subsistence and otherwise, he is very lively;--snatches, by a sudden
stroke, Bremen City: 'Yes truly, Bremen is a Reichstadt; nor shall YOU
snatch it, as you did Frankfurt; but I will, instead; and my English
proviant-ships shall have a sure haven henceforth!' Snatches Bremen
by one sudden stroke; RE-snatches Osnabruck by another ('our magazine
considerably INCREASED since you have had it, many thanks!'); does lose
Munster, to his sorrow; but nevertheless sticks by his ground here;--nay
detaches his swift-cutting Nephew, the Hereditary Prince, who is growing
famous for such things, to cut out Contades's strong post to southward
(Gohfeld, ten miles up the Weser), which guards his meal-wagons, after
their long journey from the south. That is Contades's one weak point,
in this posture of things: his meal is at Cassel, seventy miles off.
Broglio and he see clearly, 'Till we can get a new magazine much nearer
Hanover, or at lowest, can clear out these people from infesting us
here, there is no moving northward!' To both Contades and Broglio
that is an evident thing: the corollary to which is, They must fight
Ferdinand; must watch lynx-like till a chance turn up of beating him in
fight. That is their outlook; and Ferdinand knows it is,--and manoeuvres
accordingly. Military men admire much, not his movements only, but his
clear insight into Contades's and Broglio's temper of mind, and by what
methods they were to be handled, they and his own affairs together, and
brought whither he wanted them. [In MAUVILLON (ii. 41-44) minute account
of all that.]

"This attempt on Gohfeld was a serious mischief to Contades, if it
succeeded. But the detaching of the Prince of Brunswick on it, and
weakening one's too weak Army, 'What a rashness, what an oversight!'
thinks Contades (as Ferdinand wished him to do): 'Is our skilful enemy,
in this extreme embarrassment, losing head, then? Look at his left wing
yonder [General Wangenheim, sitting behind batteries, in his Village of
Todtenhausen, looking into Minden from the north]:--Wangenheim's left
leans on the Weser, yes; but Wangenheim's right, observe, has no support
within three miles of it: tear Wangenheim out, Ferdinand's flank is
bare!' These things seemed to Contades the very chance he had been
waiting for; and brought him triumphantly out of his rabbit-hole, into
the Heath of Minden, as Ferdinand hoped they would do.

"And so, TUESDAY EVENING, JULY 31st, things being now all ripe, upwards
of 50,000 French are industriously in motion. Contades has nineteen
bridges ready on the Bastau Brook, in front of him; TATTOO this night,
in Contades's Camp, is to mean GENERAL MARCH, 'March, all of you, across
these nineteen Bridges, to your stations on the Plain or Heath of Minden
yonder,--and be punctual, like the clock!' Broglio crosses Weser by
the town Bridge, ranks himself opposite Todtenhausen; and through the
livelong night there is, on the part of the 50,000 French, a very great
marching and deploying. Contades and Broglio together are 51,400 foot
and horse. Ferdinand's entire force will be near 46,000; but on the day
of Battle he is only 36,000,--having detached the Hereditary Prince on
Gohfeld, in what view we know.--The BATTLE OF MINDEN, called also of
TONHAUSEN (meaning TODTENhausen), which hereupon fell out, has still its
fame in the world; and, I perceive, is well worth study by the soldier
mind: though nothing but the rough outline of it is possible here.

"Ferdinand's posts extend from the Weser river and Todtenhausen round by
Stemmern, Holzhausen, to Hartum and the Bog of Bastau (the chief part
of him towards Bastau),--in various Villages, and woody patches and
favorable spots; all looking in upon Minden, from a distance of five
or seven miles; forming a kind of arc, with Minden for centre. He
will march up in eight Columns; of course, with wide intervals between
them,--wide, but continually narrowing as he advances; which will
indeed be ruinous gaps, if Ferdinand wait to be attacked; but which will
coalesce close enough, if he be speedy upon Contades. For Contades's
line is also of arc-like or almost semicircular form, behind it Minden
as centre; Minden, which is at the intersection of Weser and the Brook;
his right flank is on Weser, Broglio VERSUS Wangenheim the extreme
right; his left, with infantry and artillery, rests on that black Brook
of Bastau with its nineteen Bridges. As the ground on both wings is
rough, not so fit for Cavalry, Contades puts his Cavalry wholly in the
centre: they are the flower of the French Army, about 10,000 horse in
all; firm open ground ahead of them there, with strong batteries, masses
of infantry to support on each flank; batteries to ply with cross-fire
any assailant that may come on. Broglio, we said, is right wing; strong
in artillery and infantry. Broglio is to root out Waugenheim: after
which,--or even before which, if Wangenheim is kept busy and we are
nimble,--what becomes of Ferdinand's left flank, with a gap of three
miles between Wangenheim and him, and 10,000 chosen horse to take
advantage of it! Had the French been of Prussian dexterity and
nimbleness in marching, it is very possible something might have come of
this latter circumstance: but Ferdinand knows they are not; and intends
to take good care of his flank.

"Contades and his people were of willing mind; but had no skill in
'marchiug up:' and, once got across the Bastau by their nineteen
Bridges, they wasted many hours:--'Too far, am I? not far enough?
Too close? not close enough?'--and broiled about, in much hurry and
confusion, all night. Fight was to have begun at 5 in the morning.
Broglio was in his place, silently looking into Wangenheim, by five
o'clock; but unfortunately did nothing upon Wangenheim ('Not ready you,
I see!'), except cannonade a little;--and indeed all through did nothing
('Still not ready you others!'); which surely was questionable conduct,
though not reckoned so at Versailles, when the case came to be argued
there. As to the Contades people, across those nineteen Bridges, they
had a baffling confused night; and were by no means correctly on their
ground at sunrise, nor at 7 o'clock, nor at 8; and were still mending
themselves when the shock came, and time was done.

"The morning is very misty; but Ferdinand has himself been out examining
since the earliest daybreak: his orders last night were, 'Cavalry be
saddled at 1 in the morning,'--having a guess that there would be work,
as he now finds there will. From 5 A.M. Ferdinand is issuing from
his Camp, flowing down eastward, beautifully concentric, closing on
Contades; horse NOT in centre, but English Infantry in centre (Six
Battalions, or Six REGIMENTS by English reckoning); right opposite those
10,000 Horse of Contades's, the sight of whom seems to be very animating
to them. The English Cavalry stand on the right wing, at the Village of
Hartum: Lord George Sackville had not been very punctual in saddling at
1 o'clock; but he is there, ranked on the ground, at 8,--in what humor
nobody knows; sulky and flabby, I should rather guess. English Tourists,
idle otherwise, may take a look at Hartum on the south side, as the spot
where a very ugly thing occurred that day.

"Soon after 8 the Fight begins: attack, by certain Hessians, on Hahlen
and its batteries; attempt to drive the French out of Hahlen, as the
first thing,--which does not succeed at once (indeed took three
attacks in all); and perhaps looks rather tedious to those Six English
Battalions. Ferdinand's order to them was, 'You shall march up to
attack, you Six, on sound of drum;' but, it seems, they read it, 'BY
sound of drum;' 'Beating our own drums; yes, of course!'--and, being
weary of this Hahlen work, or fancying they had no concern with it,
strode on, double-quick, without waiting for Hahlen at all! To the
horror of their Hanoverian comrades, who nevertheless determined to
follow as second line. 'The Contades cross-fire of artillery, battery
of 30 guns on one flank, of 36 on the other, does its best upon this
forward-minded Infantry, but they seem to heed it little; walk right
forward; and, to the astonishment of those French Horse and of all
the world, entirely break and ruin the charge made on them, and
tramp forward in chase of the same. The 10,000 Horse feel astonished,
insulted; and rush out again, furiously charging; the English halt and
serry themselves: 'No fire till they are within forty paces;' and then
such pouring torrents of it as no horse or man can endure. Rally after
rally there is, on the part of those 10,000; mass after mass of them
indignantly plunges on,--again, ever again, about six charges in
all;--but do not break the English lines: one of them (regiment
Mestrede-Camp, raised to a paroxysm) does once get through, across the
first line, but is blown back in dreadful circumstances by the second.
After which they give it up, as a thing that cannot be done. And rush
rearward, hither, thither, the whole seventy-five squadrons of them;
and 'between their two wings of infantry are seen boiling in complete
disorder.'

"This has lasted about an hour: this is essentially the soul of the
Fight,--though there wanted not other activities, to right of it and to
left, on both sides; artilleries going at a mighty rate on both wings;
and counter-artilleries (superlative practice 'by Captain Phillips' on
OUR right wing); Broglio cannonading Wangenheim very loudly, but
with little harm done or suffered, on their right wing. Wangenheim is
watchful of that gap between Ferdinand and him, till it close itself
sufficiently. Their right-wing Infantry did once make some attempt
there; but the Prussian Horse--(always a small body of Prussians serve
in this Allied Army)--shot out, and in a brilliant manner swept them
home again.

PLAN OF BATTLE HERE--PAGE 239,----

Artillery and that pretty charge of Prussian Horse are all one
remembers, except this of the English and Hanover Foot in the centre:
'an unsurpassable thing,' says Tempelhof (though it so easily might have
been a fatal!)--which has set Contades's centre boiling, and reduced
Contades altogether to water, as it were. Contades said bitterly:
'I have seen what I never thought to be possible,--a single line of
infantry break through three lines of cavalry ranked in order of battle,
and tumble them to ruin!' [Stenzel, v. 204.]

"This was the feat, this hour's work in the centre, the essential soul
of the Fight:--and had Lord George Sackville, General of the Horse,
come on when galloped for and bidden, here had been such a ruin, say all
judges, as seldom came upon an Army. Lord George--everlasting disgrace
and sorrow on the name of him--could not see his way to coming on;
delayed, haggled; would not even let Granby, his lieutenant, come; not
for a second Adjutant, not for a third; never came on at all; but rode
to the Prince, asking, 'How am I to come on?' Who, with a politeness I
can never enough admire, did not instantly kill him, but answered,
in mild tone, 'Milord, the opportunity is now past!' Whereby Contades
escaped ruin, and was only beaten. By about 10 in the morning all was
over. When a man's centre is gone to water, no part of him is far
from the fluid state. Contades retreated into his rabbit-hole by those
nineteen bridges,--well tormented, they say, by Captain Phillips's
artillery, till he got beyond the knolls again. Broglio, who had never
been in musket-fire at all, but had merely barked on Wangenheim all
morning, instead of biting, covered the retreat, and withdrew into
Minden. And we are a beaten Army,--thanks to Lord George, not an
annihilated one. Our loss being only 7,086 (with heavy guns, colors,
cavalry flags and the like); theirs being 2,822,--full half of it
falling on those rash Six Battalions. [Mauvillon, ii. 44-60; Tempelhof,
iii. 154-179, &c. &c.: and _Proceedings of a Court-Martial, held at the
Horse-Guards, 7th-24th March and 25th March-5th April, 1760, in Trial of
Lord George Sackville_ (London, 1760)]. In Knesebeck, _Ferdinand wahrend
des siebenjahrigen Krieges_ (i. 395), Ferdinand's Letter to Friedrich of
"July 31st;" and (i. 398-418 and ii. 33-36) many special details about
Sackville and "August 1st."

"And what is this one hears from Gohfeld in the evening? The Hereditary
Prince, busy there on us during the very hours of Minden, has blown our
rear-guard division to the winds there;--and we must move southward,
one and all of us, without a moment's delay! Out of this rabbit-hole
the retreat by rearward is through a difficult country, the Westphalian
Gates so called; fatal to Varus's Legions long ago. Contades got under
way that very night; lost most of his baggage, all his conquests, that
shadow-conquest of Hanover, and more than all his glories (Versailles
shrieking on him, 'Resign you; let Broglio be chief,);--and, on the
whole, jumbled homeward hither and thither, gravitating towards the
Rhine, nothing but Wesel to depend on in those parts, as heretofore.
Broglio retreated Frankfurt-way, also as usual, though not quite so far;
and at Versailles had clearly the victory. Zealous Belleisle could
not protect his Contades; it is not known whether he privately blamed
Contades or blamed Broglio for loss of Minden. Zealous old man, what a
loss to himself withal had Minden been! That shadow-conquest of Hanover
is quite vanished: and worse, in Ferdinand's spoil were certain LETTERS
from Belleisle to Contades, inculcating strange things;--for example,
'IL FAUT FAIRE UN DESERT DU PAYS [all Hessen, I think, lest Ferdinand
advance on you] DEVANT L'ARMEE,' and the like. Which Ferdinand saw good
to publish, and which resounded rather hideously through the general
mind." [Were taken at Detmold (Tempelhof, iii. 223); Old Newspapers full
of Excerpts from them, in the weeks following.]

Ignominious Sackville was tried by Court-martial; cashiered,
declared incapable of again serving his Majesty "in any military
capacity;"--perhaps a mild way of signifying that he wanted the common
courage of a soldier? Zealous Majesty, always particular in soldier
matters, proclaimed it officially to be "a sentence worse than death;"
and furthermore, with his own royal hand, taking the pen himself, struck
out Sackville from the List of Privy-Councillors. Proper surely, and
indispensable;--and should have been persisted in, like Fate; which,
in a new Reign, it was not! For the rest, there was always, and is,
something of enigma in Sackville's palpably bad case. It is difficult
to think that a Sackville wanted common courage. This Sackville fought
duels with propriety; in private life, he was a surly, domineering kind
of fellow, and had no appearance of wanting spirit. It is known, he did
not love Duke Ferdinand; far from it! May not he have been of peculiarly
sour humor that morning, the luckless fool; sulky against Ferdinand, and
his "saddling at one o'clock;" sulky against himself, against the
world and mankind; and flabbily disinclined to heroic practices for the
moment? And the moment came; and the man was not there, except in that
foggy, flabby and forever ruinous condition! Archenholtz, alone of
Writers, judges that he expressly wanted to spoil the Battle of Minden
and Ferdinand's reputation, and to get appointed Commander in his stead.
Wonderful; but may have some vestige of basis, too! True, this Sackville
was as fit to lead the courses of the stars as to lead armies. But such
a Sackville has ambition, and, what is fatally more peculiar to him, a
chance for unfolding it;--any blockhead has an ambition capable, if you
encourage it sufficiently, of running to the infinite. Enough of this
particular blockhead; and may it be long before we see his like again!--

The English Cavalry was in a rage with Sackville. Of the English
Infantry, Historians say, what is not now much heard of in this Country,
"That these unsurpassable Six [in industrious valor unsurpassable,
though they mistook orders, and might have fared badly!] are ever since
called the Minden Regiments; that they are the 12th, 20th, 23d, 25th,
37th and 51st of the British Line; and carry 'Minden' on their colors,"
[Kausler, _Schlachter, _ &c. p, 587.]--with silent profit, I hope!

Fancy how Pitt's public, lately gloomy and dubious, blazed aloft into
joyful certainty again! Pitt's outlooks have been really gloomy all this
season; nor are the difficulties yet ended, though we hope they will
end. Let us add this other bit of Synchronism, which is still of
adverse aspect, over Seas; and will be pungently interesting to Pitt and
England, when they come to hear of it.

"BEFORE QUEBEC, JULY 31st, 1759. This same Evening, at Quebec, on the
other side of the Atlantic,--evening at Quebec, 9 or 10 at night for
Contades and his nineteen Bridges,--there is a difficult affair going
on. Above and below the Falls of Montmorenci, and their outflow into the
St. Lawrence: attempt on General Wolfe's part to penetrate through upon
the French, under Marquis de Montcalm, French Commander-in-chief, and to
get a stroke at Quebec and him. From the south side of the St. Lawrence,
nothing can be done upon Quebec, such the distance over. From Isle
d'Orleans and the north side, it is also impossible hitherto. Easy
enough to batter the Lower Town, from your ships and redoubts: but the
High Town towers aloft on its sheer pinnacles, inaccessible even to
cannon; looks down on the skilfulest British Admiral and Fleet as if
with an air of indifference,--trying him on dark nights with fire-ships,
fire-rafts, the cunningest kinds of pyrotechny, which he skilfully tows
aside.

"A strenuous thing, this of Wolfe's; though an unsuccessful. Towards
evening, the end of it; all Quebec assembled on the southern ramparts,
witnessing with intense interest; the sublime Falls of Montmorenci
gushing on, totally indifferent. For about a month past, General Wolfe,
with the proper equipments, and about 10,000 men, naval and military,
who was expressly selected by Pitt to besiege Quebec, and is dying to
succeed, has been trying every scheme to get into contact with it:--to
no purpose, so lofty, chasmy, rocky is the ground, cut by mountainous
precipices and torrent streams, branches of the grand St. Lawrence
River; so skilfully taken advantage of by Montcalm and his people, who
are at home here, and in regulars nearly equal Wolfe, not to speak of
Savages and Canadians, Wolfe's plan of the 31st was not ill laid; and
the execution has been zealous, seamen and landsmen alike of willing
mind;--but it met with accidents. Accidents in boating; then a still
worse accident on landing; the regiment of grenadiers, which crossed
below the Falls, having, so soon as landed, rushed off on the redoubt
there on their own score, without waiting for the two brigades that were
to cross and co-operate ABOVE the Falls! Which cut Wolfe to the heart;
and induced him, especially as the tide was making again, to give up
the enterprise altogether, and recall everybody, while it was yet time.
[_Gentleman's Magazine_ for 1759, pp. 470-473; Thackeray, i. 488.] Wolfe
is strict in discipline; loves the willing mind, none more, and can
kindle it among those about him; but he loves discipline withal, and
knows how fatal the too willing may be. For six weeks more there is toil
on the back of toil everywhere for poor Wolfe. He falls into fevers,
into miseries, almost into broken heart;--nothing sure to him but that
of doing his own poor utmost to the very death. After six weeks, we
shall perhaps hear of him again. Gliding swiftly towards death; but also
towards victory and the goal of all his wishes."

And now, after this flight half round the world, it is time we return
to Oder Country, and a Friedrich on the edge of formidable things there.
Next day after Beeskow, where we left him, he duly arrived at Mullrose;
was joined by Wedell there, August 6th; and is now at Wulkow,--"encamped
between Lebus and Wulkow," as we hear elsewhere;--quite in the environs
of Frankfurt and of great events.


FRIEDRICH TO GRAF VON FINKENSTEIN (Second Note).

WULKOW, 8th August, 1759.

"If you hear of firing to-morrow, don't be surprised; it is our
rejoicing for the Battle of Minden. I believe I shall have to keep you
in suspense some days yet. I have many arrangements to make; I find
great difficulties to surmount,--and it is required to save our Country,
not to lose it: I ought both to be more prudent and more enterprising
than ever. In a word, I will do and undertake whatever I find feasible
and possible. With all that, I see myself in the necessity of making
haste, to check the designs Haddick may have on Berlin. Adieu, MON CHER.
In a little, you will have either a DE PROFUNDIS or a TE DEUM.--F."
[_OEuvres de Frederic, _ xxv. 305, 306.]




Chapter IV.--BATTLE OF KUNERSDORF.

Sunday, July 29th, at Frankfurt-on-Oder divine worship was broken in
upon, and the poor City thrown into consternation, by actual advent,
or as good as advent, of the Russians: "On the Crossen road, close by;
coming, come!" And they did undeniably appear, next morning, in force;
on the opposite, eastern or Kunersdorf side of the River, on the top
of the Oder-Dam there; and demanded instant admission, under penalty of
general death by fire.

Within the Town stood Major Arnim, a Veteran of those parts, with 400
militia; these, with their muskets and with two cannon, are the only
defence of Frankfurt, The Town has Gates; but its walls, I doubt, are
mainly garden-walls and house-walls. On the eastern side, the River,
especially if you have cannon on the Bridge, gives it something of
protection; but on the western and all other sides, it is overhung by
heights. This Frankfurt, like its bigger Namesake on the Mayn, is known
as a busy trading place, its Fairs much frequented in those Eastern
parts; and is believed by the Russians to be far richer than it is. The
reader, as there happens to be ocular testimony extant, [Johann Zudwig
Kriele, SCHLACHT BEI KUNERSDORF, MIT &C. (Berlin, 1801). Kriele was
subsequent Pastor in the Parish, an excellent intelligent man: has
compiled in brief form, with an elaborate Chart too, a clear account of
everything, in the Battle and before and after it.] may like to see a
little how they behaved there.

"Arnim, taking survey of the Russian Party, values it, or what he can
see of it, at 1,000 [they really were 6,000]; keeps his Drawbridge up;
and answers stoutly enough, 'No.' Upon which, from the Oder-Dam, there
flies off one fiery grenado; one and no more,--which alighted in the
house of 'Mrs. Thielicke, a Baker's Widow, who was standing at the
door;'--killed poor Mrs. Thielicke, blew the house considerably to
wreck, but did not set fire to it. Amim, all the Magistrates entreating
him for the love of Heaven to leave them, is secretly shoving off his
two cannon to the Northern Gate; and in fact is making his packages
with full speed: 'Push for Custrin,' thinks Arnim, and save selves and
cannon, since no good is to be done here!'

"It was about 11 A.M. when the Thielicke grenado fell: obstinate Arnim
would by no means go; only packed all the faster. A second summons
came: still, No. For the third and last time the Russians then summon:
'Grenadoes, a hundred more of them lie ready, unless--!' 'We will, we
will; O merciful servant of Czarish Majesty!' passionately signify the
Magistrates. But Arnim is still negative, still keeps the Bridge up. One
of the hundred does go, by way of foretaste: this lighted 'near the
Ober Kirche, in the chimney of the Town Musikus;' brought the chimney
crashing down on him [fancy a man with some fineness of ear]; tore the
house a good deal to pieces, but again did not set it on fire. 'Your
obstinate Town can be bombarded, then,--cannot it?' observed the Russian
Messenger.--'Give us Free Withdrawal!' proposes Amim. 'No; you to
be Prisoners of War; Town at Czarish Majesty's discretion.' 'Never,'
answers Arnim (to the outward ear).--'Go, oh, for the love of Heaven,
go!' cry all Official people.

"Arnim, deaf to clamor, but steadily diligent in getting ready, does at
last go; through the Lebus Suburb, quick march; steady, yet at his best
step;--taking the Town-keys in his pocket, and leaving the Drawbridge
up. One is sorry for poor Arnim and his 400 Militia; whose conduct was
perfect, under difficulties and alarms; but proved unsuccessful. The
terrified Magistrates, finding their Keys gone, and the conflagrative
Russians at their gates, got blacksmiths on the instant; smote down, by
chisel and mallet, the locked Drawbridge, smote open the Gates: 'Enter,
O gracious Sirs; and may Czarish Majesty have mercy on us!' So that
Arnim had small start for marchers on foot; and was overtaken about
half-way. Would not yield still, though the odds were overwhelming; drew
himself out on the best ground discoverable; made hot resistance; hot
and skilful; but in vain. About six in the evening, Arnim and Party
were brought back, Prisoners, to Frankfurt again,--self, surviving men,
cannons and all (self in a wounded state);--and 'were locked in various
Brew-houses;' little of careful surgery, I should fear. Poor Arnim; man
could do no more; and he has been unfortunate."

It is by no means our intention to describe the Iliad of miseries,
the agitations, terrors and disquietudes, the tribulation and utter
harrowing to despair, which poor Frankfurt underwent, incessantly from
that day forward, for about five weeks to come. "The furnishings of
victual [Russian stock quite out] were to an inconceivable amount;
surrender of arms, of linens, cloths, of everything useful to a hungry
Army; above all things, of horses, so that at last there were but four
horses left in all Frankfurt; and"--But we must not go into details.

"On the second day, besides all this," what will be significant of it
all, "there was exacted 'ransom of 600,000 thalers (90,000 pounds), or
you shall be delivered to the Cossacks!' Frankfurt has not above 12,000
inhabitants within its bounds; here is a sudden poll-tax of 7 pounds
10s. per head. Frankfurt has not such a sum; the most rigorous
collection did not yield above the tenth part of it. And more than once
those sanguinary vagabonds were openly drawn out, pitch-link in hand:
'The 90,000 pounds or--!' Civic Presidency Office in Frankfurt was not a
bed of roses. The poor Magistrates rushed distractedly about; wrung out
moneys to the last drop; moneys, and in the end plate from those that
had it; went in tearful deputation to General Soltikof,--a severe proud
kind of man, capable perhaps of being flattered,--who usually locked
them up instead. Magistrates were locked in Russian ward, at one time,
for almost a week; sat in the blazing sun; if you try for the shade of
a tree, the sentry handles arms upon you;--and were like to die. To me,
Kriele, it is a miracle how the most of us lived; nay we never really
wanted food, so kind was Providence, so generous our poor neighbors out
of all the Towns round. The utmost of money that could be raised was
6,000 pounds; nothing but some little of plate, and our Bill for the
remainder. Soltikof, a high kind of gentleman, saw at last how it
stood; let the Magistrates out of ward; sent back the plate--'Nothing of
that!'--nay, Czarish Majesty was herself generous; and FORGAVE the Bill,
on our petition, next Year. Cossacks, indeed, were a plunderous wild
crew; but the Russians kept them mostly without the gates. The regular
Russians were civil and orderly, officers and men,--greatly beyond the
Austrians in behavior." [Kriele, _Schlacht bei Kunersdorf;_ pp. 1-15 (in
compressed state).] By these few traits conceive Frankfurt: this, now
forgotten in most books, is a background on which things were transacted
still memorable to everybody.

"Friday, August 3d, General Loudon came to hand: arrived early, in the
Guben (or Western) Suburb, his 18,000 and he. In high spirits naturally,
and somewhat exultant to have evaded Friedrich; but found a reception
that surprised him. The Russians had been living in the hope of
junction; but still more vividly in that of meal. 'Auxiliaries;
humph,--only 18,000 of them; how much welcomer had been as many
hundredweights of meal!' Loudon had pushed his baggage direct into
Frankfurt; and likewise a requisition of such and such proviants,
weights of meal and the like, in exuberant amount, to be furnished
straightway by the City: neither of which procedures would the
Russians hear of for a moment. 'Out with you!' said they roughly to the
baggage-people: 'quarter in the Guben Suburb, or where you like; not
here!' And with regard to the requisition of proviant, they answered
in a scornful angry key, 'Proviant? You too without it? You have not
brought us meal, according to covenant; instead of meal, you bring us
18,000 new eaters, most of them on horse-back,--Satan thank you! From
Frankfurt be very certain you can get no ounce of meal; Frankfurt is our
own poor meal-bag, dreadfully scanty: stay outside, and feed where and
how you can!'

"All this, Loudon, though of hot temper, easily capable of rising to
the fierce point, had to endure in silence, for the common interest.
Loudon's own table is furnished from Frankfurt; no other Austrian man's:
all others have to shift how they can. Sad requisitioning needed, and
sad plunder to supplement it: the Austrian behavior was very bad, say
the Frankfurters; 'in particular, they had burnt gradually all the
corn-mills in the country; within many miles not one mill standing
when they left us,'--and four horses all the conveyance power we had.
Soltikof lodges in great pomp, much soldiery and cannon parading before
his doors; not an undignified man, or an inhuman or essentially foolish,
but very high in his ways, and distasteful to Austrian dignitaries."

The Russian Army lies mainly across Oder; encamped on the Judenberg, and
eastward there, along the Heights, near three miles, to Kunersdorf and
beyond. They expect Friedrich at the gates of Frankfurt shortly; know
well that they cannot defend Frankfurt. They calculate that Friedrich
will attack them in their Judenberg Encampment, but hope they are nearly
ready for him there. Loudon, from the Guben Suburb, will hasten across,
at any moment;--welcome on such fighting occasion, though ill seen
when the question is of eating! The Russians have their Wagenburg on an
Island southward, farther up the River; they have three Pontoon Bridges
leading thither, a free retreat should they be beaten. And in the
mean while are intrenching themselves, as only Daun would,--cannon and
redoubts all round those Heights;--and except it be screwing Frankfurt
to do its impossible duty, and carting provender with all the horses
except four, have not much farther to do but wait till the King come.
Which will be speedily, it is probable!--

Wednesday, August 8th, Russian and Austrian Generals, a cheerful party
of them, had rendezvoused at FISCHERS MUHLE; a Mill not yet burnt, and a
pleasant Tavern as well; in one of the prettiest valleys in the Western
Environs;--intending to dine there, and have a pleasant day. But the
Miller's Boy runs in upon them, wide-eyed, "HIMMEL UND ERDE, Prussian
Hussars!" It was in verity Prussian Hussars; the King of Prussia with
them in person. He is come out reconnoitring,--the day after his arrival
in those parts. The pleasuring Generals, Russian and Austrian, sprang to
horseback at their swiftest,--hope of dinner gone futile, except to the
intervening Prussian Hussars;--and would have all been captured, but
for that Miller's Boy; whose Mill too was burnt before long. This gallop
home of the undined Generals into Frankfurt was the first news we poor
Frankfurters had of the King's arrival.

The King has been punctual to his reckoning: he picked up Wedell at
Mullrose,--not too cordial to Wedell's people: "None of you speak to
those beaten wretches," ordered he; "till perhaps they wipe off
their Zullichau stain!" On the 7th, Friedrich advanced to Frankfurt
neighborhood; took Camp between Wulkow and Lebus;--and has just been
out reconnoitring. And has raised, fancy what emotion in poor Frankfurt
lying under its nightmare! "Next day, August 9th, from Wulkow-Lebus hand,
we" of Frankfurt, "heard a great firing; cannon-salvos, musket-volleys:
'Nothing of fight,' the Russian Officers told us; 'it is the King of
Prussia doing joy-fire for Minden,' of which we till now knew nothing."

Friedrich, on survey of this Russian-Austrian Army, some 90,000 in
number, with such posts, artilleries, advantages, judges that he,
counting only 40,000, is not strong enough. And, indeed, had so
anticipated, and already judged; and, accordingly, has Finck on march
hitherward again,--Berlin must take its risk, Saxony must shift for
itself in the interim. Finck is due in two days,--not here at Lebus
precisely, but at another place appointed; Finck will raise him to
50,000; and then business can begin! Contrary to Russian expectation,
Friedrich does not attack Frankfurt; seems quite quiet in his
cantonments;--he is quietly (if one knew it) making preparations
farther down the River. About Reitwein, between this and Custrin, there
arrangements are proceeding, by no means of a showy sort.

The Russian-Austrian Army quits Frankfurt, leaving only some hundreds
of garrison: Loudon moves across, Soltikof across; to the Oder-Dam and
farther; and lie, powerfully intrenched, on those Kunersdorf Heights,
and sandy Moorlands, which go eastward at right-angles to Oder-Dam. One
of the strongest Camps imaginable. All round there, to beyond Kunersdorf
and back again, near three miles each way, they have a ring of redoubts,
and artillery without end. And lie there, in order of battle, or nearly
so; ready for Friedrich, when he shall attack, through Frankfurt or
otherwise. They face to the North (Reitwein way, as it happens); to
their rear, and indeed to their front, only not so close, are woods and
intricate wilds. Loudon has the left flank; that is to say, Loudon's
left hand is towards the Oder-Dam and Frankfurt; he lies at the ROTHE
VORWERK ("Red Grange," a Farmstead much mentioned just now); rather
to northwestward of the Jew Hill and Jew Churchyard (JUDENBERG and
JUDENKIRCHHOF, likewise much mentioned); and in advance of the general
Mass. Soltikof's head-quarter, I rather understand, is on the right
wing; probably in Kunersdorf itself, or beyond that Village; there, at
least, our highly important Russian right wing is; there, elaborately
fortified; and, half a mile farther, ends,--on the edge of steep dells;
the Russian brink of which is strongly fringed with cannon, while
beyond, on the farther brink, they have built an abatis; so making
assurance doubly sure. Looking to the northward all these 90,000; their
left rather southward of Frankfurt Bridge, over which Friedrich will
probably arrive. Leftward, somewhat to rearward, they have bridges of
their own; should anything sinister befall; three bridges which lead
into that Oder Island, and the Russian Wagenburg there.

August 10th, Finck, punctual to time, arrives in the neighborhood of
Reitwein (which is some ten miles down stream from Lebus, from Frankfurt
perhaps fifteen); Friedrich, the same day, is there before him; eager
to complete the Bridges, and get to business. One Bridge is of pontoons;
one of "Oder-boats floated up from Custrin." Bridges are not begun till
nightfall, lest eyes be abroad; are ready in the minimum of time. And
so, during the same night of the 10th, all the Infantry, with their
artilleries and battle-furnitures, pour over in two columns; the
Cavalry, at the due point of time, riding by a ford short way to the
right. And at four, in the gray of the August morning (Saturday, 11th
August, 1759), all persons and things find themselves correctly across;
ranked there, in those barren, much-indented "Pasture-grounds of Goritz"
or of OEtscher; intending towards Kunersdorf; ready for unfolding into
order of battle there. They leave their heavy baggage at Goritz, Wunsch
to guard the Bridges and it; and, in succinct condition, are all under
way. At one in the afternoon we are got to Leissow and Bischofsee;
scrubby hamlets (as the rest all are), not above two miles from
Kunersdorf. The August day is windless, shiny, sultry; man and horse are
weary with the labors, and with the want of sleep: we decide to bivouac
here, and rest on the scrubby surface, heather or whatever it is, till
to-morrow.

Finck is Vanguard, ahead short way, and with his left on a bit of lake
or bog; the Army is in two lines, with its right on Leissow, and has
Cavalry in the kind of wood which there is to rear. Friedrich, having
settled the positions, rides out reconnoitring; hither, thither,
over the Heights of Trettin. "The day being still hot, he suffers
considerably from thirst [it is our one Anecdote] in that arid tract: at
last a Peasant does bring him, direct from the fountain, a jug of pure
cold water; whom, lucky man, the King rewarded with a thaler; and not
only so, but, the man being intelligent of the localities, took with him
to answer questions." Readers too may desire to gain some knowledge of
the important ground now under survey.

"Frankfurt, a very ancient Town, not a very beautiful," says my Note,
"stands on an alluvium which has been ground down from certain clay
Hills on the left bank of Oder. It counted about 12,000 inhabitants in
Friedrich's time; has now perhaps about 20,000; not half the bulk of
its namesake on the Mayn; but with Three great Fairs annually, and much
trade of the rough kind. On this left or west bank of Oder the country
is arable, moderately grassy and umbrageous, the prospect round you
not unpleasant; but eastward, over the River, nothing can be more in
contrast. Oder is of swift current, of turbid color, as it rolls under
Frankfurt Bridge,--Wooden Bridge, with Dam Suburb at the end;--a River
treeless, desolate, as you look up and down; which has, evidently,
often changed its course, since grinding down that alluvium as site for
Frankfurt; and which, though now holding mainly to northward, is still
given to be erratic, and destructive on the eastern low grounds,--had
not the Frankfurters built an 'Oder-Dam' on that side; a broad strong
Earth-mound, running for many miles, and confining its floods. Beyond
the Dam there are traces of an 'Old Oder (ALTE ODER);' and, in fact,
Oder, in primeval and in recent time, has gone along, many-streamed;
indenting, quarrying, leaving lakelets, quagmires, miscellaneous sandy
tumult, at a great rate, on that eastern shore. Making of it one of
the unloveliest scenes of chaotic desolation anywhere to be met
with;--fallen unlovelier than ever in our own more recent times.

"What we call the Heights of Kunersdorf is a broad Chain of Knolls;
coming out, at right-angles, or as a kind of spur, from the eastern high
grounds; direct towards Oder and Frankfurt. Mill-Hill (MUHLBERG) is
the root or easternmost part of this spur. From the Muhlberg, over
Kunersdorf, to Oder-Dam, which is the whole length of the spur, or Chain
of Knolls, will be little short of four miles; the breadth of the Chain
is nowhere one mile,--which is its grand defect as a Camp: 'too narrow
for manoeuvring in.' Here, atop and on the three sides of this Block
of Knolls, was fought the furious Battle of Kunersdorf [to be fought
to-morrow], one of the most furious ever known. A Block of Knolls
memorable ever since.

"To all appearance: it was once some big Island or chain of Islands
in the Oder deluges: it is still cut with sudden hollows,--KUHGRUND
(Cow-Hollow), TIEFE WEG (Deep Way), and westernmost of all, and
most important for us here, HOHLE GRUND (Big Hollow, let us call it;
'LOUDON'S Hollow' people subsequently called it);--and is everywhere
strangely tumbled up into knolls blunt or sharp, the work of primeval
Oder in his rages. In its highest knolls,--of which let readers note
specially the Spitzberg, the Muhlberg, the Judenberg,--it rises nowhere
to 150 feet; perhaps the general height of it may be about 100. On each
side of it, especially on the north, the Country is of most intricate
character: bushy, scraggy, with brooklets or muddy oozings wandering
about, especially with a thing called the HUNERFLIESS (Hen-Floss), which
springs in the eastern woods, and has inconceivable difficulty to
get into Oder,--if it get at all! This was a sore Floss to Friedrich
to-morrow. Hen-Floss struggles, painfully meandering and oozing, along
the northern side (sometimes close, sometimes not) of our Chain of
Knolls: along the south side of it (in our time, through the middle
of it) goes the Highway to Reppen ["From that Highway will his attack
come!" thought the Russians, always till to-day]: on the north, to
Leissow, to Trettin," where Friedrich is now on survey, "go various
wheel-tracks, but no firm road. A most intricate unlovely Country.
Withered bent-grasses, heath, perhaps gorse, and on both sides a great
deal of straggling Forest-wood, reaching eastward, and especially
southward, for many miles.

"For the rest," to our ill-luck in this place, "the Battlefield of
Kunersdorf has had a peculiar fate in the world; that of being blown
away by the winds! The then scene of things exists no longer; the
descriptions in the Old Books are gone hopelessly irrecognizable. In our
time, there is not anywhere a tract more purely of tumbled sand, than
all this between Kunersdorf and Dam Vorstadt; and you judge, without aid
of record or tradition, that it is greatly altered for the worse since
Friedrich's time,--some rabbit-colony, or other the like insignificancy,
eating out the roots, till all vegetation died, and the wind got hold
and set it dancing;--and that, in 1759, when Russian human beings
took it for a Camp, it must have been at least coherent, more or less;
covered, held together by some film of scrubby vegetation; not blowing
about in every wind as now! Kunersdorf stands with its northern end
pushed into that KUHGRUND (Cow-Hollow); which must then have been a
grassy place. Eastward of Kunersdorf the ground has still some skin of
peat, and sticks together: but westward, all that three miles, it is a
mere tumult of sand-hills, tumbled about in every direction (so diligent
have the conies been, and then the winds); no gullet, or definite cut or
hollow, now traceable anywhere, but only an endless imbroglio of twisted
sand-heaps and sand-hollows, which continually alter in the wind-storms.
Sand wholly, and--except the strong paved Highway that now runs through
it (to Reppen, Meseritz and the Polish Frontier, and is strongly paved
till it get through Kunersdorf)--chaotic wholly; a scene of heaped
barrenness and horror, not to be matched but in Sahara; the features of
the Battle quite blown away, and indecipherable in our time.

"A hundred years ago, it would have some tattered skin,--of peat, of
heather and dwarf whins, with the sand cropping out only here and there.
So one has to figure it in Soltikof's day,--before the conies ruined
it. Which was not till within the last sixty years, as appears. Kriele's
Book (in 1801) still gives no hint of change: the KUHGRUND, which now
has nothing but dry sand for the most industrious ruminant, is still a
place of succulence and herbage in Kriele's time; 'Deep Way,' where 'at
one point two carts could not pass,' was not yet blown out of existence,
but has still 'a Well in it' for Kriele; HOHLE GRUND (since called
Loudon's Hollow), with the Jew Hill and Jew Churchyard beyond, seem
tolerable enough places to Kriele. Probably not unlike what the
surrounding Country still is. A Country of poor villages, and of wild
ground, flat generally, and but tolerably green; with lakelets, bushes,
scrubs, and intricate meandering little runlets and oozelets; and in
general with more of Forest so called than now is:--this is Kunersdorf
Chain of Knolls; Soltikof's Intrenched Camp at present; destined to
become very famous in the world, after lying so long obscure under Oder
and its rages." [TOURIST'S NOTE (Autumnn, 1852).]

From the Knolls of Trettin, that Saturday afternoon, Friedrich takes
view of the Russian Camp. All lying bright enough there; from Muhlberg
to Judenberg, convenient to our glass; between us and the evening Sun.
Batteries most abundant, difficulties great: Soltikof just ahead here,
72,000: Loudon at the Red Grange yonder, on their extreme left, with
18,000 more. An uncommonly strong position for 90,000 against 50,000.
One thing strikes Friedrich: On front in this northern side, close by
the base of the Russian Camp, runs--for the present away FROM Oder, but
intending to join it elsewhere--a paltry little Brook, "Hen-Floss" so
called, with at least two successive Mills on it (KLEINE MUHLE, GROSSE
MUHLE); and on the northern shore of it, spilling itself out into a
wet waste called ELSBRUCH (Alder Waste), which is especially notable
to Friedrich. ALDER Waste? Watery, scrubby; no passage there, thinks
Friedrich; which his Peasant with the water-jug confirms. "Tell me,
however," inquires Friedrich, with strictness, "From the Red Grange
yonder, where General Loudon is, if you wished to get over to the HOHLE
GRUND, or to the Judenberg, would you cross that Hen-Floss?" "It is not
crossable, your Majesty; one has to go round quite westward by the
Dam." "What, from Rothe Vorwerk to Big Hollow, no passage, say you; no
crossing?" "None, your Majesty," insists the Peasant;--who is not aware
that the Russians have made one of firm trestles and logs, and use it
daily for highway there; an error of some interest to Friedrich within
the next twenty-four hours!

Friedrich himself does not know this bit of ground: but there is with
him, besides the Peasant, a Major Linden, whose Regiment used to lie in
Frankfurt, of whom Friedrich makes minute questioning. Linden answers
confidently; has been over all this tract a hundred times; "but knows
it only as a hunter," says Tempelhof, [Tempelhof, iii. 186.] "not as a
soldier," which he ought to have done. His answers are supposed to
have misled Friedrich on various points, and done him essential damage.
Friedrich's view of the case, that evening, is by no means so despondent
as might be imagined: he regards the thing as difficult, not as
impossible,--and one of his anxieties is, that he be not balked of
trying it straightway. Retiring to his hut in Bischofsee, he makes two
Dispositions, of admirable clearness, brevity, and calculated for two
contingencies: [Given in Tempelhof, iii. 182, 183.] That of the
enemy retaining his now posture; and That of the enemy making off for
Reppen;--which latter does not at all concern us, as matters turned! Of
the former the course will unfold itself to us, in practice, shortly. At
2 A.M. Friedrich will be on foot again, at 3 on march again.--The last
phenomenon, at Bischofsee this night, is some sudden glare of disastrous
light rising over the woods:--"Russians burning Kunersdorf!" as
neighbors are sorry to hear. That is the finale of much Russian
rearranging and tumbling, this day; that barbarous burning of
Kunersdorf, before going to bed. To-morrow various other poor Villages
got burnt by them, which they had better have left standing.

The Russians, on hearing that Friedrich was across at Goritz, and coming
on them from the north side, not from Frankfurt by the Reppen Highway,
were in great agitation. Not thrown into terror, but into manifold
haste, knowing what hasty adversary there was. Endless readjustments
they have to make; a day of tumultuous business with the Russians, this
Saturday, 11th, when the news reached them. "They inverted their front
[say all the Books but Friedrich's own]: Not coming by the Reppen
Highway, then!" think they. And thereupon changed rear to front, as at
Zorndorf, but more elaborately;--which I should not mention, were it
not that hereby their late "right wing on the Muhlberg" has, in strict
speech, become their "left," and there is ambiguity and discrepancy in
some of the Books, should any poor reader take to studying them on this
matter. Changed their front; which involves much interior changing;
readjusting of batteries and the like. That of burning Kunersdorf was
the barbaric winding up of all this: barbaric, and, in the military
sense, absurd; poor Kunersdorf could have been burnt at any moment,
if needful; and to the Russians the keeping of it standing was the
profitable thing, as an impediment to Friedrich in his advance there.
They have laid it flat and permeable; ashes all of it,--except the
Church only, which is of stone; not so combustible, and may have uses
withal. Has perhaps served as temporary lock-up, prison for the night,
to some of those Frankfurt Deputations and their troublesome wailings;
and may serve as temporary hospital to-morrow, who knows?

Readjustments in the Russian Camp were manifold: but these are as
nothing, in the tumultuous business of the day. Carting of their
baggage, every article of value, to that safe Wagenburg in the River;
driving of cattle,--the very driving of cattle through Frankfurt,
endless herds of them, gathered by the Cossacks from far and wide,
"lasted for four-and-twenty hours." Oxen in Frankfurt that day were
at the rate of ten shillings per head. Often enough you were offered a
full-grown young steer for a loaf of bread; nay the Cossacks, when there
was absolutely no bidder, would slaughter down the animal, leave its
carcass in the streets, and sell the hide for a TYMPF,--fivepence (very
bad silver at present). Never before or since was seen in Frankfurt such
a Saturday, for bellowing and braying, and raging and tumulting, all
through the day and through the night; ushering in such a Sunday too!

Sunday about 3 in the morning, Friedrich is on march again,--Russians
still in their place; and Disposition FIRST, not SECOND at all, to be
our rule of action! Friedrich, in Two Columns, marches off, eastward
through the woods, as if for Reppen quite away from the Russians and
their Muhlberg; but intending to circle round at the due point, and come
down upon their right flank there (left flank, as he persists to call
it), out of the woods, and clasp it in his arms in an impressive,
unexpected way. In Two Columns; which are meant, as usual, to be the Two
Lines of Battle: Seidlitz, with chosen Cavalry, is at the head of
Column First, and will be Left Wing, were we on the ground; Eugen of
Wurtemberg, closing the rear of Column First, will, he, or Finck and he
together, be Right Wing. That is the order of march;--order of BATTLE,
we shall find, had to alter itself somewhat, for reasons extremely
valid!

Finck with his 12,000 is to keep his present ground; to have two good
batteries got ready, each on its knoll ahead, which shall wait silent
in the interim: Finck to ride out reconnoitring, with many General
Officers, and to make motions and ostentations; in a word, to persuade
the Russians that here is the Main Army coming on from the north. All
which Finck does; avoiding, as his orders were, any firing, or serious
commencement of business, till the King reappear out of the woods. The
Russians give Finck and his General Officers a cannon salvo, here and
there, without effect, and get no answer. "The King does not see his
way, then, after all?" think the Russians. Their Cossacks go scouring
about; on the southern side, "burn Schwetig and Reipzig," without the
least advantage to themselves: most of the Cavalry, and a regiment or
two of excellent Austrian Grenadiers, are with Loudon, near the Red
Grange, in front of the Russian extreme left;--but will have stept over
into Big Hollow at a moment of crisis!

The King's march, through the Forest of Reppen, was nothing like so
expeditious as had been expected. There are thickets, intricacies,
runlets, boggy oozes; indifferent to one man well mounted, but vitally
important to 30,000 with heavy cannon to bring on. Boggy oozings
especially,--there is one dirty stream or floss (HUNERFLIESS, Hen-Floss)
which wanders dismally through those recesses, issuing from the far
south, with dirty daughters dismally wandering into it, and others that
cannot get into it (being of the lake kind): these, in their weary,
circling, recircling course towards Oder,--FAULE LAACKE (Foul Lake,
LITHER-MERE, as it were), Foul Bridge, Swine's Nook (SCHWEINEBUCKT), and
many others,--occasion endless difficulty. Whether Major Linden was shot
that day, or what became of him after, I do not know: but it was pity he
had not studied the ground with a soldier's eye instead of a hunter's!
Plumping suddenly, at last, upon Hen-Floss itself, Friedrich has to
turn angularly; angularly, which occasions great delay: the heavy cannon
(wall-guns brought from Custrin) have twelve horses each, and cannot
turn among the trees, but have to be unyoked, reyoked, turned round by
hand:--in short, it was eight in the morning before Friedrich arrived
at the edge of the wood, on the Klosterberg, Walckberg, and other woody
BERGS or knolls, within reach of Muhlberg, and behind the preliminary
abatis there (abatis which was rather of service to him than
otherwise);--and began privately building his batteries.

At eight o'clock he, with Column First, which is now becoming Line First
(CENTRE of Line First, if we reckon Finck as RIGHT-WING), is there;
busy in that manner: Column Second, which was to have been Rear Line, is
still a pretty way behind; and has many difficulties before it gets into
Kunersdorf neighborhood, or can (having wriggled itself into a kind of
LEFT-WING) co-operate on the Russian Position from the south side. On
the north side, Finck has been ready these five hours.--Friedrich speeds
the building of his batteries: "Silent, too; the Russians have not yet
noticed us!" By degrees the Russians do notice something; shoot out
Cossacks to reconnoitre. Cossacks in quantity; who are so insolent, and
venture so very near, our gunners on the north battery give them a blast
of satisfactory grape-shot; one and then another, four blasts in all,
satisfactory to the gunner mind,--till the King's self, with a look,
with a voice, came galloping: "Silence, will you!" The Russians took no
offence; still considering Finck to be the main thing and Friedrich some
scout party,--till at last,

Half-past eleven, everything being ready on the Walck Hill, Friedrich's
batteries opened there, in a sudden and volcanic way. Volcanically
answered by the Russians, as soon as possible; who have 72 guns on this
Muhlberg, and are nothing loath. Upon whom Finck's battery is opening
from the north, withal: Friedrich has 60 cannon hereabouts; on the
Walckberg, on the LITTLE Spitzberg (called SEIDLITZ HILL ever since);
all playing diligently on the head and south shoulder of this Muhlberg:
while Finck's battery opens on the north shoulder (could he but get near
enough). Volcanic to a degree all these; nor are the Russians wanting,
though they get more and more astonished: Tempelhof, who was in it, says
he never, except at Torgau next Year, heard a louder cannonade. Loud
exceedingly; and more or less appalling to the Russian imagination:
but not destructive in proportion; the distance being too
considerable,--"1,950 paces at the nearest," as Tempelhof has since
ascertained by measuring. Friedrich's two batteries, however, as they
took the Russians in the flank or by enfilade, did good execution.
"The Russian guns were ill-pointed; the Russian batteries wrong-built;
batteries so built as did not allow them sight of the Hollow they were
meant to defend." [Tempelhof, iii. 186, 187.]

After above half an hour of this, Friedrich orders storm of the
Muhlberg: Forward on it, with what of enfilading it has had! Eight
grenadier Battalions, a chosen vanguard appointed for the work (names of
Battalions all given, and deathless in the Prussian War-Annals), tramp
forth on this service: cross the abatis, which the Russian grenadoes
have mostly burnt; down into the Hollow. Steady as planets; "with
a precision and coherency," says Tempelhof, "which even on the
parade-ground would have deserved praises. Once well in the Hollow,
they suffer nothing; though the blind Russian fire, going all over their
heads, rages threefold:" suffered nothing in the Hollow; nor till they
reached almost the brow of the Muhlberg, and were within a hundred steps
of the Russian guns. These were the critical steps, these final ones;
such torrents of grape-shot and musket-shot and sheer death bursting
out, here at last, upon the Eight Battalions, as they come above ground.
Who advanced, unwavering, all the faster,--speed one's only safety. They
poured into the Russian gunners and musketry battalions one volley of
choicest quality, which had a shaking effect; then, with level bayonets,
plunge on the batteries: which are all empty before we can leap
into them; artillery-men, musketeer battalions, all on wing; general
whirlpool spreading. And so, in ten minutes, the Muhlberg and its guns
are ours. Ever since Zorndorf, an idea had got abroad, says Tempelhof,
that the Russians would die instead of yielding; but it proved far
otherwise here. Down as far as Kunersdorf, which may be about a mile
westward, the Russians are all in a whirl; at best hanging in tatters
and clumps, their Officers struggling against the flight; "mixed groups
you would see huddled together a hundred men deep." The Russian Left
Wing is beaten: had we our cannon up here, our cavalry up here, the
Russian Army were in a bad way!

This is a glorious beginning; completed, I think, as far almost as
Kunersdorf by one o'clock: and could the iron continue to be struck
while it is at white-heat as now, the result were as good as certain.
That was Friedrich's calculation: but circumstances which he had not
counted on, some which he could not count on, sadly retarded the matter.
His Left Wing (Rear Line, which should now have been Left Wing) from
southward, his Right Wing from northward, and Finck farther west,
were now on the instant to have simultaneously closed upon the beaten
Russians, and crushed them altogether. The Right Wing, conquerors of the
Muhlberg, are here: but neither Finck nor the Left can be simultaneous
with them. Finck and his artillery are much retarded with the Flosses
and poor single Bridges; and of the Left Wing there are only some
Vanguard Regiments capable of helping ("who drove out the Russians from
Kunersdorf Churchyard," as their first feat),--no Main Body yet for
a long while. Such impediments, such intricacies of bog and bush! The
entire Wing does at last get to the southeast of Kunersdorf, free of the
wood; but finds (contrary to Linden with his hunter eye) an intricate
meshwork of meres and straggling lakes, two of them in the burnt
Village itself; no passing of these except on narrow isthmuses, which
necessitate change of rank and re-change; and our Left Wing cannot, with
all its industry, "march up," that is, arrive at the enemy in fighting
line, without the painfulest delays.

And then the getting forward of our cannon! On the Muhlberg itself
the seventy-two Russian guns, "owing to difference of calibre," or
artillery-men know what, cannot be used by us: a few light guns,
Tempelhof to one of them, a poor four in all, with perhaps 100 shot to
each, did, by the King's order, hasten to the top of the Muhlberg; and
never did Tempelhof see a finer chance for artillery than there. Soft
sloping ground, with Russians simmering ahead of you, all the way
down to Kunersdorf, a mile long: by horizontal pointing, you had such
reboundings (RICOCHETS); and carried beautiful execution! Tempelhof soon
spent his hundred shots: but it was not at once that any of our sixty
heavy guns could be got up thither. Twelve horses to each: fancy it, and
what baffling delays here and elsewhere;--and how the Russian whirlpool
was settling more and more, in the interim! And had, in part, settled;
in part, got through to the rear, and been replaced by fresh troops!

Friedrich's activities, and suppressed and insuppressible impatiences
in this interval, are also conceivable, though not on record for us. The
swiftest of men; tied down, in this manner, with the blaze of perfect
victory ahead, were the moments NOT running out! Slower or faster, he
thinks (I suppose), the victory is his; and that he must possess his
soul till things do arrive. It was in one and more of those embargoed
intervals that he wrote to Berlin [Preuss, ii. 212 n.] (which is
waiting, as if for life or death, the issue of this scene, sixty miles
distant): "Russians beaten; rejoice with me!" Four successive couriers,
I believe, with messages to that effect; and at last a Fifth with
dolefully contrary news!--

In proportion as the cannon and other necessaries gradually got in, the
Fight flamed up from its embers more and more: and there ensued,--the
Russians being now ranked again (fronting eastward now) "in many lines,"
and very fierce,--a second still deadlier bout; Friedrich furiously
diligent on their front and right flank; Finck, from the Alder Waste,
battering and charging (uphill, and under difficulties from those
Flosses and single Bridges) on their left flank. This too, after long
deadly efforts on the Prussian part, ended again clearly in their
favor; their enemies broken a second time, and driven not only out of
Kunersdorf and the Kuhgrund, but some say almost to the foot of the
Judenberg,--what can only be very partially true. Broken portions of the
Russian left flank,--some of Finck's people, in their victorious wrath,
may have chased these very far: but it is certain the general Russian
mass rallied again a long way short of the Judenberg;--though, the
ground being all obliterated by the rabbits and the winds, nobody can
now know with exactitude where.

And indeed the Battle, from this point onwards, becomes blurred and
confused to us, only its grosser features visible henceforth. Where the
"Big Spitzberg" was (so terribly important soon), nobody can now
tell me, except from maps. London's motions too are obscure, though
important. I believe his grenadiers had not yet been in the fire; but am
certain they are now come out of Big Hollow; fresh for the rescue;
and have taken front rank in this Second Rally that is made. Loudon's
Cavalry Loudon himself has in hand, and waits with them in a fit place.
He has 18,000 fresh men; and an eye like few others on a field of war.
Loudon's 18,000 are fresh: of the Prussians that can by no means be
said. I should judge it must be 3 of the afternoon. The day is windless,
blazing; one of the hottest August days; and "nobody, for twelve hours
past, could command a drink of water:" very fresh the poor Prussians
cannot be! They have done two bouts of excellent fighting; tumbled the
Russians well back, stormed many batteries; and taken in all 180 cannon.

At this stage, it appears, Finck and many Generals, Seidlitz among the
others, were of opinion that, in present circumstances, with troops so
tired, and the enemy nearly certain to draw off, if permitted, here
had been enough for one day, and that there ought to be pause till
to-morrow. Friedrich knew well the need of rest; but Friedrich,
impatient of things half-done, especially of Russians half-beaten, would
not listen to this proposal; which was reckoned upon him as a grave and
tragic fault, all the rest of his life; though favorable judges, who
were on the ground, Tempelhof for one, [Tempelhof, iii. 194.] are
willing to prove that pausing here--at the point we had really got to, a
little beyond the Kuhgrund, namely; and not a couple of miles westward,
at the foot of the Jew Hill, where vague rumor puts us--was not feasible
or reasonable. Friedrich considers with himself, "Our left wing has
hardly yet been in fire!" calls out the entire left wing, foot
and horse: these are to emerge from their meshwork of Lakes about
Kunersdorf, and bear a hand along with us on the Russian front
here,--especially to sweep away that raging Battery they have on the Big
Spitzberg, and make us clear of it. The Big Spitzberg lies to south and
ahead of the Russian right as now ranked; fatally covers their right
flank, and half ruins the attack in front. Big Spitzberg is blown
irrecognizable in our time; but it was then an all-important thing.

The left-wing Infantry thread their lake-labyrinth, the soonest
possible; have to rank again on the hither side, under a tearing fire
from that Spitzberg; can then at last, and do, storm onwards, upwards;
but cannot, with their best efforts, take the Spitzberg: and have to
fall back under its floods of tearing case-shot, and retire out of
range. To Friedrich's blank disappointment: "Try it you, then, Seidlitz;
you saved us at Zorndorf!" Seidlitz, though it is an impossible problem
to storm batteries with horse, does charge in for the Russian flank,
in spite of its covering battery: but the torrents of grape-shot are
insufferable; the Seidlitz people, torn in gaps, recoil, whirl round,
and do not rank again till beyond the Lakes of Kunersdorf. Seidlitz
himself has got wounded, and has had to be carried away.

And, in brief, from this point onwards all goes aback with the Prussians
more and more. Repeated attempts on that Spitzberg battery prove
vain; to advance without it is impossible. Friedrich's exertions
are passionate, almost desperate; rallying, animating, new-ordering;
everywhere in the hottest of the fire. "Thrice he personally led on
the main attack." He has had two horses shot down under him; mounting
a third, this too gets a bullet in an artery of the neck, and is about
falling, when two Adjutants save the King. In his waistcoat-pocket some
small gold case (ETUI) has got smitten flat by a bullet, which would
otherwise have ended matters. The people about him remonstrate on such
exposure of a life beyond value; he answers curtly, "We must all of
us try every method here, to win the Battle: I, like every other, must
stand to my duty here!" These, and a second brief word or two farther
on, are all of articulate that we hear from him this day.

Friedrich's wearied battalions here on the Heights, while the Spitzberg
to left goes so ill, fight desperately; but cannot prevail farther; and
in spite of Friedrich's vehement rallyings and urgings, gradually lose
ground,--back at last to Kunersdorf and the Kuhgrund again. The Loudon
grenadiers, and exclaimed masses of fresh Russians, are not to be
broken, but advance and advance. Fancy the panting death-labors, and
spasmodic toilings and bafflings, of those poor Prussians and their
King! Nothing now succeeding; the death-agony now come; all hearts
growing hopeless; only one heart still seeing hope. The Spitzberg is
impossible; tried how often I know not. Finck, from the Alder Waste,
with his Infantry, attacks, and again attacks; without success: "Let the
Cavalry go round, then, and try there. Seidlitz we have not; you Eugen
of Wurtemberg lead them!" Eugen leads them (cuirassiers, or we will
forget what); round by the eastern end of the Muhlberg; then westward,
along the Alder Waste; finally southward, against the Russian flank,
himself foremost, and at the gallop for charging:--Eugen, "looking
round, finds his men all gone," and has to gallop the other way, gets
wounded to boot. Puttkammer, with Hussars, then tried it; Puttkammer was
shot dead, and his Hussars too could do nothing.

Back, slowly back, go the Prussians generally, nothing now succeeds with
them. Back to the Kuhgrund again; fairly over the steep brow there; the
Russians serrying their ranks atop, rearranging their many guns. There,
once more, rose frightful struggle; desperate attempt by the fordone
Prussians to retake that Height. "Lasted fifteen minutes, line to line
not fifty yards asunder;" such musketry,--our last cartridges withal.
Ardent Prussian parties trying to storm up; few ever getting to the top,
none ever standing there alive one minute. This was the death-agony of
the Battle. Loudon, waiting behind the Spitzberg, dashes forward now,
towards the Kuhgrund and our Left Flank. At sight of which a universal
feeling shivers through the Prussian heart, "Hope ended, then!"--and
their solid ranks rustle everywhere; and melt into one wild deluge,
ebbing from the place as fast as it can.

It is towards six o'clock; the sweltering Sun is now fallen low and
veiled; gray evening sinking over those wastes. "N'Y A-T-IL DONC PAS
UN BOUGRE DE BOULET QUI PUISSE M'ATTEINDREE (Is there no one b---- of a
ball that can reach me, then)?" exclaimed Friedrich in despair. Such a
day he had never thought to see. The pillar of the State, the Prussian
Army itself, gone to chaos in this manner. Friedrich still passionately
struggles, exhorts, commands, entreats even with tears, "Children, don't
forsake me, in this pinch (KINDER, VERLASSET HEUTE MICH, EUREN KONIG,
EUREN VATER, NICHT)!" [Kriele, p. 169.]--but all ears are deaf. On the
Muhlberg one regiment still stood by their guns, covering the retreat.
But the retreat is more and more a flight; "no Prussian Army was ever
seen in such a state." At the Bridges of that Hen-Floss, there was such
a crowding, all our guns got jammed; and had to be left, 165 of them of
various calibre, and the whole of the Russian 180 that were once in our
hands. Had the chase been vigorous, this Prussian Army had been heard
of no more. But beyond the Muhlberg, there was little or no pursuit;
through the wood the Army, all in chaos, but without molestation
otherwise, made for its Oder Bridges by the way it had come. [Tempelhof,
iii. 179-200; Retzow, ii. 80-115: in Seyfarth, _Beylagen,_ ii. 589-598,
_ Bericht von der am 12 August, 1759 bey Kunersdorf vorgefallenen
Schlacht_ (Official); and IB. 598-603, _Beschreibung der &c._ (by a
Private Hand): lucidly accurate both.]

Friedrich was among the last to quit the ground. He seemed stupefied
by the excess of his emotions; in no haste to go; uncertain whether
he would go at all. His adjutants were about him, and a small party
of Ziethen Hussars under Captain Prittwitz. Wild swarms of Cossacks
approached the place. "PRITTWITZ, ICH BIN VERLOREN (Prittwitz, I am
lost)!" remarked he. "NEIN, IHRO MAJESTAT!" answered Prittwitz with
enthusiasm; charged fiercely, he and his few, into the swarms of
Cossacks; cut them about, held them at bay, or sent them else-whither,
while the Adjutants seized Friedrich's bridle, and galloped off with
him. At OEtscher and the Bridges, Friedrich found of his late Army not
quite 3,000 men. Even Wunsch is not there till next morning. Wunsch
with his Party had, early in the afternoon, laid hold of Frankfurt,
as ordered; made the garrison prisoners, blocked the Oder Bridge; poor
Frankfurt tremulously thanking Heaven for him, and for such an omen. In
spite of their Wagenburg and these Pontoon-Bridges, it appears, there
would have been no retreat for the Russians except into Wunsch's cannon:
Wagenburg way, latish in the afternoon, there was such a scramble of
runaways and retreating baggage, all was jammed into impassability;
scarcely could a single man get through. In case of defeat, the
Russian Army would have had no chance but surrender or extermination.
[Tempelhof, iii. 194: in Retzow (ii. 110) is some dubious traditionary
stuff on the matter.] At dark, however, Wunsch had summons, so truculent
in style, he knew what it meant; and answering in words peremptorily,
"No" with a like emphasis, privately got ready again, and at midnight
disappeared. Got to Reitwein without accident.

Friedrich found at OEtscher nothing but huts full of poor wounded men,
and their miseries and surgeries;--he took shelter, himself, in a hut
"which had been plundered by Cossacks" (in the past days), but which had
fewer wounded than others, and could be furnished with some bundles of
dry straw. Kriele has a pretty Anecdote, with names and particulars, of
two poor Lieutenants, who were lying on the floor, as he entered this
hut. They had lain there for many hours; the Surgeons thinking them
desperate; which Friedrich did not. "ACH KINDER, Alas, children, you
are badly wounded, then?" "JA, your Majesty: but how goes the Battle?"
(Answer, evasive on this point): "Are you bandaged, though? Have you
been let blood?" "NEIN, EUER MAJESTAT, KEIN TEUFEL WILL UNS VERBINDEN
(Not a devil of them would bandage us)!" Upon which there is a Surgeon
instantly brought; reprimanded for neglect: "Desperate, say you? These
are young fellows; feel that hand, and that; no fever there: Nature
in such cases does wonders!" Upon which the leech had to perform his
function; and the poor young fellows were saved,--and did new fighting,
and got new wounds, and had Pensions when the War ended. [Kriele, pp.
169, 170; and in all the Anecdote-Books.] This appears to have been
Friedrich's first work in that hut at OEtscher. Here next is a Third
Autograph to Finkenstein, written in that hut, probably the first of
several Official things there:--


THE KING TO GRAF VAN FINKENSTEIN (at Berlin): Third Note.

OETSCHER, "12th August," 1759.

"I attacked the Enemy this morning about eleven; we beat him back to the
JUDENKIRCHHOF (Jew Churchyard,"--a mistake, but now of no moment), "near
Frankfurt. All my troops came into action, and have done wonders. I
reassembled them three times; at length, I was myself nearly taken
prisoner; and we had to quit the Field. My coat is riddled with bullets,
two horses were killed under me;--my misfortune is, that I am still
alive. Our loss is very considerable. Of an Army of 48,000 men, I have,
at this moment while I write, not more than 3,000 together; and am no
longer master of my forces. In Berlin you will do well to think of
your safety. It is a great calamity; and I will not survive it: the
consequences of this Battle will be worse than the Battle itself. I have
no resources more; and, to confess the truth, I hold all for lost. I
will not survive the destruction of my Country. Farewell forever
(ADIEU POUR JAMAIS).--F." [In orig. "CE 12," no other date (_OEuvres de
Frederic,_ xxv. 306).]

Another thing, of the same tragic character, is that of handing over
this Army to Finck's charge. Order there is to Finck of that tenor: and
along with it the following notable Autograph,--a Friedrich taking
leave both of Kingship and of life. The Autograph exists; but has no
date,--date of the Order would probably be still OETSCHER, 12th AUGUST;
date of the Autograph, REITWEIN (across the River), next day.

FRIEDRICH TO LIEUT.-GENERAL FINCK (at OEtscher or Reitwein).

"General Finck gets a difficult commission; the unlucky Army which
I give up to him is no longer in condition to make head against the
Russians. Haddick will now start for Berlin, perhaps Loudon too; if
General Finck go after these, the Russians will fall on his rear; if
he continue on the Oder, he gets Haddick on his flank (SO KRIGT ER DEN
HADEK DISS SEIT):--however, I believe, should Loudon go for Berlin, he
might attack Loudon, and try to beat him: this, if it succeeded, would
be a stand against misfortune, and hold matters up. Time gained is much,
in these desperate circumstances. The news from Torgau and Dresden,
Coper my Secretary (COPER MEIN SEGRETER," kind of lieutenant to Eichel
[See Preuss, i. 349, iii. 442.]) "will send him. You (ER) must inform my
Brother [Prince Henri] of everything; whom I have declared Generalissimo
of the Army. To repair this bad luck altogether is not possible: but
what my Brother shall command, must be done:--the Army swears to my
Nephew [King henceforth].

"This is all the advice, in these unhappy circumstances, I am in a
condition to give. Had I still had resources, I would have stayed by
them (SO WEHRE ICH DARBEI GEBLIEBEN).

"FRIEDRICH" [Exact Copy, two exact copies, in PREUSS (i. 450, and again,
ii. 215).]

All this done, the wearied Friedrich flung himself into his truss of dry
straw; and was seen sound asleep there, a single sentry at the door, by
some high Generals that ventured to look in. On the morrow he crossed to
Reitwein; by to-morrow night, there had 23,000 of his fugitives come in
to him;--but this is now to be Finck's affair, not his! That day, too
(for the Paper seems to be misdated), he signed, and despatched to
Schmettau, Commandant in Dresden, a Missive, which proved more fatal
than either of the others; and brought, or helped to bring, very bitter
fruits for him, before long:--

TO LIEUTENANT-GENERAL VON SCHMETTAU (at Dresden).

"REITWEIN, 14th [probably 13th] August, 1759.

"You will perhaps have heard of the Check [L'ECHEC, Kunersdorf to wit!]
I have met with from the Russian Army on the 13th [12th, if you have the
Almanac at hand] of this month. Though at bottom our affairs in regard
to the Enemy here are not desperate, I find I shall not now be able to
make any detachment for your assistance. Should the Austrians attempt
anything against Dresden, therefore, you will see if there are means
of maintaining yourself; failing which, it will behoove you to try and
obtain a favorable Capitulation,--to wit, Liberty to withdraw, with
the whole Garrison, Moneys, Magazines, Hospital and all that we have at
Dresden, either to Berlin or else-whither, so as to join some Corps of
my Troops.

"As a fit of illness [MALADIE, alas!] has come on me,--which I do not
think will have dangerous results,--I have for the present left the
command of my Troops to Lieutenant-General von Finck; whose Orders you
are to execute as if coming to you directly from myself. On this I
pray God to have you in his holy and worthy keeping.--F." [Preuss, ii.
_Urkundenbuch,_ p. 43.]

At Berlin, on this 13th,--with the Five Couriers coming in successively
(and not in the order of their despatch, but the fatal Fifth arriving
some time AHEAD of the Fourth, who still spoke of progress and
victory),--there was such a day as Sulzer (ACH MEIN LIEBER SULZER!)
had never seen in the world. "'Above 50,000 human beings on the Palace
Esplanade and streets about;' swaying hither and thither, in agony of
expectation, in alternate paroxysm of joy and of terror and woe; often
enough the opposite paroxysms simultaneous in the different groups, and
men crushed down in despair met by men leaping into the air for very
gladness:" Sulzer (whose sympathy is of very aesthetic type) "would
not, for any consideration, have missed such a scene." [_Briefe der
Schweitzer Bodmer, Sulzer, Gessner; aus Gleim's literarischen Nachlasse:
herausgegeben von Wilhelm Korte_ (Zurich, 1804), pp. 316-319.] The
"scene" is much obliged to you, MEIN LIEBER!--

Practically we find, in Rodenbeck, or straggling elsewhere, this Note:
"On the day after Kunersdorf, Queen and Court fly to Magdeburg: this is
their second flight. Their first was on Haddick's Visit, October, 1757;
but after Rossbach they soon returned, and Berlin and the Court were
then extremely gay: different gentlemen, French and others of every
Nation, fallen prisoners, made the Queen's soirees the finest in the
world for splendor and variety, at that time." [Rodenbeck, i. 390; &c.
&c.]

One other Note we save, for the sake of poor Major Kleist, "Poet of the
Spring," as he was then called. A valiant, punctual Soldier, and with a
turn for Literature as well; who wrote really pleasant fine things, new
at that time and rapturously welcome, though too much in the sentimental
vein for the times which have followed. Major Kleist,--there is a
General Kleist, a Colonel Kleist of the Green Hussars (called GRUNE
Kleist, a terrible cutting fellow):--this is not Grune Kleist; this
is the Poet of THE SPRING; whose fate at Kunersdorf made a tragic
impression in all intelligent circles of Teutschland. Here is Kriele's
Note (abridged):--

"Christian Ewald von Kleist, 'Poet of the Spring' [a Pommern gentleman,
now in his forty-fourth year], was of Finck's Division; had come on,
after those Eight Battalions took the first Russian battery [that is,
Muhlberg]; and had been assisting, with zeal, at the taking of three
other batteries, regardless of twelve contusions, which he gradually
got. At the third battery, he was farther badly hurt on the left arm and
the right. Took his Colonel's place nevertheless, whom he now saw fall;
led the regiment MUTHIG forward on the fourth battery. A case-shot
smashed his right leg to pieces; he fell from his horse [hour not given,
shall we say 3 P.M.]; sank, exclaiming: 'KINDER, My children, don't
forsake your King!' and fainted there. Was carried to rear and leftward;
laid down on some dry spot in the Elsbruch, not far from the Kuhgrund,
and a Surgeon brought. The Surgeon, while examining, was torn away by
case-shot: Kleist lay bleeding without help. A friend of his, Pfau [who
told Kriele], one of Finck's Generals, came riding that way: Kleist
called to him; asked how the Battle went; uncommonly glad to hear we are
still progressive. Pfau undertook, and tried his utmost, for a carriage
to Kleist; did send one of Finck's own carriages; but after such delays
that the Prussians were now yielding: poor Kleist's had become Russian
ground, and the carriage could not get in.

"Kleist lay helpless; no luck worse than his. In the evening, Cossacks
came round him; stript him stark-naked; threw him, face foremost, into
the nearest swampy place, and went their way. One of these devils had
something so absurd and Teniers-like in the face of him, that Kleist,
in his pains, could not help laughing at remembrance of it. In the
night some Russian Hussars, human and not Cossack, found Kleist in this
situation; took him to a dry place; put a cloak over him, kindled a
watch-fire for themselves, and gave him water and bread. Towards morning
they hastened away, throwing an 8-GROSCHEN STUCK [ninepenny piece,
shilling, say half-crown] on his cloak,--with human farewell. But
Cossacks again came; again stript him naked and bare. Towards noon of
the 13th, Kleist contrived to attract some Russian Cavalry troop passing
that way, and got speech of the Captain (one Fackelberg, a German);
who at once set about helping him;--and had him actually sent into
Frankfurt, in a carriage, that evening. To the House of a Professor
Nikolai; where was plenty of surgery and watchful affection. After near
thirty hours of such a lair, his wounds seemed still curable; there was
hope for ten days. In the tenth night (22d-23d August), the shivered
pieces of bone disunited themselves; cut an artery,--which, after
many trials, could not be tied. August 24th, at two in the morning,
he died.--Great sorrow. August 26th, there was soldier's funeral; poor
Kleist's coffin borne by twelve Russian grenadiers; very many Russian
Officers attending, who had come from the Camp for that end; one Russian
Staff-Officer of them unbuckling his own sword to lay on the bier, as
there was want of one. King Friedrich had Kleist's Portrait hung in the
Garnison Kirche. Freemason Lodge, in 1788, set up a monument to him,"
[Kriele, pp. 39-43.]--which still stands on the Frankfurt pavement, and
is now in sadly ruinous state.

The Prussian loss, in this Battle, was, besides all the cannon and
field-equipages: 6,000 killed, 13,000 wounded (of which latter, 2,000
badly, who fell to the Russians as prisoners); in all, about 19,000
men. Nor was the Russian loss much lighter; of Russians and Austrians
together, near 18,000, as Tempelhof counts: "which will not surprise
your Majesty," reports Soltikof to his Czarina; "who are aware that
the King of Prussia sells his defeats at a dear rate." And privately
Soltikof was heard to say, "Let me fight but another such Victory, and
I may go to Petersburg with the news of it myself, with the staff in my
hand." The joy at Petersburg, striving not to be braggart or immodest,
was solemn, steady and superlative: a great feat indeed for Russia, this
Victory over such a King,--though a kind of grudge, that it was due
to Loudon, dwelt, in spite of Loudon's politic silence on that point,
unpleasantly in the background. The chase they had shamefully neglected.
It is said, certain Russian Officers, who had charge of that business
stept into a peasant's cottage to consult on it; contrived somehow to
find tolerable liquor there; and sat drinking instead. [Preuss, ii.
217.]




Chapter V.--SAXONY WITHOUT DEFENCE: SCHMETTAU SURRENDERS DRESDEN.

Friedrich's despair did not last quite four days. On the fourth
day,--day after leaving Reitwein,--there is this little Document, which
still exists, of more comfortable tenor: "My dear Major-General von
Wunsch,--Your Letter of the 16th to Lieutenant-General von Finck
punctually arrived here: and for the future, as I am now recovered from
my illness, you have to address your Reports directly to Myself.--F."
["Madlitz," on the road to Furstenwalde, "17th August:" in Preuss,
_Friedrich der Grosse; eine historische Portrait-Skizze_ (kind of
LECTURE, so let us call it, if again citing it; Lecture delivered, on
Friedrich's Birthday, to Majesty and Staff-Officers as Audience, Berlin,
24th January, 1855), p. 18.] Finding that, except Tottleben warily
reconnoitring with a few Cossacks, no Russians showed themselves at
Reitwein; that the Russians were encamping and intrenching on the
Wine-Hills south of Frankfurt, not meaning anything immediate,--he took
heart again; ranked his 23,000; sent for General Kleist from Pommern
with his Anti-Swedish handful (leave the Swedes alone, as usual in time
of crisis); considered that artilleries and furnishings could come to
him from Berlin, which is but 60 miles; that there still lay possibility
ahead, and that, though only a miracle could save him, he would try it
to the very last.

A great relief, this of coming to oneself again! "Till death, then;--rage
on, ye elements and black savageries!" Friedrich's humor is not
despondent, now or afterwards; though at this time it is very sad, very
angry, and, as it were, scorning even to hope: but he is at all times of
beautifully practical turn; and has, in his very despair, a sobriety of
eyesight, and a fixed steadiness of holding to his purpose, which are
of rare quality. His utterances to D'Argens, about this time and
onward,--brief hints, spontaneous, almost unconscious,--give curious
testimony of his glooms and moody humors. Of which the reader shall
see something. For the present, he is in deep indignation with his poor
Troops, among other miseries. "Actual running away!" he will have it to
be; and takes no account of thirst, hunger, heat, utter weariness and
physical impossibility! This lasts for some weeks. But in general there
is nothing of this injustice to those about him. In general, nothing
even of gloom is manifested; on the contrary, cheerfulness, brisk hope,
a strangely continual succession of hopes (mostly illusory);--though,
within, there is traceable very great sorrow, weariness and misery. A
fixed darkness, as of Erebus, is grown habitual to him; but is strictly
shut up, little of it shown to others, or even, in a sense, to himself.
He is as a traveller overtaken by the Night and its tempests and
rain-deluges, but refusing to pause; who is wetted to the bone, and does
not care farther for rain. A traveller grown familiar with the howling
solitudes; aware that the Storm-winds do not pity, that Darkness is the
dead Earth's Shadow:--a most lone soul of a man; but continually toiling
forward, as if the brightest goal and haven were near and in view.

Once more the world was certain of Friedrich's ruin;--Friedrich himself
we have seen certain of it, for some few desperate hours:--but the world
and he, as had been repeatedly the world's case, were both disappointed.
Intrinsically there could be little doubt but Friedrich's enemies might
now have ruined him, had they been diligent about it. Now again, and now
more than ever, they have the winning-post in sight. At small distance
is the goal and purpose of all these four years' battlings and
marchings, and ten years' subterranean plottings and intriguings. He
himself says deliberately, "They had only to give him the finishing
stroke (COUP-DE-GRACE)." [_OEuvres de Frederic,_ v. 20.] But they never
gave him that stroke; could not do it, though heartily desirous. Which
was, and is, matter of surprise to an observant public.

The cause of failure may be considered to have been, in good part,
Daun and his cunctations. Daun's zeal was unquestionable; ardent and
continual is Daun's desire to succeed: but to try it at his own risk was
beyond his power. He expected always to succeed by help of others: and
to show them an example, and go vigorously to work himself, was what he
never could resolve on. Could play only Fabius Cunctator, it would seem;
and never was that part less wanted than now! Under such a Chief Figure,
the "incoherency of action," instead of diminishing, as Friedrich had
feared, rose daily towards its maximum; and latterly became extreme. The
old Lernean Hydra had many heads; but they belonged all to one body. The
many heads of this Anti-Friedrich Hydra had withal each its own body,
and separate set of notions and advantages. Friedrich was at least a
unity; his whole strength going one way, and at all moments, under his
own sole command. The value of this circumstance is incalculable; this
is the saving-clause of Pitt and his England (Pitt also a despotic
sovereign, though a temporary one); this, second only to Friedrich's
great gifts from Nature, and the noble use he makes of them, is above
all others the circumstance that saved him in such a duel with the
Hydras.

On the back of Kunersdorf, accordingly, there was not only no finishing
stroke upon Friedrich, but for two months no stroke or serious attempt
whatever in those neighborhoods where Friedrich is. There are four
Armies hereabouts: The Grand Russian, hanging by Frankfurt; Friedrich
at Furstenwalde (whitherward he marched from Reitwein August 16th), at
Furstenwalde or farther south, guarding Berlin;--then, unhurt yet by
battle of any kind, there are the Grand Daunish or Mark-Lissa Army, and
Prince Henri's of Schmottseifen. Of which latter Two the hitchings and
manoeuvrings from time to time become vivid, and never altogether
cease; but in no case come to anything. Above two months' scientific
flourishing of weapons, strategic counter-dancing; but no stroke
struck, or result achieved, except on Daun's part irreparable waste of
time:--all readers would feel it inhuman to be burdened with any notice
of such things. One march of Prince Henri's, which was of a famous and
decisive character, we will attend to, when it comes, that is, were
the end of September at hand; the rest must be imagined as a general
strategic dance in those frontier parts,--Silesia to rearward on one
side, the Lausitz and Frankfurt on the other,--and must go on, silently
for most part, in the background of the reader's fancy. Indeed, Saxony
is the scene of action; Friedrich, Henri, Soltikof, Daun, comparatively
inactive for the next six weeks and more.

Some days before Kunersdorf, Daun personally, with I will forget how
many thousands, had made a move to northward from Mark-Lissa, 60 miles
or so, through Sagan Country; and lies about Priebus, waiting there
ever since. Priebus is some 40 miles north of Gorlitz, about 60 west of
Glogau, south of Frankfurt 80. This is where the Master-Smith, having
various irons in the fire, may be handiest for clutching them out, and
forging at them, as they become successively hot. Daun, as Master-Smith,
has at least three objects in view. The FIRST is, as always, Reconquest
of Silesia: this is obstructed by Prince Henri, who sits, watchful on
the threshold, at Schmottseifen yonder. The SECOND is, as last year,
Capture of Dresden: which is much the more feasible at present,--there
being, except the Garrisons, no Prussian force whatever in Saxony; and
a Reichs Army now actually there at last, after its long haggling about
its Magazines; and above all, a Friedrich with his hands full elsewhere.
To keep Friedrich's hands full,--in other words, to keep the Russians
sticking to him,--that is the THIRD object: or indeed we may call it the
first, second and third; for Daun is well aware that unless Soltikof
can manage to keep Friedrich busy, Silesia, Saxony and all else becomes
impossible.

Ever since the fortunate junction of Loudon with Soltikof, Daun has sat,
and still sits, expectant; elaborately calculative, gathering Magazines
in different parts, planting out-parties, this way, that way, with
an eye to these three objects, all or each,--especially to the third
object, which he discerns to be all AND each. Daun was elaborately
calculative with these views: but to try any military action, upon
Prince Henri for example, or bestir himself otherwise than in driving
provender forward, and marching detachments hither and thither to the
potentially fit and fittest posts, was not in Daun's way,--so much the
worse for Daun, in his present course of enterprise.

Prince Henri had lain quiet at Schmottseifen, waiting his Brother's
adventure; did not hear the least tidings of him till six days after
Kunersdorf, and then only by rumor; hideous, and, though still dubious,
too much of it probable! On the very day of Kunersdorf, Henri had
begun effecting some improvements on his right flank,--always a sharply
strategic, most expert creature,--and made a great many motions, which
would be unintelligible here. [Detailed, every fibre of them (as is
the soul-confusing custom there), in Tempelhof, iii. 228 et seq.] Henri
feels now that upon him lies a world of duties; and foremost of all, the
instant duty of endeavoring to open communication with his Brother. Many
marches, in consequence; much intricate marching and manoeuvring between
Daun and him: of which, when we come to Henri's great March (of 25th
September), there may be again some hint.

For the present, let readers take their Map, and endeavor to fix the
following dates and localities in their mind. Here, in summary, are the
King's various Marches, and Two successive Encampments, two only,
during those Six Weeks of forced inaction, while he is obliged to stand
watching the Russians, and to witness so many complicacies and disasters
in the distance; which he struggles much and fruitlessly to hinder or
help:--

ENCAMPMENT 1st (Furstenwalde, August 18th-30th). Friedrich left Reitwein
AUGUST 16th; 17th, he is at Madlitz [Note to Wunsch written there, which
we read]; 18th, to Furstenwalde, and encamp. Furstenwalde is on the
Spree, straight between Frankfurt and Berlin; 25 miles from the former,
35 from the latter. Here for near a fortnight. At first, much in alarm
about the Russians and Berlin; but gradually ascertaining that the
Russians intend nothing.

"In effect, all this while Soltikof lay at Lossow, 10 miles south of
Frankfurt, with his right on Oder; totally motionless, inactive, except
listening, often rather gloomily, to Daun's and Montalembert's suasive
eloquences and advices,--and once, August 22d, in the little Town of
Guben, holding Conference with Daun [of which by and by]. In consequence
of which, AUGUST 28th, Soltikof and his Russians and Austrians got under
way again; southward, but only a few marches: first to Mullrose, then
to Lieberose:--whom, the instant he heard of their movements, Friedrich,
August 30th, hastened to follow; but had not to follow very far.
Whereupon ensues,

"ENCAMPMENT SECOND (Waldau, till September 15th). AUGUST 30th,
Friedrich, we say, rose from Furstenwalde; hastened to follow this
Russian movement, and keep within wind of it: up the valley of the
Spree; first to Mullrose neighborhood [where the Russians, loitering
some time, spoiled the canal-locks of the Friedrich-Wilhelm Canal, if
nothing more],--thence to Lieberose neighborhood; Waldau, the King's new
place of encampment,--Waldau, with Spree Forest to rear of it: silent
both parties till September 15th, when Soltikof did fairly march, not
towards Berlin, but quite in the opposite direction."

By the middle of September, when the Russians did get on foot, and moved
eastward; especially on and after September 25th, when Henri made his
famous March westward; then it will behoove us to return to Friedrich
and these localities. For the present we must turn to Saxony, where, and
not here, the scene of action is. Take, farther, only the following
bits of Note, which will now be readable. First, these Utterances to
D'Argens; direct glimpses into the heavy-laden, indeed hag-ridden and
nearly desperate inner man of Friedrich, during the first three weeks
after his defeat at Kunersdorf:--


THE KING TO MARQUIS D'ARGENS (at Berlin): Six Notes.

1. "MADLITZ [road from Reitwein to Furstenwalde], 16th AUGUST, 1759.
We have been unfortunate, my dear Marquis; but not, by my fault. The
victory was ours, and would even have been a complete one, when our
infantry lost patience, and at the wrong moment abandoned the field of
battle. The enemy to-day is on march to Mullrose, to unite with Haddick
[not to Mullrose for ten days yet; Haddick had already got united with
THEM]. The Russian infantry is almost totally destroyed. Of my own
wrecks, all that I have been able to assemble amounts to 32,000 men;
with these I am pushing on to throw myself across the enemy's road, and
either perish or save the Capital. That is not what you [you Berliners]
will call a deficiency of resolution.

"For the event I cannot answer. If I had more lives than one, I would
sacrifice them all to my Country. But if this stroke fail, I think I am
clear-scores with her, and that it will be permissible to look a little
to myself. There are limits to everything. I support my misfortune;
courage not abated by it: but I am well resolved, after this stroke,
if it fail, to open an outgate for myself [that small glass tube which
never quits me], and no longer be the sport of any chance."

2. Furstenwalde, 20th AUGUST.... "Remain at Berlin, or retire to
Potsdam; in a little while there will come some catastrophe: it is not
fit that you suffer by it. If things take a good turn, you can be back
to Berlin [from Potsdam] in four hours. If ill-luck still pursue us, go
to Hanover or to Zelle, where you can provide for your safety.

"I protest to you, that in this late Action I did what was humanly
possible to conquer; but my people"--Oh, your Majesty!

3. FURSTENWALDE, 21st AUGUST.... "The enemy is intrenching himself near
Frankfurt; a sign he intends no attempt. If you will do me the pleasure
to come out hither, you can in all safety. Bring your bed with you;
bring my Cook Noel; and I will have you a little chamber ready. You will
be my consolation and my hope."--

This day,--let readers mark the circumstance,--Friedrich, in better
spirits, detaches Wunsch with some poor 6,000, to try if he can be of
help in Saxony; where the Reichs Army, now arrived in force, and with
nothing whatever in the field against them, is taking all the Northward
Garrison-Towns, and otherwise proceeding at a high rate. Too possibly
with an eye towards Dresden itself! Wunsch sets out August 21st.
[Tempelhof, iii. 211.] And we shall hear of him in those Saxon Countries
before long.

4. FURSTENWALDE, 22d AUGUST. "Yesterday I wrote to you to come; but
to-day I forbid it. Daun is at Kotbus; he is marching on Luben and
Berlin [nothing like so rash!].--Fly these unhappy Countries!--This news
obliges me again to attack the Russians between here and Frankfurt. You
may imagine if this is a desperate resolution. It is the sole hope that
remains to me, of not being cut off from Berlin on the one side or the
other. I will give the discouraged troops some brandy"--alas!--"but I
promise myself nothing of success. My one consolation is, that I shall
die sword in hand."

5. SAME PLACE AND DAY (after a Letter FROM D'Argens). "You make the
panegyric, MON CHER, of an Army that does not deserve any. The soldiers
had good limbs to run with, none to attack the enemy. [Alas, your
Majesty; after fifteen hours of such marching and fighting!]

"For certain I will fight; but don't flatter yourself about the event. A
happy chance alone can help us. Go, in God's name, to Tangermunde [since
the Royal Family went, D'Argens and many Berliners are thinking of
flight], to Tangermunde, where you will be well; and wait there how
Destiny shall have disposed of us. I will go to reconnoitre the enemy
to-morrow. Next day, if there is anything to do, we will try it. But if
the enemy still holds to the Wine-Hills of Frankfurt, I shall never dare
to attack him.

"No, the torment of Tantalus, the pains of Prometheus, the doom of
Sisyphus, were nothing like what I suffer for the last ten days [from
Kunersdorf till now, when destruction has to be warded off again, and
the force wanting]. Death is sweet in comparison to such a life. Have
compassion on me and it; and believe that I still keep to myself a great
many evil things, not wishing to afflict or disquiet anybody with them;
and that I would not counsel you to fly these unlucky Countries, if I
had any ray of hope. Adieu, MON CHER."

Four days after, AUGUST 25th, from this same Furstenwalde, the Russians
still continuing stagnant, Friedrich despatches to Schmettau, Commandant
of Dresden (by some industrious hand, for the roads are all blocked), a
Second Letter, "That Dresden is of the highest moment; that in case of
Siege there, relief [Wunsch, namely, and perhaps more that may follow]
is on the road; and that Schmettau must defend himself to the utmost."
Let us hope this Second Missive may counteract the too despondent
First, which we read above, should that have produced discouragement
in Schmettau! [Second Letter is given in _Schmettau's Leben,_ pp. 436,
437.]--D'Argens does run to Wolfenbuttel; stays there till September
9th. Nothing more from Friedrich till 4th September, when matters are
well cooled again.

6. WALDAU, 4th SEPTEMBER. "I think Berlin is now in safety; you may
return thither. The Barbarians [Russians] are in the Lausitz; I keep by
the side of them, between them and Berlin, so that there is nothing to
fear for the Capital. The imminency of danger is past; but there will
still be many bad moments to get through, before reaching the end of
the Campaign. These, however, only regard myself; never mind these. My
martyrdom will last two months yet; then the snows and the ices will end
it." [_OEuvres de Frederic,_ xix. 78, 82, 83, 85, 86.]

Thus at Furstenwalde, then at Waldau, keeping guard, forlorn but
resolute, against the intrusive Russian-Austrian deluges, Friedrich
stands painfully vigilant and expectant,--still for about a fortnight
more. With bad news coming to him latterly, as we shall hear. He is in
those old moorland Wusterhausen Countries, once so well known under far
other circumstances. Thirty years ago, in fine afternoons, we used
to gallop with poor Duhan de Jandun, after school-tasks done, towards
Mittenwalde, Furstenwalde and the furzy environs, far and wide; at home,
our Sister and Mother waiting with many troubles and many loves, and
Papa sleeping, Pan-like, under the shadow of his big tree:--Thirty years
ago, ah me, gone like a dream is all that; and there is solitude and
desolation and the Russian-Austrian death-deluges instead! These, I
suppose, were Friedrich's occasional remembrances; silent always, in
this locality and time. The Sorrows of WERTER, of the GIAOUR, of the
Dyspeptic Tailor in multifarious forms, are recorded in a copious
heart-rending manner, and have had their meed of weeping from a
sympathetic Public: but there are still a good few Sorrows which lie
wrapt in silence, and have never applied there for an idle tear!--Let us
look now into Daun's side of things.

DAUM, AFTER NEGOTIATION, HAS AN INTERVIEW WITH SOLTIKOF (at Guben,
August 22d).--"Daun, who had moved to Priebus, with a view to be nearer
Soltikof, had scarcely got his tent pitched there (August 13th), when
a breathless horseman rode in, with a Note from Loudon, dated the night
before: 'King of Prussia beaten, to the very bone, beyond mistake this
time,--utterly ruined, if one may judge!' What a vision of the Promised
Land! Delighted Daun moves forward, one march, to Triebel on the morrow;
to be one march nearer the scene of glory, and endeavor to forge this
biggest of the hot irons to advantage.

"At Triebel Soltikof's own account, elucidated by oral messengers,
eye-witnesses, and, in short, complete conspectus of this ever memorable
Victory, await the delighted Daun. Who despatches messengers, one and
another; Lacy, the first, not succeeding quite: To congratulate with
enthusiasm the most illustrious of Generals; who has beaten King
Friedrich as none else ever did or could; beaten to the edge of
extinction;--especially to urge him upon trampling out this nearly
extinct King, before he gleam up again. Soltikof understands the
congratulations very well; but as to that of trampling out, snorts an
indignant negative: 'Nay, you, why don't you try it? Surely it is more
your business than my Imperial Mistress's or mine. We have wrenched two
victories from him this season. Kay and Kunersdorf have killed near the
half of us: go you in, and wrench something!' This is Soltikof's logic;
which no messenger of Daun's, Lacy or another, aided by never such
melodies and suasions from Montalembert and Loudon, who are permanently
diligent that way, can shake.

"And truly it is irrefragable. How can Daun, if himself merely
speculative, calculative, hope that Soltikof will continue acting? Men
who have come to help you in a heavy job of work need example. If you
wish me to weep, be grieved yourself first of all. Soltikof angrily
wipes his countenance at this point, and insists on a few tears
from Daun. Without metaphor, Soltikof has shot away all his present
ammunition, his staff of bread is quite precarious in these parts; and
Soltikof thinks always, 'Is it my business, then, or is it yours?'

"Soltikof has intrenched himself on the Wine-Hills at Lossow,
comfortably out of Friedrich's way, and contiguous to Oder and the
provision-routes; sits there, angrily deaf to the voice of the charmer;
nothing to be charmed out of him, but gusts of indignation, instead of
consent. A proud, high-going, indignant kind of man, with a will of
his own. And sees well enough what is what, in all this symphony of the
Lacys, the Montalemberts and surrounding adorers. Montalembert, who is
here this season, our French best man (unprofitable Swedes must put up
with an inferior hand), is extremely persuasive, tries all the arts of
French rhetoric, but effects nothing. 'To let the Austrians come in
for the finishing stroke,---Excellence, it will be to let them gain,
in History, a glory which is of your earning. Daun and Austria, not
Soltikof and Russia, will be said to have extinguished this pestilent
King; whom History will have to remember!' [Choiseul's Letter (not
DUC de Choiseul, but COMTE, now Minister at Vienna) to Montalembert,
"Vienna, 16th August;" and Montalembert's Answer, "Lieberhausen [means
LIEBEROSE], 31st August, 1759:" in Montalembert, _Correspondance,_ ii.
58-65.] 'With all my heart,' answers Soltikof; 'I make the Austrians and
History perfectly welcome! Monsieur, my ammunition is in Posen; my
bread is fallen scarce; in Frankfurt can you find me one horse more?'
Indignant Soltikof is not to be taken by chaff; growls now and then,
if you stir him to the bottom: 'Why should we, who are volunteer
assistants, take all the burden of the work? I will fall back to Posen,
and home to Poland and East Preussen, if this last much longer.'

"Austria has a good deal disgusted these Soltikofs and Russian Chief
Officers;--who are not so stupid as Austria supposes. Austria's steady
wish is, 'Let them do their function of cat's-paw for us; we are here to
eat the chestnuts; not, if we can help it, to burn our own poor fingers
for them!' After every Campaign hitherto, Austria has been in use to
raise eager accusations at Petersburg; and get the Apraxins, Fermors
into trouble: this is not the way to conciliate Russian General
Officers. Austria, taught probably by Daun, now tries the other tack:
heaps Soltikof with eulogies, flatteries, magnificent presents. All
which Soltikof accepts, but with a full sense of what they mean. An
unmanageable Soltikof; his answer always,--'Your turn now to fight a
victory! I will go my ways to Posen again, if you don't.' And, in these
current weeks, in Soltikof's audience-room, if anybody were curious
about it, we could present a very lively solicitation going on, with
answers very gruff and negatory. No suasion of Montalembert, Lacy, and
Daun Embassies, backed by diamond-hilted swords, and splendor of gifts
from Vienna itself, able to prevail on the barbarous people.

"Daun at length resolves to go in person; solicits an Interview with
the distinguished Russian Conqueror; gets it, meets Soltikof at Guben,
half-way house between Frankfurt and Triebel; select suite attending
both Excellencies (August 22d); and exerts whatever rhetoric is in him
on the barbarous man. The barbarous man is stiff as brass; but Daun
comes into all his conditions: 'Saxony, Silesia,--Excellenz, we have
them both within clutch; such our exquisite angling and manoeuvring, in
concert with your immortal victory, which truly gives the life-breath to
everything. Oh, suffer us to clutch them: keep that King away from us;
and see if they are not ours, Saxony first, Silesia next! Provisions of
meal? I will myself undertake to furnish bread for you [though I have to
cart it from Bohemia all the way, and am myself terribly off; but fixed
to do the impossible]; ration of bread shall fail no Russian man, while
you escort us as protective friend. Towards Saxony first, where the
Reichs Army is, and not a Prussian in the field; the very Garrisons
mostly gone by this time. Dresden is to be besieged, within a week;
Dresden itself is ours, if only YOU please! Come into the Lausitz with
us, Magazines are there, loaves in abundance: Saxony done, Dresden ours,
cannot we turn to Silesia together; besiege Glogau together (I am myself
about trying Neisse, by Harsch again); capture Glogau as well as Neisse;
and crown the successfulest campaign that ever was? Oh, Excellenz--!'"

In a word, Excellenz, strictly fixing that condition of the loaves,
consents. Will get ready to leave those Frankfurt Wine-Hills in about
a week. "But the loaves, you recollect: no Bread, no Russian!" Daun
returns to Triebel a victorious man,--though with an onerous condition
incumbent. Tempelhof, minutely computing, finds that to cart from
Bohemia such a cipher of human rations daily into these parts, will
surpass all the vehiculatory power of Daun. [Tempelhof, iii. 225.]'




THE "REICHS ARMY" 80 CALLED HAS ENTERED SAXONY, UNDER FINE OMENS; DOES
SOME FEATS OF SIEGING (August 7th-23d),--WITH AN EYE ON DRESDEN AS THE
CROWNING ONE.

The Reichs Army, though it had been so tumbled about, in Spring, with
such havoc on its magazines and preparations, could not wait to refit
itself, except superficially; and showed face over the Mountains almost
earlier than usual. The chance was so unique: a Saxony left to its mere
Garrisons,--as it continued to be, for near two months this Year. On
such golden opportunity the Reichs Army--first, in light mischievous
precursor parties, who roamed as far as Halle or even as Halberstadt;
then the Army itself, well or ill appointed, under Generalissimo the
Prince von Zweibruck,--did come on, winding through Thuringen towards
the Northwestern Towns; various Austrian Auxiliary-Corps making
appearance on the Dresden side. Eight Austrian regiments, as a
permanency, are in the Reichs Army itself. Commander, or part Commander,
of the eight is (what alone I find noteworthy in them) "Herr General
Thomas von Blonquet:" Irish by nation, says a foot-note; [Seyfarth, ii.
831 n.]--sure enough some adventurous "Thomas PLUNKET," visible
this once, soldiering, in those circumstances; never heard of by a
sympathetic reader before or after. It was while the King was hunting
the Haddick-Loudon people in Sagan Country in such vehement fashion,
that Zweibruck came trumpeting into Saxony,--King, Prince Henri and
everybody, well occupied otherwise, far away!

The Reichs Army has a camp at Naumburg (Rossbach neighborhood): and has
light troops out in Halle neighborhood; which have seized Halle; are
very severe upon Halle, and other places thereabouts, till chased away.
August 7th, the Reichs Army begirt Leipzig; summoned the weak
garrison there. It is a Town capable of ruin, but not of defence:
"Free-withdrawal," proposes the Reichs Army,--and upon these terms gets
hold of Leipzig, for the time being. Leipzig, Torgau, Wittenberg; in
a fortnight or less, all the Prussian posts in those parts fall to
the Reichs Army. Its marchings and siegings, among those Northwestern
places, not one of them capable of standing above a few days' siege, are
worth no mention, except to Parish History: enough that, by little
after the middle of August, Zweibruck had got all these places,
"Free-withdrawal" the terms for all; and that, except it be the
following feature in their Siege of Torgau, feature mainly Biographic,
and belonging to a certain Colonel Wolfersdorf concerned, there is
not one of those Sieges now worth a moment's attention from almost any
mortal. This is the Torgau feature,--feature of human nature, soldiering
under difficulties:--

COLONEL VON WOLFERSDORF BEAUTIFULLY DEFENDS HIMSELF IN TORGAU (August
9th-14th). Two days after Leipzig was had, there appeared at Torgau a
Body of Pandours, 2,000 and more; who attempted some kind of scalade on
Torgau and its small Garrison (of 700 or so),--where are a Magazine, a
Hospital and other properties: not capable, by any garrison, of standing
regular siege; but important to defend till you have proper terms
offered. The multitudinous Pandours, if I remember, made a rush into the
Suburbs, in their usual vociferous way; but were met by the 700 silent
Prussians,--silent except through their fire-arms and field-pieces,--in
so eloquent a style as soon convinced the Pandour mind, and sent it
travelling again. And in the evening of the same day (August 9th),
Colonel Wolfersdorf arrives, as new Commandant, and with reinforcements,
small though considerable in the circumstances.

Wolfersdorf, one dimly gathers, had marched from Wittenberg on this
errand; the whole force in Torgau is now of about 3,000, still with only
field-cannon, but with a Captain over them;--who, as is evident, sets
himself in a very earnest manner to do his utmost in defence of the
place. Next morning Reichs General Kleefeld ("Cloverfield"), with 6 or
8,000 Pandour and Regular, summons Wolfersdorf: "Surrender instantly;
or--!" "We will expect you!" answers Wolfersdorf. Whereupon, same
morning (August 10th), general storm; storm No. 1: beautifully handled
by Wolfersdorf; who takes it in rear (to its astonishment), as well as
in front; and sends it off in haste. On the morrow, Saturday, a second
followed; and on Sunday a third; both likewise beautifully handled.
This third storm, readers see, was "Sunday, August 12th:" a very busy
stormful day at Torgau here,--and also, for some others of us, during
the heats of Kunersdorf, over the horizon far away! Wolfersdorf tumbles
back all storms; furthermore makes mischievous sallies: a destructive,
skilled person; altogether prompt, fertile in expedients; and evidently
is not to be managed by Kleefeld. So that Prince von Stolberg, Second to
supreme Zweibruck himself, has to take it in hand. And,

MONDAY, 13th, at break of day, Stolberg arrives with a train of
battering guns and 6,000 new people; summons Wolfersdorf: "No," as
before. Storms him, a fourth time; likewise "No," as before: attacks,
thereupon, his Elbe Bridge, and his Redoubt across the River; finds a
Wolfersdorf party rush destructively into his rear there. And has to
withdraw, and try battering from behind the Elbe Dam. Continues this,
violently for about two hours; till again Wolfersdorf, whose poor
fieldpieces, the only artillery he has, "cannot reach so far with leaden
balls" (the iron balls are done, and the powder itself is almost done),
manages, by a flank attack, to quench this also. Which produces entire
silence, and considerable private reflection, on the part of indignant
Stolberg. Stolberg offers him the favorablest terms devisable: "Withdraw
freely, with all your honors, all your properties; only withdraw!" Which
Wolfersdorf, his powder and ball being in such a state of ebb, and no
relief possible, agrees to; with stipulations very strict as to every
particular. [In _Anonymous of Hamburg_ (iii. 350) the Capitulation,
"August 14th." given IN EXTENSO.]

COLONEL VON WOLFERSDORF WITHDRAWS, ALSO BEAUTIFULLY (August 15th).
Accordingly, Wednesday, August 15th, at eight in the morning,
Wolfersdorf by the Elbe Gate moves out; across Elbe Bridge, and the
Redoubt which is on the farther shore yonder. Near this Redoubt,
Stolberg and many of his General Officers are waiting to see him go.
He goes in state; flags flying, music playing. Battalion Hessen-Cassel,
followed by all our Packages, Hospital convalescents, King's Artillery,
and whatever is the King's or ours, marches first. Next comes, as
rear-guard to all this, Battalion Grollmann;--along with which is
Wolfersdorf himself, knowing Grollmann for a ticklish article (Saxons
mainly); followed on the heel by Battalion Hofmann, and lastly by
Battalion Salmuth, trusty Prussians both of these.

Battalion Hessen-Cassel and the Baggages are through the Redoubt,
Prince of Stolberg handsomely saluting as saluted. But now, on Battalion
Grollmann's coming up, Stolberg's Adjutant cries out with a loud voice
of proclamation, many Officers repeating and enforcing: "Whoever is a
brave Saxon, whoever is true to his Kaiser, or was of the Reichs Army,
let him step out: Durchlaucht will give him protection!" At sound of
which Grollmann quivers as if struck by electricity; and instantly
begins dissolving;--dissolves, in effect, nearly all, and is in the act
of vanishing like a dream! Wolfersdorf is a prompt man; and needs to be
so. Wolfersdorf, in Olympian rage, instantly stops short; draws pistol:
"I will shoot dead every man that quits rank!" vociferates he; and
does, with his pistol, make instant example of one; inviting every true
Prussian to do the like: "Jagers, Hussars, a ducat for every traitor you
shoot down!" continues Wolfersdorf (and punctually paid it afterwards):
unable to prevent an almost total dissolution of Grollmann. For some
minutes, there is a scene indescribable: storm of vociferation, menace,
musket-shot, pistol-shot; Grollmann disappearing on every side,--"behind
the Redoubt, under the Bridge, into Elbe Boats, under the cloaks of the
Croats;"--in spite of Wolfersdorf's Olympian rages and efforts.

At sight of the shooting, Prince Stolberg, a hot man, had said
indignantly, "Herr, that will be dangerous for you (DAS WIRD NICHT GUT
GEHN)!" Wolfersdorf not regarding him a whit; regarding only Grollmann,
and his own hot business of coercing it at a ducat per head. Grollmann
gone, and Battalion Hofmann in due sequence come up, Wolfersdorf--who
has sent an Adjutant, with order, "Hessen-Cassel, HALT"--gives
Battalion Hofmann these three words of command: "Whole Battalion,
halt!--Front!--Make ready!" (with due simultaneous click of every
firelock, on utterance of that last);--and turning to Prince Stolberg,
with a brow, with a tone of voice: "Durchlaucht, Article 9 of the
Capitulation is express on this point; 'ALL DESERTION STRICTLY
PROHIBITED; NO DESERTER TO BE RECEIVED EITHER ON THE IMPERIAL OR ON
THE PRUSSIAN SIDE!' [Durchlaucht silently gives, we suppose, some faint
sniff.] Since your Durchlaucht does not keep the Capitulation, neither
will I regard it farther. I will now take you and your Suite prisoners,
return into the Town, and again begin defending myself. Be so good as
ride directly into that Redoubt, or I will present, and give fire!"

A dangerous moment for the Durchlaucht of Stolberg; Battalion Salmuth
actually taking possession of the wall again; Hofmann here with its
poised firelock on the cock, "ready" for that fourth word, as above
indicated. A General Lusinsky of Stolberg's train, master of those
Croats, and an Austrian of figure, remarks very seriously: "Every
point of the Capitulation must be kept!" Upon which Durchlaucht has to
renounce and repent; eagerly assists in recovering Grollmann, restores
it (little the worse, little the FEWER); will give Wolfersdorf "COMMAND
of the Austrian Escort you are to have", and every satisfaction and
assurance;--wishful only to get rid of Wolfersdorf. Who thereupon
marches to Wittenberg, with colors flying again, and a name mentionable
ever since. [Templehof, iii. 201-204; Seyfarth, ii. 562 n., and _
Beylagen,_ ii. 587; _Militair-Lexikon,_ iv. 283.]

This Wolfersdorf was himself a Pirna Saxon; serving Polish Majesty, as
Major, in that Pirna time; perhaps no admirer of "Feldmarschall Bruhl"
and Company?--at any rate, he took Prussian service, as then offered
him; and this is his style of keeping it. A decidedly clever soldier,
and comes out, henceforth, more and more as such,--unhappily not for
long. Was taken at Maxen, he too, as will be seen. Rose, in after times,
to be Lieutenant-General, and a man famous in the Prussian military
circles; but given always, they say, to take the straight line (or
shortest distance between self and object), in regard to military
matters, to recruiting and the like, and thus getting himself into
trouble with the Civil Officials.

Wolfersdorf, at Wittenberg or farther on, had a flattering word from the
King; applauding his effective procedures at Torgau; and ordering him,
should Wittenberg fall (as it did, August 23d), to join Wunsch, who is
coming with a small Party to try and help in those destitute localities.
Wunsch the King had detached (21st August), as we heard already. Finck
the King finds, farther, that he can detach (from Waldau Country,
September 7th); [Tempelhof, iii. 211, 237.] Russians being so languid,
and Saxony fallen into such a perilous predicament.

"Few days after Kunersdorf," says a Note, which should be inserted here,
"there had fallen out a small Naval matter, which will be consolatory to
Friedrich, and go to the other side of the account, when he hears of
it: Kunersdorf was Sunday, August 12th; this was Saturday and Sunday
following. Besides their Grand Brest Fleet, with new Flat-bottoms, and
world-famous land-preparations going on at Vannes, for Invasion of
proud Albion, all which are at present under Hawke's strict keeping, the
French have, ever since Spring last, a fine subsidiary Fleet at Toulon,
of very exultant hopes at one time; which now come to finis.

"SEA-FIGHT (PROPERLY SEA-HUNT OF 200 MILES), IN THE CADIZ WATERS, AUGUST
18th-19th. The fine Toulon Fleet, which expected at one time, Pitt's
ships being so scattered over the world, to be 'mistress of the
Mediterranean,' has found itself, on the contrary (such were Pitt's
resources and promptitudes); cooped in harbor all Summer; Boscawen
watching it in the usual strict way. No egress possible; till, in
the sultry weather (8th July-4th August), Boscawen's need of fresh
provisions, fresh water and of making some repairs, took him to
Gibraltar, and gave the Toulon Fleet a transient opportunity, which it
made use of.

"August 17th, at 8 in the evening, Boscawen, at Gibraltar (some of his
ships still in deshabille or under repair), was hastily apprised by one
of his Frigates, That the Toulon Fleet had sailed; been seen visibly at
Ceuta Point so many hours ago. 'Meaning,' as Boscawen guesses, 'to
be through the Straits this very night!' By power of despatch, the
deshabille ships were rapidly got buttoned together (in about two
hours); and by 10 P.M. all were under sail. And soon were in hot chase;
the game, being now in view,--going at its utmost through the Straits,
as anticipated. At 7 next morning (Saturday, August 18th) Boscawen got
clutch of the Toulon Fleet; still well east of Cadiz, somewhere in the
Trafalgar waters, I should guess. Here Boscawen fought and chased the
Toulon Fleet for 24 hours coming; drove it finally ashore, at Lagos on
the coast of Portugal, with five of its big ships burnt or taken,
its crews and other ships flying by land and water, its poor Admiral
mortally wounded; and the Toulon Fleet a ruined article. The wind had
been capricious, here fresh, there calm; now favoring the hunters,
now the hunted; both Fleets had dropped in two. De la Clue, the French
Admiral, complained bitterly how his Captains lagged, or shore off and
forsook him. Boscawen himself, who for his own share had gone at it
eagle-like, was heard grumbling, about want of speed in some people;
and said: 'It is well; but it might have been better!' [Beatson,
ii. 313-319; ib. iii. 237-238, De la Clue, the French Admiral's
Despatch;--Boscawen's Despatch, &c., in _Gentleman's Magazine,_ xxix.
434.]

"De la Clue--fallen long ago from all notions of 'dominating the
Mediterranean'--had modestly intended to get through, on any terms,
into the Ocean; might then, if possible, have joined the Grand 'Invasion
Squadron,' now lying at Brest, till Vannes and the furnishings are
ready, or have tried to be troublesome in the rear of Hawke, who is
blockading all that. A modest outlook in comparison;--and this is
what it also has come to. As for the Grand Invasion Squadron, Admiral
Conflans, commanding it, still holds up his head in Brest Harbor, and
talks big. Makes little of Rodney's havoc on the Flat-bottoms at Havre,
'Will soon have Flat-bottoms again: and you shall see!'--if only Hawke,
and wind and weather and Fortune, will permit."




AUSTRIAN REICHS ARMY DOES ITS CROWNING FEAT (August 26th-September 4th):
DIARY OF WHAT IS CALLED THE "SIEGE" OF DRESDEN.

Since the first weeks of, August there have been Austrian detachments,
Wehla's Corps, Brentano's Corps, entering Saxony from the northeast
or Daun-ward side, and posting themselves in the strong points looking
towards Dresden; waiting there till the Reichs Army should capture its
Leipzigs, Torgaus, Wittenbergs, and roll forward from northwest. To all
which it is easy to fancy what an impetus was given by Kunersdorf
and August 12th; the business, after that, going on double-quick, and
pointing to immediate practical industry on Dresden. The Reichs Army
hastens to settle its northwestern Towns, puts due garrison in each,
leaves a 10 or 12,000 movable for general protection, in those parts;
and, August 23d, marches for Dresden. There are only some 15,000 left
of it now; almost half the Reichs Army drunk up in that manner; were
not Daun now speeding forth his Maguire with a fresh 12,000; who is to
command the Wehlas and Brentanos as well. And, in effect, to be Austrian
Chief, and as regards practical matters, Manager of this important
Enterprise,--all-important to Daun just now. Schmettau in Dresden sees
clearly what mischief is at hand.

To Daun this Siege of Dresden is the alpha to whatever omegas there may
be: he and his Soltikof are to sit waiting this; and can attempt nothing
but eating of provender, till this be achieved. As the Siege was really
important, though not quite the alpha to all omegas, and has in it
curious points and physiognomic traits, we will invite readers to
some transient inspection of it,--the rather as there exist ample
contemporary Narratives, DIARIUMS and authentic records, to render that
possible and easy. [In TEMPELHOF (iii. 210-216-222) complete and careful
Narrative; in ANONYMOUS OF HAMBURG (iii. 371-377) express "DAY-BOOK" by
some Eye-witness in Dresden.]'

"Ever since the rumor of Kunersdorf," says one Diarium, compiled out of
many, "in the last two weeks of August, Schmettau's need of vigilance
and diligence has been on the increase, his outlooks becoming grimmer
and grimmer. He has a poorish Garrison for number (3,700 in all
[Schmettau's LEBEN (by his Son), p. 408.]), and not of the best quality;
deserters a good few of them: willing enough for strokes; fighting
fellows all, and of adventurous turn, but uncertain as to loyalty in a
case of pinch. He has endless stores in the place; for one item, almost
a million sterling of ready money. Poor Schmettau, if he knew it, has
suddenly become the Leonidas of this campaign, Dresden its Thermopylae;
and"--But readers can conceive the situation.

"AUGUST 20th, Schmettau quits the Neustadt, or northern part of Dresden,
which lies beyond the River: unimportant that, and indefensible with
garrison not adequate; Schmettau will strengthen the River-bank, blow up
the Stone Bridge if necessary, and restrict himself to Dresden Proper.
The Court is here; Schmettau does not hope that the Court can avert a
Siege from him; but he fails not to try, in that way too, and may at
least gain time.

"AUGUST 25th, He has a Mine put under the main arch of the Bridge: 'mine
ill-made, uncertain of effect,' reports the Officer whom he sent to
inspect it. But it was never tried, the mere rumor of it kept off
attacks on that side. Same day, August 25th, Schmettau receives that
unfortunate Royal Missive [Tempelhof, iii. 208; Schmettau's LEBEN (p.
421) has "August 27th."] written in the dark days of Reitwein, morrow of
Kunersdorf (14th or 13th August)," which we read above. "That there is
another Letter on the road for him, indicating 'Relief shall be tried,'
is unknown to Schmettau, and fatally continues unknown. While Schmettau
is reading this (August 25th), General Wunsch has been on the road four
days: Wunsch and Wolfersdorf with about 8,000, at their quickest pace,
and in a fine winged frame of mind withal, are speeding on: will cross
Elbe at Meissen to-morrow night,--did Schmettau only know. People say
he did, in the way of rumor, understand that Kunersdorf had not been
the fatal thing it was thought; and that efforts would be made by a King
like his. In his place one might have, at least, shot out a spy or two?
But he did not, then or afterwards.

"Already, ever since the arrival of Wehla and Brentano in those parts,
he has been laboring under many uncertainties; too many for a Leonidas!
Hanging between Yes and No, even about that of quitting the Neustadt,
for example: carrying over portions of his goods, but never heartily the
whole; unable to resolve; now lifting visibly the Bridge pavement,
then again visibly restoring it;--and, I think, though the contrary
is asserted, he had at last to leave in the Neustadt a great deal of
stores, horse-provender and other, not needful to him at present, or
impossible to carry, when dubiety got ended. He has put a mine under the
Bridge; but knows it will not go off.

"Schmettau has been in many wars, but this is a case that tries his
soldier qualities as none other has ever done. A case of endless
intricacy,--if he be quite equal to it; which perhaps he was not
altogether. Nobody ever doubted Schmettau's high qualities as a man and
captain; but here are requisite the very highest, and these Schmettau
has not. The result was very tragical; I suppose, a pain to Friedrich
all his life after; and certainly to Schmettau all his. This is Saturday
night, 25th August: before Tuesday week (September 4th) there will have
sad things arrived, irremediable to Schmettau. Had Schmettau decided to
defend himself, Dresden had not been taken. What a pity Schmettau had
not been spared this Missive, calculated to produce mere doubt! Whether
he could not, and should not, after a ten days of inquiry and new
discernment, have been able to read the King's true meaning, as well
as the King's momentary humor, in this fatal Document, there is no
deciding. Sure enough, he did not read the King's true meaning in it,
but only the King's momentary humor; did not frankly set about defending
himself to the death,--or 'seeing' in that way 'whether he could not
defend himself,'--with a good capitulation lying in the rear, after he
had.

"SUNDAY, AUGUST 26th, Trumpet at the gates. Messenger from Zweibruck is
introduced blindfold; brings formal Summons to Schmettau. Summons duly
truculent: 'Resistance vain; the more you resist, the worse it will
be,--and there is a worst [that of being delivered to the Croats, and
massacred every man], of which why should I speak? Especially if in
anything you fail of your duty to the Kur-Prinz [Electoral Prince and
Heir-Apparent, poor crook-backed young Gentleman, who has an excellent
sprightly Wife, a friend of Friedrich's and daughter of the late Kaiser
Karl VII., whom we used so beautifully], imagine what your fate will
be!'--To which Schmettau answers: 'Can Durchlaucht think us ignorant
of the common rules of behavior to Persons of that Rank? For the rest,
Durchlaucht knows what our duties here are, and would despise us if we
did NOT do them;'--and, in short, our answer again is, in polite
forms, 'Pooh, pooh; you may go your way!' Upon which the Messenger is
blindfolded again; and Schmettau sets himself in hot earnest to clearing
out his goods from the Neustadt; building with huge intertwisted
cross-beams and stone and earth-masses a Battery at his own end of the
Bridge, batteries on each side of it, below and above;--locks the Gates;
and is passionately busy all Sunday,--though divine service goes on as
usual.

"Hardly were the Prussian guns got away, when Croat people in quantity
came in, and began building a Battery at their end of the Bridge, the
main defence-work being old Prussian meal-barrels, handily filled with
earth. 'If you fire one cannon-ball across on us,' said Schmettau, 'I
will bombard the Neustadt into flame in few minutes [I have only to aim
at our Hay Magazine yonder]: be warned! 'Nor did they once fire from
that side; Electoral Highness withal and Royal Palace being quite
contiguous behind the Prussian Bridge-Battery. Electoral Highness and
Household are politely treated, make polite answer to everything; intend
going down into the 'APOTHEKE' (Kitchen suite), or vaulted part of the
Palace, and will lodge there when the cannonade begins.

"This same SUNDAY, AUGUST 26th, Maguire arrived; and set instantly to
building his bridge at Pillnitz, a little way above Dresden: at Uebigau,
a little below Dresden, the Reichsfolk have another. Reichsfolk,
Zweibruck in person, come all in on Wednesday; post themselves there,
to north and west of the City. What is more important, the siege-guns,
a superb stock, are steadily floating, through the Pirna regions,
hitherward; get to hand on Friday next, the fifth day hence. [Tempelhof,
p. 210.] Korbitz (half-way out to Kesselsdorf) is Durchlaucht's
head-quarter:--Chief General is Durchlaucht, conspicuously he, at least
in theory, and shall have all the glory; though Maguire, glancing on
these cannon, were it nothing more, has probably a good deal to say.
Maguire too, I observe, takes post on that north or Kesselsdorf side;
contiguous for the Head General. Wehla and Brentano post themselves on
the south or up-stream side; it is they that hand in the siege-guns:
batteries are already everywhere marked out, 13 cannon-batteries and 5
howitzer. In short, from the morrow of that truculent Summons, Monday
morning to Thursday, there is hot stir of multifarious preparation on
Schmettau's part; and continual pouring in of the hostile force, who are
also preparing at the utmost. Thursday, the Siege, if it can be called a
Siege, begins. Gradually, and as follows:--

"THURSDAY MORNING (August 30th), Schmettau, who is, night and day,
'palisading the River,' and much else,--discloses (that is, Break of
Day discloses on his part) to the Dresden public a huge Gallows, black,
huge, of impressive aspect; labelled 'For Plunderers, Mutineers and
their Helpers.' [ANONYMOUS OF HAMBURG, iii. 373.] The Austrian heavy
guns are not yet in battery; but multitudes of loose Croat people go
swarming about everywhere, and there is plentiful firing from such
artilleries as they have. This same Thursday morning, two or three
battalions of them rush into the Pirna Suburb; attack the Prussian
Guard-parties there. Schmettau instantly despatches Captain Kollas and a
Trumpet:--'Durchlaucht, have the goodness to recall these Croat Parties;
otherwise the Suburb goes into flame! And directly on arrival of this
Messenger, may it please Durchlaucht. For we have computed the time; and
will not wait beyond what is reasonable for his return!' Zweibruck is
mere indignation and astonishment; 'will burn Halle,' burn Quedlinburg,
Berlin itself, and utterly ruin the King of Prussia's Dominion in
general:--the rejoinder to which is, burning of Pirna Suburb, as
predicted; seventy houses of it, this evening, at six o'clock.

"Onward from which time there is on both sides, especially on
Schmettau's, diligent artillery practice; cannonade kept up wherever
Schmettau can see the enemy busy; enemy responding with what artillery
he has:--not much damage done, I should think, though a great deal of
noise; and for one day (Saturday, September 1st), our Diarist notes,
'Not safe to walk the streets this day.' But, in effect, the Siege,
as they call it,--which fell dead on the fifth day, and was never well
alive--consists mainly of menace and counter-menace, in the way of
bargain-making and negotiation;--and, so far as I can gather, that
superb Park of Austrian Artillery, though built into batteries, and
talked about in a bullying manner, was not fired from at all.

"Schmettau affects towards the enemy (and towards himself, I dare say)
an air of iron firmness; but internally has no such feeling,--'Calls a
Council of War,' and the like. Council of War, on sight of that King's
Missive, confirms him with one voice: 'Surely, surely, Excellenz; no
defence possible!' Which is a prophecy and a fulfilment, both in one.
Why Schmettau did not shoot forth a spy or two, to ascertain for him
What, or whether Nothing whatever, was passing outside Dresden? I never
understand! Beyond his own Walls, the world is a vacancy and blank to
Schmettau, and he seems content it should be so.

"SUNDAY, SEPTEMBER 2d. Though Schmettau's cannonade was very loud, and
had been so all night, divine service was held as usual, streets safe
again,--Austrians, I suppose, not firing with cannon. About 4 P.M.,
after a great deal of powder spent, General Maguire, stepping out on
Elbe Bridge, blows or beats Appeal, three times; 'wishes a moment's
conversation with his Excellency.' Granted at once; witnesses attending
on both sides. 'Defence is impossible; in the name of humanity,
consider!' urges Maguire. 'Defence to the last man of us is certain,'
answers Schmettau, from the teeth outwards;--but, in the end, engages to
put on paper, in case he, by extremity of ill-luck, have at any time
to accept terms, what his terms will inflexibly be. Upon which there is
'Armistice till To-morrow:' and Maguire, I doubt not, reports joyfully
on this feeling of the enemy's pulse. Zweibruck and Maguire are very
well aware of what is passing in these neighborhoods (General Wunsch
back at Wittenberg by forced marches; blew it open in an hour); and are
growing highly anxious that Dresden on any terms were theirs.

"MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 3d, The death-day of the Siege; an uncommonly busy
day,--though Armistice lasted perfect till 3 P.M., and soon came back
more perfect than ever. A Siege not killed by cannon, but by medical
industry. Let us note with brevity the successive symptoms and
appliances. About seven in the morning Maguire had his Messenger in
Dresden, 'Your Excellency's Paper ready?' 'Nearly ready,' answers
Schmettau; 'we will send it by a Messenger of our own.' And about eleven
of the day Maguire does get it;--the same Captain Kollas (whose name we
recollect) handing it in; and statue-like waiting Answer. 'Pshaw, this
will never do,' ejaculates Maguire; 'terms irrationally high!' Captain
Kollas 'knows nothing of what is IN the Paper; and is charged only to
bring a Written Answer from Excellenz.' Excellenz, before writing, 'will
have to consult with Durchlaucht;' can, however, as if confidentially
and from feelings of friendship, can assure you, Sir, on my honor, That
the Garrison will be delivered to the Croats, and every man of it put
to the sword. 'The Garrison will expect that (WIRD DAS ERWARTEN),' said
Kollas, statue-like; and withdrew, with the proper bow. [Tempelhof, iii.
211.] Something interesting to us in these Military diplomatic passages,
with their square-elbowed fashions, and politeness stiff as iron!

"Not till three of the afternoon does the Written Answer reach
Schmettau: 'Such Terms never could be accepted.'--'Good,' answers
Schmettau: 'To our last breath no others will be offered.' And commences
cannonading again, not very violently, but with the order, 'Go on, then,
night and day!'

"About 10 at night, General Guasco, a truculent kind of man, whom I have
met with up and down, but not admitted to memory, beats Appeal on
the Bridge: 'Inform the Commandant that there will now straightway 13
batteries of cannon, and 5 ditto of howitzers open on him, unless he
bethinks himself!' Which dreadful message is taken to Schmettau. 'Wish
the gentleman good-evening,' orders Schmettau; 'and say we will answer
with 100 guns.' Upon which Guasco vanishes;--but returns in not many
minutes, milder in tone; requests 'a sight of that Written Paper of
Terms again.' 'There it still is,' answers Schmettau, 'not altered, nor
ever shall be.' And there is Armistice again:--and the Siege, as turns
out, has fired its last shot; and is painfully expiring in paroxysms
of negotiation, which continue a good many hours. Schmettau strives
to understand clearly that his terms (of the King's own suggesting, as
Schmettau flatters himself) are accepted: nor does Durchlaucht take
upon him to refuse in any point; but he is strangely slow to sign, still
hoping to mend matters.

"Much hithering and thithering there was, till 4 next morning
(Durchlaucht has important news from Torgau, at that moment); till 11
next day; till 4 in the afternoon and later,--Guasco and others coming
with message after message, hasty and conciliatory: (Durchlaucht at such
a distance, his signature not yet come; but be patient; all is right,
upon my honor!' Very great hurry evident on the part of Guasco and
Company; but, nothing suspected by Schmettau. Till, dusk or darkness
threatening now to supervene, Maguire and Schmettau with respective
suites have a Conference on the Bridge,--'rain falling very heavy.'
Durchlaucht's signature, Maguire is astonished to say, has not yet come;
hut Maguire pledges his honor 'that all shall be kept without chicane;'
and adds 'what to some of us seemed not superfluous afterwards), 'I am
incapable of acting falsely or with chicane.' In fact, till 9 in the
evening there was no signature by Durchlaucht; but about 6, on such
pledge by Maguire of his hand and his honor, the Siege entirely gave
up the ghost; and Dresden belonged to Austria. Tuesday Evening, 4th
September, 1759; Sun just setting, could anybody see him for the rain.

"Schmettau had been over-hasty; what need had Schmettau of haste? The
terms had not yet got signature, perfection of settlement on every
point; nor were they at all well kept, when they did! Considerable
flurry, temporary blindness, needless hurry, and neglect of symptoms
and precautions, must be imputed to poor Schmettau; whose troubles began
from this moment, and went on increasing. The Austrians are already
besetting Elbe Bridge, rooting up the herring-bone balks; and
approaching our Block-house,--sooner than was expected. But that is
nothing. On opening the Pirna Gate to share it with the Austrians,
Friedrich's Spy (sooner had not been possible to the man) was waiting;
who handed Schmettau that Second Letter of Friedrich's, 'Courage; there
is relief on the road!' Poor Schmettau!"

What Captain Kollas and the Prussian Garrison thought of all this,
THEY were perhaps shy of saying, and we at such distance are not
informed,--except by one symptom: that, of Colonel Hoffman, Schmettau's
Second, whose indignation does become tragically evident. Hoffman, a
rugged Prussian veteran, is indignant at the Capitulation itself; doubly
and trebly indignant to find the Austrians on Elbe Bridge, busy raising
our Balks and Battery: "How is this Sir?" inquires he of Captain Sydow,
who is on guard at the Prussian end; "How dared you make this change,
without acquainting the Second in Command? Order out your men, and come
along with me to clear the Bridge again!" Sydow hesitates, haggles;
indignant Hoffman, growing loud as thunder, pulls out a pistol,
fatal-looking to disobedient Sydow; who calls to his men, or whose men
spring out uncalled; and shoot Hoffman down,--send two balls through
him, so that he died at 8 that night. With noise enough, then and
afterwards. Was drunk, said Schmettau's people. Friedrich answered, on
report of it: "I think as Hoffman did. If he was 'drunk,' it is pity the
Governor and all the Garrison had not been so, to have come to the same
judgment, as he." [P.S. in Autograph of Letter to Schmettau, "Waldau,
11th September, 1759" (Preuss, ii.; _Urkundenbuch,_ p. 45).] Friedrich's
unbearable feelings, of grief and indignation, in regard to all this
Dresden matter,--which are not expressed except coldly in business
form,--can be fancied by all readers. One of the most tragical bits
of ill-luck that ever befell him. A very sore stroke, in his present
condition; a signal loss and affront. And most of all, unbearable
to think how narrowly it has missed being a signal triumph;--missed
actually by a single hair's-breadth, which is as good as by a mile, or
by a thousand miles!

Soon after 9 o'clock that evening, Durchlaucht in person came rolling
through our battery and the herring-bone balks, to visit Electoral
Highness,--which was not quite the legal time either, Durchlaucht had
not been half an hour with Electoral Highness, when a breathless Courier
came in: "General Wunsch within ten miles [took Torgau in no time, as
Durchlaucht well knows, for a week past]; and will be here before we
sleep!" Durchlaucht plunged out, over the herring-bone balks again
(which many carpenters are busy lifting); and the Electoral Highnesses,
in like manner, hurry off to Toplitz that same night, about an hour
after. What a Tuesday Night! Poor Hoffman is dead at 8 o'clock; the
Saxon Royalties, since 11, are galloping for Pirna, for Toplitz;
Durchlaucht of Zweibruck we saw hurry off an hour before
them,--Capitulation signature not yet dry, and terms of it beginning to
be broken; and Wunsch reported to be within ten miles!

The Wunsch report is perfectly correct. Wunsch is at Grossenhayn this
evening; all in a fiery mood of swiftness, his people and he;--and
indeed it is, by chance, one of Wolfersdorf's impetuosities that has
sent the news so fast. Wunsch had been as swift with Torgau as he was
with Wittenberg: he blew out the poor Reichs Garrison there by instant
storm, and packed it off to Leipzig, under charge of "an Officer and
Trumpet:"--he had, greatly against his will, to rest two days there for
a few indispensable cannon from Magdeburg. Cannon once come, Wunsch,
burning for deliverance of Dresden, had again started at his swiftest,
"Monday, 3d September [death day of the Siege], very early."

"He is under 8,000; but he is determined to do it;--and would have done
it, think judges, half thinks Zweibruck himself: such a fire in that
Wunsch and his Corps as is very dangerous indeed. At 4 this morning,
Zweibruck heard of his being on march: 'numbers uncertain'--(numbers
seemingly not the important point,--blows any number of us about our
business!)--and since that moment Zweibruck has driven the capitulation
at such a pace; though the flurried Schmettau suspected nothing.

"Afternoon of TUESDAY, 4th, Wunsch, approaching Grossenhayn, had
detached Wolfersdorf with 100 light horse rightwards to Grodel, a
boating Village on Elbe shore, To seek news of Dresden; also to see if
boats are procurable for carrying our artillery up thither. At Grodel,
Wolfersdorf finds no boats that will avail: but certain boat-people, new
from Dresden, report that no capitulation had been published when they
left, but that it was understood to be going on. New spur to Wolfersdorf
and Wunsch. Wolfersdorf hears farther in this Village, That there are
some thirty Austrian horse in Grossenhayn:--'Possible these may escape
General Wunsch!' thinks Wolfersdorf; and decides to have them. Takes
thirty men of his own; orders the other seventy to hold rightward,
gather what intelligence is going, and follow more leisurely; and breaks
off for the Grossenhayn-Dresden Highway, to intercept those fellows.

"Getting to the highway, Wolfersdorf does see the fellows; sees
also,--with what degree of horror I do not know,--that there are
at least 100 of them against his 30! Horror will do nothing for
Wolfersdorf, nor are his other 70 now within reach. Putting a bold face
on the matter, he commands, Stentor-like, as if it were all a fact:
'Grenadiers, march; Dragoons, to right forwards, WHEEL; Hussars,
FORWARD: MARCH!'--and does terrifically dash forward with the thirty
Hussars, or last item of the invoice; leaving the others to follow. The
Austrians draw bridle with amazement; fire off their carbines; take to
their heels, and do not stop for more. Wolfersdorf captures 68 of them,
for behoof of Grossenhayn; and sends the remaining 32 galloping home.
[Tempelhof, iii. 214.] Who bring the above news to Durchlaucht of
Zweibruck: '12,000 of them, may it please your Durchlaucht; such the
accounts we had!'--Fancy poor Schmettau's feelings!

"On the morrow Dresden was roused from its sleep by loud firing and
battle, audible on the north side of the River: 'before daybreak, and
all day.' It is Wunsch impetuously busy in the woody countries there.
Durchlaucht had shot out Generals and Divisions, Brentano, Wehla,
this General and then that, to intercept Wunsch: these the fiery
Wunsch--almost as if they had been combustible material coming to quench
fire--repels and dashes back, in a wonderful manner, General after
General of them. And is lord of the field all day:--but cannot hear the
least word from Dresden; which is a surprising circumstance.

"In the afternoon Wunsch summons Maguire in the Neustadt: 'Will answer
you in two hours,' said Maguire. Wunsch thereupon is for attacking
their two Pontoon Elbe-Bridges; still resolute for Dresden,--and orders
Wolfersdorf on one of them, the Uebigau Bridge, who finds the enemy
lifting it at any rate, and makes them do it faster. But night is now
sinking; from Schmettau not a word or sign. 'Silence over there, all
day; not a single cannon to or from,' say Wunsch and Wolfersdorf to one
another. 'Schmettau must have capitulated!' conclude they, and withdraw
in the night-time, still thunderous if molested; bivouac at Grossenhayn,
after twenty-four hours of continual march and battle, not time even for
a snatch of food. [BERICHT VON DER ACTION DES GENERAL-MAJORS VON WUNSCH,
BEY REICHENBERG, DEN 5 SEPTEMBER, 1759 in Seyfarth, _Beylagen,_ ii.
606-608.]

"Resting at Grossenhayn, express reaches Wunsch from his Commandant at
Torgau: 'Kleefeld is come on me from Leipzig with 14,000; I cannot long
hold out, unless relieved.' Wunsch takes the road again; two marches,
each of twenty miles. Reaches Torgau late; takes post in the ruins of
the North Suburb, finds he must fight Kleefeld. Refreshes his men
'with a keg of wine per Company,' surely a judicious step; and sends to
Wolfersdorf, who has the rear-guard, 'Be here with me to-morrow at
10.' Wolfersdorf starts at 4, is here at 10: and Wunsch, having scanned
Kleefeld and his Position [a Position strong IF you are dexterous to
manoeuvre in it; capable of being ruinous if you are not,--part of
the Position of a bigger BATTLE OF TORGAU, which is coming],--flies at
Kleefeld and his 14,000 like a cat-o'-mountain; takes him on the left
flank:--Kleefeld and such overplus of thousands are standing a little to
west-and-south of Torgau, with the ENTEFANG [a desolate big reedy mere,
or PLACE OF DUCKS, still offering the idle Torgauer a melancholy sport
there] as a protection to their right; but with no evolution-talent, or
none in comparison to Wunsch's;--and accordingly are cut to pieces
by Wunsch, and blown to the winds, as their fellows have all been."
[HOFBERCHT VON DER AM 8 SEPTEMBER, 1759, BEY TORGAU, VORGEFALLENEN
ACTION: in Seyfarth, _ Beylagen,_ ii. 609, 610. Tempelhof, iii.
219-222.]

Wunsch, absolute Fate forbidding, could not save Dresden: but he is
here lord of the Northern regions again,--nothing but Leipzig now in
the enemy's hand;--and can await Finck, who is on march with a stronger
party to begin business here. It is reckoned, there are few more
brilliant little bits of Soldiering than this of Wunsch's. All the more,
as his men, for most part, were not Prussian, but miscellaneous Foreign
spirits of uncertain fealty: roving fellows, of a fighting turn,
attracted by Friedrich's fame, and under a Captain who had the art of
keeping them in tune. Wunsch has been soldiering, in a diligent though
dim miscellaneous way, these five-and-twenty years; fought in the old
Turk Wars, under disastrous Seckendorf,--Wunsch a poor young Wurtemberg
ensign, visibly busy there (1737-1739)) as was this same Schmettau, in
the character of staff-officer, far enough apart from Wunsch at that
time!--fought afterwards, in the Bavarian service, in the Dutch, at
Roucoux, at Lauffeld, again under disastrous people. Could never, under
such, find anything but subaltern work all this while; was glad to
serve, under the eye of Friedrich, as Colonel of a Free Corps; which he
has done with much diligence and growing distinction: till now, at the
long last, his chance does come; and he shows himself as a real General.
Possibly a high career lying ahead;--a man that may be very valuable
to Friedrich, who has now so few such left? Fate had again decided
otherwise for Wunsch; in what way will be seen before this Campaign
ends: "an infernal Campaign," according to Friedrich, "CETTE CAMPAGNE
INFERNALE."

Finck, whom Friedrich had just detached from Waldau (September 6th) with
a new 8 or 6,000, to command in chief in those parts, and, along with
Wunsch, put Dresden out of risk, as it were,--Finck does at least
join Wunsch, as we shall mention in a little. And these Two, with such
Wolfersdorfs and people under them, did prove capable of making front
against Reichsfolk in great overplus of number. Nor are farther SIEGES
of those Northern Garrisons, but recaptures of them, the news one
hears from Saxony henceforth;--only that Dresden is fatally gone.
Irrecoverably, as turned out, and in that unbearable manner. Here is the
concluding scene:--

DRESDEN, SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 8th; EXIT SCHMETTAU. "A thousand times
over, Schmettau must have asked himself, 'Why was I in such a hurry?
Without cause for it I, only Maguire having cause!'--The Capitulation
had been ended in a huddle, without signature: an unwise Capitulation;
and it was scandalously ill kept. Schmettau was not to have marched
till Monday, 10th,--six clear days for packing and preparing;--but,
practically, he has to make three serve him; and to go half-packed, or
not packed at all. Endless chicanes do arise, 'upon my honor!'--not
even the 800 wagons are ready for us; 'Can't your baggages go in boats,
then?' 'No, nor shall!' answers Schmettau, with blazing eyes, and heart
ready to burst; a Schmettau living all this while as in Purgatory, or
worse. Such bullyings from truculent Guasco, who is now without muzzle.
Capitulation, most imperfect in itself, is avowedly infringed: King's
Artillery,--which we had haggled for, and ended by 'hoping for,' to
Maguire that rainy evening: why were we in such a hurry, too, and blind
to Maguire's hurry!--King's Artillery, according to Durchlaucht of
Zweibruck, when he actually signed within the walls, is 'NICHT ACCORDIRT
(Not granted), except the Field part.' King's regimental furnishings,
all and sundry, were 'ACCORDIRT, and without visitation,'--but on second
thoughts, the Austrian Officials are of opinion there must really be
visitation, must be inspection. 'May not some of them belong to Polish
Majesty?' In which sad process of inspection there was incredible waste,
Schmettau protesting; and above half of the new uniforms were lost to
us. Our 80 pontoons, which were expressly bargained for, are brazenly
denied us: '20 of them are Saxon,' cry the Austrians: 'who knows if they
are not almost all Saxon,'--upon my honor! At this rate, only wait a day
or two, and fewer wagons than 800 will be needed! thinks Schmettau; and
consents to 18 river-boats; Boats in part, then; and let us march at
once. Accordingly,

"SATURDAY, 8th, at 5 in the morning, Schmettau, with goods and people,
does at last file out: across Elbe Bridge through the Neustadt;
Prussians five deep; a double rank of Austrians, ranged on each side, in
'espalier' they call it,--espalier with gaps in it every here and there,
to what purpose is soon evident. The march was so disposed (likewise for
a purpose) that, all along, there were one or two Companies of Prussian
Foot; and then in the interval, carriages, cannon, cavalry and hussars.
Schmettau's carriage is with the rear-guard, Madam Schmettau's well
in the van:--in two other carriages are two Prussian War-and-Domain
Ministers. [ANONYMOUS OF HAMBURG, III. 376.] 'Managers of Saxon
Finance,' these Two;--who will have to manage elsewhere than in
Dresden henceforth. Zinnow, Borck, they sit veritably there, with their
multiform Account Papers: of whom I know absolutely nothing,--except (if
anybody cared) that Zinnow, who 'died of apoplexy in June following,'
is probably of pursy red-nosed type; and that Borck, for certain, has
a very fine face and figure; delicacy, cheerful dignity, perfect
gentlemanhood in short, written on every feature of him; as painted by
Pesne, and engraved by Schmidt, for my accidental behoof. [_Fredericus
Wilhelmus Borck (Pesne pinxit,_ 1732; _Schmidt, sculptur Regis,
sculpsit, Berolini,_ 1764): an excellent Print and Portrait.] Curious
to think of that elaborate court-coat and flowing periwig, with this
specific Borck, 'old as the Devil' (whom I have had much trouble to
identify), forming visible part of this dismal Procession: the bright
eye of Borck not smiling as usual, but clouded, though impassive! But
that of Borck or his Limners is not the point.

"The Prussians have been divided into small sections, with a mass of
baggage-wagons and cavalry between every two. And no sooner is the mass
got in movement, than there rises from the Austrian part, and continues
all the way, loud invitation, 'Whosoever is a brave Saxon, a brave
Austrian, Reichsman, come to us! Gaps in the espalier, don't you
see!' And Schmettau, in the rear, with baggage and cavalry
intervening,--nobody can reach Schmettau. Here is a way of keeping your
bargain! The Prussian Officers struggle stoutly: but are bellowed at,
struck at, menaced by bayonet and bullet,--none of them shot, I think,
but a good several of them cut and wounded;--the Austrian Officers
themselves in passionate points behaving shamefully, 'Yes, shoot them
down, the (were it nothing else) heretic dogs;' and being throughout
evidently in a hot shivery frame of mind, forgetful of the laws. Seldom
was such a Procession; spite, rage and lawless revenge blazing out
more and more. On the whole, there deserted, through those gaps of
the espalier, about half of the whole Garrison. On Madam Schmettau's
hammercloth there sat, in the Schmettau livery, a hard-featured man,
recognizable by keen eyes as lately a Nailer, of the Nailer Guild here;
who had been a spy for Schmettau, and brought many persons into trouble:
him they tear down, and trample hither and thither,--at last, into some
Guard-house near by." [The Schmettau DIARIUM in ANONYMOUS OF HAMBURG,
iii. 364-376 (corrected chiefly from TEMPELHOF): Protest, and
Correspondence in consequence, is in Seyfarth, _Beylagen,_ ii. 611-621;
in _ Helden-Geschichte,_ &c. &c.]

Schmettau's protest against all this is vehement, solemnly
circumstantial: but, except in regard to the trampled Nailer (Zweibruck
on that point "heartily sorry for the insult to your Excellency's
livery; and here the man is, with a thousand apologies"), Schmettau got
no redress. Nor had Friedrich any, now or henceforth. Friedrich did at
once, more to testify his disgust than for any benefit, order Schmettau:
"Halt at Wittenberg, not at Magdeburg as was pretended to be bargained.
Dismiss your Escort of Austrians there; bid them home at once, and out
of your sight." Schmettau himself he ordered to Berlin, to idle waiting.
Never again employed Schmettau: for sixteen years that they lived
together, never saw his face more.

Schmettau's ill-fortune was much pitied, as surely it deserved to be,
by all men. About Friedrich's severity there was, and still occasionally
is, controversy held. Into which we shall not enter for Yes or for No.
"You are like the rest of them!" writes Friedrich to him; "when the
moment comes for showing firmness, you fail in it." ["Waldau, 10th
September, 1759:" in Preuss, ii. URKUNDEN. p. 44.] Friedrich expects of
others what all Soldiers profess,--and what is in fact the soul of all
nobleness in their trade,--but what only Friedrich himself, and a select
few, are in the habit of actually performing. Tried by the standard
of common practice, Schmettau is clearly absolvable; a broken veteran,
deserving almost tears. But that is not the standard which it will
be safe for a King of men to go by. Friedrich, I should say, would be
ordered by his Office, if Nature herself did not order him, to pitch
his ideal very high; and to be rather Rhadamanthine in judging about it.
Friedrich was never accused of over-generosity to the unfortunate among
his Captains.

After the War, Schmettau, his conduct still a theme of argument, was
reduced to the Invalid List: age now sixty-seven, but health and heart
still very fresh, as he pleaded; complaining that he could not live on
his retiring Pension of 300 pounds a year. "Be thankful you have not had
your head struck off by sentence of Court-Martial," answered Friedrich.
Schmettau, after some farther troubles from Court quarters, retired
to Brandenburg, and there lived silent, poor but honorable, for his
remaining fifteen years. Madam Schmettau came out very beautiful in
those bad circumstances: cheery, thrifty, full of loyal patience; a
constant sunshine to her poor man, whom she had preceded out of Dresden
in the way we saw. Schmettau was very quiet, still studious of War
matters; [See _Leben_ (by his Son, "Captain Schmettau;" a modest
intelligent Book), pp. 440-447.] "sent the King" once,--in 1772, while
Polish Prussia, and How it could be fortified, were the interesting
subject,--"a JOURNAL," which he had elaborated for himself, "OF THE
MARCHES OF KARL TWELFTH IN WEST PREUSSEN;" which was well received:
"Apparently the King not angry with me farther?" thought Schmettau. A
completely retired old man; studious, social,--the best men of the
Army still his friends and familiars:--nor, in his own mind, any mutiny
against his Chief; this also has its beauty in a human life, my friend.
So long as Madam Schmettau lived, it was well; after her death,
not well, dark rather, and growing darker: and in about three years
Schmettau followed (27th October, 1775), whither that good soul had
gone. The elder Brother--who was a distinguished Academician, as well
as Feldmarschall and Negotiator--had died at Berlin, in Voltaire's time,
1751. Each of those Schmettaus had a Son, in the Prussian Army, who
wrote Books, or each a short Book, still worth reading. [_Bavarian War
of 1778,_ by the Feldmarschall's Son; ad this _Leben_ we have just been
citing, by the Lieutenant-General's.] But we must return.

On the very morrow, September 5th, Daun heard of the glorious success
at Dresden; had not expected it till about the 10th at soonest. From
Triebel he sends the news at gallop to Lieberose and Soltikof: "Rejoice
with us, Excellenz: did not I predict it? Silesia and Saxony both are
ours; fruits chiefly of your noble successes. Oh, continue them a very
little!" "Umph!" answers Soltikof, not with much enthusiasm: "Send us
meal steadily; and gain you, Excellenz's self, some noble success!"
Friedrich did not hear of it for almost a week later; not till Monday,
10th,--as a certain small Anecdote would of itself indicate.

Sunday Evening, 9th September, General Finck, with his new 6,000,
hastening on to join Wunsch for relief of Dresden, had got to
Grossenhayn; and was putting up his tents, when the Outposts brought him
in an Austrian Officer, who had come with a Trumpeter inquiring for
the General. The Austrian Officer "is in quest of proper lodgings for
General Schmettau and Garrison [fancy Finck's sudden stare!];--last
night they lodged at Gross-Dobritz, tolerably to their mind: but
the question for the Escort is, Where to lodge this night, if your
Excellency could advise me?" "Herr, I will advise you to go back to
Gross-Dobritz on the instant," answers Finck grimly; "I shall be obliged
to make you and your Trumpet prisoners, otherwise!" Exit Austrian
Officer. That same evening, too, Captain Kollas, carrying Schmettau's
sad news to the King, calls on Finck in passing; gives dismal details
of the Capitulation and the Austrian way of keeping it; filling Finck's
mind with sorrowful indignation. [Tempelhof, iii. 237.]

Finck--let us add here, though in date it belongs a little
elsewhere--pushes on, not the less, to join Wunsch at Torgau; joins
Wunsch, straightway recaptures Leipzig, garrison prisoners (September
13th): recaptures all those northwestern garrisons,--multitudinous
Reichsfolk trying, once, to fight him, in an amazingly loud, but
otherwise helpless way ("ACTION OF KORBITZ" they call it); cannonading
far and wide all day, and manoeuvring about, here bitten in upon,
there trying to bite, over many leagues of Country; principally under
Haddick's leading; [HOFBERICHT VON DER AM 21 SEPTEMBER BEY KORBITZ
(in Meissen Country, south of Elbe; Krogis too is a Village in this
wide-spread "Action") VORGEFALLENEN ACTION (Seyfarth, _Beylagen,_
ii. 621-630). Tempelhof, iii. 248, 258.] who saw good to draw off
Dresden-ward next day, and leave Finck master in those regions. To
Daun's sad astonishment,--in a moment of crisis,--as we shall hear
farther on! So that Saxony is not yet conquered to Daun; Saxony, no, nor
indeed will be:--but Dresden is. Friedrich never could recover Dresden;
though he hoped, and at intervals tried hard, for a long while to come.




Chapter VI.--PRINCE HENRI MAKES A MARCH OF FIFTY HOURS; THE RUSSIANS
CANNOT FIND LODGING IN SILESIA.

The eyes of all had been bent on Dresden latterly; and there had
occurred a great deal of detaching thitherward, and of marching there
and thence, as we have partly seen. And the end is, Dresden, and to
appearance Saxony along with it, is Daun's. Has not Daun good reason now
to be proud of the cunctatory method? Never did his game stand better;
and all has been gained at other people's expense. Daun has not played
one trump card; it is those obliging Russians that have played all
the trumps, and reduced the Enemy to nothing. Only continue that wise
course,--and cart meal, with your whole strength, for the Russians!--

Safe behind the pools of Lieberose, Friedrich between them and Berlin,
lie those dear Russians; extending, Daun and they, like an impassable
military dike, with spurs of Outposts and cunningly devised Detachments,
far and wide,--from beyond Bober or utmost Crossen on the east, to
Hoyerswerda in Elbe Country on the west;--dike of eighty miles long,
and in some eastern parts of almost eighty broad; so elaborate is Daun's
detaching quality, in cases of moment. "The King's broken Army on
one side of us," calculates Daun; "Prince Henri's on the other;
incommunicative they; reduced to isolation, powerless either or both
of them against such odds. They shall wait there, please Heaven, till
Saxony be quite finished. Zweibruck, and our Detachments and Maguires,
let them finish Saxony, while Soltikof keeps the King busy. Saxony
finished, how will either Prince or King attempt to recover it! After
which, Silesia for us;--and we shall then be near our Magazines withal,
and this severe stress of carting will abate or cease." In fact, these
seem sound calculations: Friedrich is 24,000; Henri 38,000; the military
dike is, of Austrians 75,000, of Russians and Austrians together
120,000. Daun may fairly calculate on succeeding beautifully this Year:
Saxony his altogether; and in Silesia some Glogau or strong Town taken,
and Russians and Austrians wintering together in that Country.

If only Daun do not TOO much spare his trump cards! But there is such
a thing as excess on that side too: and perhaps it is even the more
ruinous kind,--and is certainly the more despised by good judges,
though the multitude of bad may notice it less. Daun is unwearied in
his vigilantes, in his infinite cartings of provision for himself
and Soltikof,--long chains of Magazines, big and little, at Guben,
at Gorlitz, at Bautzen, Zittau, Friedland; and does, aided by French
Montalembert, all that man can to keep those dear stupid Russians in
tune.

Daun's problem of carting provisions, and guarding his multifarious
posts, and sources of meal and defence, is not without its difficulties.
Especially with a Prince Henri opposite; who has a superlative
manoeuvring talent of his own, and an industry not inferior to Daun's
in that way. Accordingly, ever since August 11th-13th, when Daun moved
northward to Triebel, and Henri shot out detachments parallel to
him, "to secure the Bober and our right flank, and try to regain
communication with the King,"--still more, ever since August 22d, when
Daun undertook that onerous cartage of meal for Soltikof as well as
self, the manoeuvring and mutual fencing and parrying, between Henri and
him, has been getting livelier and livelier. Fain would Daun secure his
numerous Roads and Magazines; assiduously does Henri threaten him
in these points, and try all means to regain communication with
his Brother. Daun has Magazines and interests everywhere; Henri is
everywhere diligent to act on them.

Daun in person, ever since Kunersdorf time, has been at Triebel; Henri
moved to Sagan after him, but has left a lieutenant at Schmottseifen,
as Daun has at Mark-Lissa:--here are still new planets, and secondary
ditto, with revolving moons. In short, it is two interpenetrating solar
systems, gyrating, osculating and colliding, over a space of
several thousand square miles,--with an intricacy, with an embroiled
abstruseness Ptolemean or more! Which indeed the soldier who would know
his business--(and not knowing it, is not he of all solecisms in this
world the most flagrant?)--ought to study, out of Tempelhof and the
Books; but which, except in its results, no other reader could endure.
The result we will make a point of gathering: carefully riddled down,
there are withal in the details five or six little passages which have
some shadow of interest to us; these let us note, and carefully omit the
rest:--

OF FOUQUET AT LANDSHUT. "Fouquet was twice attacked at Landshut; but
made a lucky figure both times. Attack first was by Deville: attack
second by Harsch. Early in July, not long after Friedrich had left for
Schmottseifen, rash Deville (a rash creature, and then again a laggard,
swift where he should be slow, and VICE VERSA) again made trial on
Landshut and Fouquet; but was beautifully dealt with; taken in rear,
in flank, or I forget how taken, but sent galloping through the Passes
again, with a loss of many Prisoners, most of his furnitures, and all
his presence of mind: whom Daun thereupon summoned out of those parts,
'Hitherward to Mark-Lissa with your Corps; leave Fouquet alone!'
[HOFBERICHT VON DEN UNTERNEHMUNGEN DES FOUQUETSCHEN CORPS, IM JULIUS
1759: in Seyfarth, Beylagen, ii. 582-586.]

"After which, Fouquet, things being altogether quiet round him, was
summoned, with most part of his force, to Schmottseifen; left General
Goltz (a man we have met before) to guard Landshut; and was in fair
hopes of proving helpful to Prince Henri,--when Harsch [Harsch by
himself this time, not Harsch and Deville as usual] thought here was his
opportunity; and came with a great apparatus, as if to swallow Landshut
whole. So that Fouquet had to hurry off reinforcements thither; and at
length to go himself, leaving Stutterheim in his stead at Schmottseifen.
Goltz, however, with his small handful, stood well to his work. And
there fell out sharp fencings at Landshut:--especially one violent
attack on our outposts; the Austrians quite triumphant; till 'a couple
of cannon open on them from the next Hill,'--till some violent Werner
or other charge in upon them with Prussian Hussars;--a desperate tussle,
that special one of Werner's; not only sabres flashing furiously on both
sides, but butts of pistols and blows on the face: [Tempelhof, iii. 233:
31st August.] till, in short, Harsch finds he can make nothing of it,
and has taken himself away, before Fouquet come." This Goltz, here
playing Anti-Harsch, is the Goltz who, with Winterfeld, Schmettau and
others, was in that melancholy Zittau march, of the Prince of Prussia's,
in 1757: it was Goltz by whom the King sent his finishing compliment,
"You deserve, all of you, to be tried by Court-Martial, and to lose
your heads!" Goltz is mainly concerned with Fouquet and Silesia, in late
times; and we shall hear of him once again. Fouquet did not return to
Schmottseifen; nor was molested again in Landshut this year, though he
soon had to detach, for the King's use, part of his Landshut force, and
had other Silesian business which fell to him.

FORTRESS OF PEITZ. The poor Fortress of Peitz was taken again;--do
readers remember it, "on the day of Zorndorf," last year? "This year,
a fortnight after Kunersdorf, the same old Half-pay Gentleman with his
Five-and-forty Invalids have again been set adrift, 'with the honors
of war,' poor old creatures; lest by possibility they afflict the
dear Russians and our meal-carts up yonder. [Tempelhof, iii. 231: 27th
August.] I will forget who took Peitz: perhaps Haddick, of whom we have
lately heard so much? He was captor of Berlin in 1757, did the Inroad on
Berlin that year,--and produced Rossbach shortly after. Peitz, if he did
Peitz, was Haddick's last success in the world. Haddick has been most
industrious, 'guarding the Russian flank,'--standing between the King
and it, during that Soltikof march to Mullrose, to Lieberose; but
that once done, and the King settled at Waldau, Haddick was ordered to
Saxony, against Wunsch and Finck:--and readers know already what he made
of these Two in the 'Action at Korbitz, September 21st,'--and shall hear
soon what befell Haddick himself in consequence."

COLONEL HORDT IS CAPTURED. "It was in that final marching of Soltikof
to Lieberose that a distinguished Ex-Swede, Colonel Hordt, of the Free
Corps HORDT, was taken prisoner. At Trebatsch; hanging on Soltikof's
right flank on that occasion. It was not Haddick, it was a swarm of
Cossacks who laid Hordt fast; his horse having gone to the girths in
a bog. [_Memoires du Comte de Hordt_ (a Berlin, 1789), ii. 53-58
(not dated or intelligible there): in Tempelhof (iii. 235, 236)
clear account, "Trebatsch, September 4th."] Hordt, an Ex-Swede of
distinction,--a Royalist Exile, on whose head the Swedes have set a
price (had gone into 'Brahe's Plot,' years since, Plot on behalf of the
poor Swedish King, which cost Brahe his life),--Hordt now might have
fared ill, had not Friedrich been emphatic, 'Touch a hair of him,
retaliation follows on the instant!' He was carried to Petersburg; 'lay
twenty-six months and three days' in solitary durance there; and we may
hear a word from him again."

ZIETHEN ALMOST CAPTURED. "Prince Henri, in the last days of August,
marched to Sagan in person; [Tempelhof, iii. 231: 29th August.] Ziethen
along with him; multifariously manoeuvring 'to regain communication with
the King.' Of course, with no want of counter-manoeuvring, of vigilant
outposts, cunningly devised detachments and assiduous small measures on
the part of Daun. Who, one day, had determined on a more considerable
thing; that of cutting out Ziethen from the Sagan neighborhood. And
would have done it, they say,--had not he been too cunctatory. September
2d, Ziethen, who is posted in the little town of Sorau, had very nearly
been cut off. In Sorau, westward, Daun-ward, of Sagan a short day's
march: there sat Ziethen, conscious of nothing particular,--with Daun
secretly marching on him; Daun in person, from the west, and two others
from the north and from the south, who are to be simultaneous on Sorau
and the Zietheners. A well-laid scheme; likely to have finished Ziethen
satisfactorily, who sat there aware of nothing. But it all miswent:
Daun, on the road, noticed some trifling phenomenon (Prussian party
of horse, or the like), which convinced his cautious mind that all was
found out; that probably a whole Prussian Army, instead of a Ziethen
only, was waiting at Sorau; upon which Daun turned home again, sorry
that he could not turn the other two as well. The other two were
stronger than Ziethen, could they have come upon him by surprise; or
have caught him before he got through a certain Pass, or bit of bad
ground, with his baggage. But Ziethen, by some accident, or by his own
patrols, got notice; loaded his baggage instantly; and was through the
Pass, or half through it, and in a condition to give stroke for stroke
with interest, when his enemies came up. Nothing could be done upon
Ziethen; who marched on, he and all his properties, safe to Sagan that
night,--owing to Daun's over-caution, and to Ziethen's own activity and
luck." [Tempelhof, iii. 233.]

All this was prior to the loss of Dresden. During the crisis of that,
when everybody was bestirring himself, Prince Henri made extraordinary
exertions: "Much depends on me; all on me!" sighed Henri. A cautious
little man; but not incapable of risking, in the crisis of a game for
life and death. Friedrich and he are wedged asunder by that dike of
Russians and Austrians, which goes from Bober river eastward, post
after post, to Hoyerswerda westward, eighty miles along the
Lausitz-Brandenburg Frontier, rooting itself through the Lausitz
into Bohemia, and the sources of its meal. Friedrich and he cannot
communicate except by spies ("the first JAGER," or regular express "from
the King, arrived September 13th" [Ib. iii. 207.]): but both are of one
mind; both are on one problem, "What is to be done with that impassable
dike?"--and co-operate sympathetically without communicating. What
follows bears date AFTER the loss of Dresden, but while Henri still knew
only of the siege,--that JAGER of the 13th first brought him news of the
loss.

"A day or two after Ziethen's adventure, Henri quits Sagan, to move
southward for a stroke at the Bohemian-Lausitz magazines; a stroke, and
series of strokes. SEPTEMBER 8th, Ziethen and (in Fouquet's absence at
Landshut) Stutterheim are pushed forward into the Zittau Country; first
of all upon Friedland,--the Zittau Friedland, for there are Friedlands
many! SEPTEMBER 9th, Stutterheim summons Friedland, gets it; gets the
bit of magazine there; and next day hastens on to Zittau. Is refused
surrender of Zittau; learns, however, that the magazine has been mostly
set on wheels again, and is a stage forward on the road to Bohemia;
whitherward Stutterheim, quitting Zittau as too tedious, hastens after
it, and next day catches it, or the unburnt remains of it. A successful
Stutterheim. Nor is Ziethen idle in the mean while; Ziethen and others;
whom no Deville or Austrian Party thinks itself strong enough to meddle
with, Prince Henri being so near.

"Here is a pretty tempest in the heart of our Bohemian meal-conduit!
Continue that, and what becomes of Soltikof and me? Daun is off from
Triebel Country to this dangerous scene; indignantly cashiers Deville,
'Why did not you attack these Ziethen people? Had not you 10,000, Sir?'
Cashiers poor Deville for not attacking;--does not himself attack: but
carts away the important Gorlitz magazine, to Bautzen, which is the
still more important one; sits down on the lid of that (according to
wont); shoots out O'Donnell (an Irish gentleman, Deville's successor),
and takes every precaution. Prince Henri, in presence of O'Donnell,
coalesces again; walks into Gorlitz; encamps there, on the Landskron
and other Heights (Moys Hill one of them, poor Winterfeld's Hill!),--and
watches a little how matters will turn, and whether Daun, severely
vigilant from Bautzen, seated on the lid of his magazine, will not
perhaps rise."

First and last, Daun in this business has tried several things; but
there was pretty much always, and emphatically there now is, only one
thing that could be effectual: To attack Prince Henri, and abolish him
from those countries;--as surely might have been possible, with twice
his strength at your disposal?--This, though sometimes he seemed to be
thinking of such a thing, Daun never would try: for which the subsequent
FACTS, and all good judges, were and are inexorably severe on Daun.
Certain it is, no rashness could have better spilt Daun's game than did
this extreme caution.




DAUN, SOLTIKOF AND COMPANY AGAIN HAVE A COLLOQUY (Bautzen, September
15th); AFTER WHICH EVERYBODY STARTS ON HIS SPECIAL COURSE OF ACTION.

Soltikof's disgust at this new movement of Daun's was great and
indignant. "Instead of going at the King, and getting some victory for
himself, he has gone to Bautzen, and sat down on his meal-bags! Meal?
Is it to be a mere fighting for meal? I will march to-morrow for Poland,
for Preussen, and find plenty of meal!" And would have gone, they say,
had not Mercury, in the shape of Montalembert with his most zealous
rhetoric, intervened; and prevailed with difficulty. "One hour of
personal interview with Excellency Daun," urges Montalembert; "one
more!" "No," answers Soltikof.--"Alas, then, send your messenger!" To
which last expedient Soltikof does assent, and despatches Romanzof on
the errand.

SEPTEMBER 15th, at Bautzen, at an early hour, there is meeting
accordingly; not Romanzof, Soltikof's messenger, alone, but Zweibruck
in person, Daun in person; and most earnest council is held. "A noble
Russian gentleman sees how my hands are bound," pleads Daun. "Will not
Excellency Soltikof, who disdains idleness, go himself upon Silesia,
upon Glogau for instance, and grant me a few days?" "No," answers
Romanzof; "Excellency Soltikof by himself will not. Let Austria
furnish Siege-Artillery; daily meal I need not speak of; 10,000 fresh
Auxiliaries beyond those we have: on these terms Excellency Soltikof
will perhaps try it; on lower terms, positively not." "Well then, yes!"
answers Daun, not without qualms of mind. Daun has a horror at weakening
himself to that extent; but what can he do? "General Campitelli, with the
10,000, let him march this night, then; join with General Loudon where
you please to order: Excellency Soltikof shall see that in every point
I conform." [Tempelhof, iii. 247-249.]--An important meeting to us, this
at Bautzen; and breaks up the dead-lock into three or more divergent
courses of activity; which it will now behoove us to follow, with the
best brevity attainable. "Bautzen, Saturday, 15th September, early in
the morning," that is the date of the important Colloquy. And precisely
eight-and-forty hours before, "on Thursday, 13th, about 10 A.M.", in
the western Environs of Quebec, there has fallen out an Event, quite
otherwise important in the History of Mankind! Of which readers shall
have some notice at a time more convenient.--

Romanzof returning with such answer, Soltikof straightway gathers
himself, September 15th-16th, and gets on march. To Friedrich's joy; who
hopes it may be homeward; waits two days at Waldau, for the Yes or
No. On the second day, alas, it is No: "Going for Silesia, I perceive;
thither, by a wide sweep northward, which they think will be safer!"
Upon which Friedrich also rises; follows, with another kind of speed
than Soltikof's; and, by one of his swift clutchings, lays hold of
Sagan, which he, if Soltikof has not, sees to be a key-point in this
operation. Easy for Soltikof to have seized this key-point, key of
the real road to Glogau; easy for Loudon and the new 10,000 to have
rendezvoused there: but nobody has thought of doing it. A few Croats
were in the place, who could make no debate.

From Sagan Friedrich and Henri are at length in free communication;
Sagan to the Landskron at Gorlitz is some fifty miles of country, now
fallen vacant. From Henri, from Fouquet (the dangers of Landshut being
over), Friedrich is getting what reinforcement they can spare (September
20th-24th); will then push forward again, industriously sticking to the
flanks of Soltikof, thrusting out stumbling-blocks, making his march
very uncomfortable.

Strange to say, from Sagan, while waiting two days for these
reinforcements, there starts suddenly to view, suddenly for Friedrich
and us, an incipient Negotiation about Peace! Actual Proposal that way
(or as good as actual, so Voltaire thinks it), on the part of Choiseul
and France; but as yet in Voltaire's name only, by a sure though a
backstairs channel, of his discovering. Of which, and of the much
farther corresponding that did actually follow on it, we purpose to say
something elsewhere, at a better time. Meanwhile Voltaire's announcement
of it to the King has just come in, through a fair and high Hand: how
Friedrich receives it, what Friedrich's inner feeling is, and has been
for a fortnight past--Here are some private utterances of his, throwing
a straggle of light on those points:--


FOUR LETTERS OF FRIEDRICH'S (10th-24th September).

No. 1. TO PRINCE FERDINAND (at Berlin). Poor little Ferdinand, the
King's Brother, fallen into bad health, has retired from the Wars, and
gone to Berlin; much an object of anxiety to the King, who diligently
corresponds with the dear little man,--giving earnest medical advices,
and getting Berlin news in return.

"WALDAU, 10th September, 1759.

"Since my last Letter, Dresden has capitulated,--the very day while
Wunsch was beating Maguire at The Barns (north side of Dresden,
September 5th) day AFTER the capitulation]. Wunsch went back to Torgau,
which St. Andre, with 14,000 Reichs-people under him, was for retaking;
him too Wunsch beat, took all his tents, kettles, haversacks and
utensils, 300 prisoners, six cannon and some standards. Finck is uniting
with Wunsch; they will march on the Prince of Zweibruck, and retake
Dresden [hopes always, for a year and more, to have Dresden back very
soon]. I trust before long to get all these people gathered round
Dresden, and our own Country rid of them: that, I take it, will be the
end of the Campaign.

"Many compliments to the Prince of Wurtemberg [wounded at Kunersdorf],
and to all our wounded Generals: I hope Seidlitz is now out of danger:
that bleeding fit (EBULLITION DE SANG) will cure him of the cramp in his
jaw, and of his colics; and as he is in bed, he won't take cold. I hope
the viper-broth will do you infinite good; be assiduous in patching your
constitution, while there is yet some fine weather left: I dread the
winter for you; take a great deal of care against cold. I have still a
couple of cruel months ahead of me before ending this Campaign.
Within that time, there will be, God knows what upshot." [_OEuvres de
Frederic,_ xxvi. 544.]--This is "September 10th:" the day of Captain
Kollas's arrival with his bad Dresden news; Daun and Soltikof profoundly
quiet for three days more.

No. 2. TO THE DUCHESS OF SACHSEN-GOTHA (at Gotha). Voltaire has enclosed
his Peace-Proposal to that Serene Lady, always a friend of Friedrich's
and his; to whom Friedrich, directly on receipt of it, makes answer:--

"SAGAN, 22d September, 1759.

"MADAM,--I receive on all occasions proofs of your goodness, to which I
am as sensible as a chivalrous man can be. Certainly it is not through
your hands, Madam, that my Correspondence with V. [with Voltaire, if
one durst write it in full] ought to be made to pass! Nevertheless, in
present circumstances, I will presume to beg that you would forward to
him the Answer here enclosed, on which I put no Address. The difficulty
of transmitting Letters has made me choose my Brother," Ferdinand, at
Berlin, "to have this conveyed to your hand.

"If I gave bridle to my feelings, now would be the moment for developing
them; but in these critical times I judge it better not; and will
restrict myself to simple assurances of--" F.

No. 3. TO VOLTAIRE, at the Delices (so her Serene Highness will address
it). Here is part of the Enclosure to "V." Friedrich is all for Peace;
but keeps on his guard with such an Ambassador, and writes in a proud,
light, only half-believing style:--

"SAGAN, 22d September, 1759.

"The Duchess of Sachsen-Gotha sends me your Letter. I never received
your packet of the 29th: communications all interrupted here; with much
trouble I get this passed on to you, if it is happy enough to pass.

"My position is not so desperate as my enemies give out. I expect to
finish my Campaign tolerably; my courage is not sunk:--it appears,
however, there is talk of Peace. All I can say of positive on this
article is, That I have honor for ten; and that, whatever misfortune
befall me, I feel myself incapable of doing anything to wound, the least
in the world, this principle,--which is so sensitive and delicate for
one who thinks like a gentleman (PENSE EN PREUX CHEVALIER); and so
little regarded by rascally politicians, who think like tradesmen.

"I know nothing of what you have been telling me about [your backstairs
channels, your Duc de Choiseul and his humors]: but for making Peace
there are two conditions which I never will depart from: 1. To make
it conjointly with my faithful Allies [Hessen and England; I have no
other]; 2. To make it honorable and glorious. Observe you, I have still
honor remaining; I will preserve that, at the price of my blood.

"If your people want Peace, let them propose nothing to me which
contradicts the delicacy of my sentiments. I am in the convulsions
of military operations; I do as the gamblers who are in ill-luck, and
obstinately set themselves against Fortune. I have forced her to return
to me, more than once, like a fickle mistress, when she had run away. My
opponents are such foolish people, in the end I bid fair to catch some
advantage over them: but, happen whatsoever his Sacred Majesty Chance
may please, I don't disturb myself about it. Up to this point, I have a
clear conscience in regard to the misfortunes that have come to me.
As to you, the Battle of Minden, that of Cadiz" (Boscawen VERSUS De la
Clue; Toulon Fleet running out, and caught by the English, as we saw),
these things perhaps, "and the loss of Canada, are arguments capable
of restoring reason to the French, who had got confused by the Austrian
hellebore.

"This is my way of thinking. You do not find me made of rose-water: but
Henri Quatre, Louis Quatorze,--my present enemies even, whom I could
cite [Maria Theresa, twenty years ago, when your Belleisle set out to
cut her in Four],--were of no softer temper either. Had I been born a
private man, I would yield everything for the love of Peace; but one
has to take the tone of one's position. This is all I can tell you
at present. In three or four weeks the ways of correspondence will be
freer.--F." [_OEuvres de Frederic,_ xxiii. 60, 61.]

No. 4. TO PRINCE FERDINAND. Two days later: has got on foot again,--end
of his first march upon Soltikof again:--

"BAUNAU, 24th September, 1759.

"Thank you for the news you send of the wounded Officers," Wurtemberg,
Seidlitz and the others. "You may well suppose that in the pass things
are at, I am not without cares, inquietudes, anxieties; it is the
frightfulest crisis I have had in my life. This is the moment for dying
unless one conquer. Daun and my Brother Henri are marching side by side
[not exactly!]. It is possible enough all these Armies may assemble
hereabouts, and that a general Battle may decide our fortune and
the Peace. Take care of your health, dear Brother.--F." [_OEuvres de
Frederic,_ xxvi. 545.]

Baunau is on Silesian ground, as indeed Sagan itself is; at Baunau
Friedrich already, just on arriving, has done a fine move on Soltikof,
and surprisingly flung the toll-gate in Soltikof's face. As we shall
see by and by;--and likewise that Prince Henri, who emerges to-morrow
morning (September 25th), has not been "marching side by side with
Daun," but at a pretty distance from that gentleman!--

Soltikof is a man of his word; otherwise one suspects he already saw his
Siege of Glogau to be impossible. Russians are not very skilful at the
War-minuet: fancy what it will be dancing to such a partner! Friedrich,
finding they are for Glogau, whisks across the Oder, gets there before
them: "No Glogau for you!" They stand agape for some time; then think
"Well then Breslau!" Friedrich again whisks across from them, farther
up, and is again ahead of them when they cross: "No Breslau either!" In
effect, it is hopeless; and we may leave the two manoeuvring in those
waste parts, astride of Oder, or on the eastern bank of it, till a
fitter opportunity; and attend to Henri, who is now the article in risk.

Zweibruck's report of himself, on that day of the general Colloquy, was
not in the way of complaint, like that of the Russians, though there did
remain difficulties. "Dresden gloriously ours; Maguire Governor there,
and everything secure; upon my honor. But in the northwest part, those
Fincks and Wunsches, Excellenz?"--And the actual truth is, Wunsch
has taken Leipzig, day before yesterday (September 13th), as Daun
sorrowfully knows, by news come in overnight. And six days hence
(September 21st), Finck and Wunsch together will do their "ACTION OF
KORBITZ," and be sending Haddick a bad road! These things Zweibruck
knows only in part; but past experience gives him ominous presentiment,
as it may well do; and he thinks decidedly: "Excellenz, more Austrian
troops are indispensable there; in fact, your Excellenz's self, were
that possible; which one feels it is not, in the presence of these
Russians!"

Russians and Reichsfolk, these are a pair of thumbscrews on both thumbs
of Daun; screwing the cunctation out of him; painfully intimating: "Get
rid of this Prince Henri; you must, you must!" And, in the course of the
next eight days Daun has actually girt himself to this great enterprise.
Goaded on, I could guess, by the "Action of Korbitz" (done on Friday,
thirty hours ago); the news of which, and that Haddick, instead of
extinguishing Finck, is retreating from him upon Dresden,--what a piece
of news! thinks Daun: "You, Zweibruck, Haddick, Maguire and Company,
you are 36,000 in Saxony; Finck has not 12,000 in the field: How is
this?"--and indignantly dismisses Haddick altogether: "Go, Sir, and
attend to your health!" [Tempelhof, iii. 276, 258-261.] News poignantly
astonishing to Daun, as would seem;--like an ox-goad in the lazy rear of
Daun. Certain it is, Daun had marched out to Gorlitz in collected form;
and, on Saturday afternoon, SEPTEMBER 22d is personally on the Heights
(not Moys Hill, I should judge, but other points of vision), taking
earnest survey of Prince Henri's position on the Landskron there.
"To-morrow morning we attack that Camp," thinks Daun; "storm Prince
Henri and it: be rid of him, at any price!" [Ib. iii. 253-256 (for
the March now ensuing): iii. 228-234, 241-247 (for Henri's anterior
movements).]

"To-morrow morning," yes:--but this afternoon, and earlier, Prince
Henri has formed a great resolution, his plans all laid, everything in
readiness; and it is not here you will find Prince Henri to-morrow. This
is his famous March of Fifty Hours, this that we are now come to; which
deserves all our attention,--and all Daun's much more! Prince Henri was
habitually a man cautious in War; not aggressive, like his Brother, but
defensive, frugal of risks, and averse to the lion-springs usual with
some people; though capable of them, too, in the hour of need. Military
men are full of wonder at the bold scheme he now fell upon; and at his
style of executing it. Hardly was Daun gone home to his meditations
on the storm of the Landskron to-morrow, and tattoo beaten in Prince
Henri's Camp there, when, at 8 that Saturday evening, issuing
softly, with a minimum of noise, in the proper marching columns,
baggage-columns, Henri altogether quitted this Camp; and vanished like
a dream. Into the Night; men and goods, every item:--who shall say
whitherward? Leaving only a few light people to keep up the watch-fires
and sentry-cries, for behoof of Daun! Let readers here, who are in the
secret, watch him a little from afar.

Straight northward goes Prince Henri, down Neisse Valley, 20 miles
or so, to Rothenburg; in columns several-fold, with much delicate
arranging, which was punctually followed: and in the course of to-morrow
Prince Henri is bivouacked, for a short rest of three hours,--hidden in
unknown space, 20 miles from Daun, when Daun comes marching up to storm
him on the Landskron! Gone veritably; but whitherward Daun cannot form
the least guess. Daun can only keep his men under arms there, all day;
while his scouts gallop far and wide,--bringing in this false guess and
the other; and at length returning with the eminently false one, misled
by some of Henri's baggage-columns, which have to go many routes, That
the Prince is on march for Glogau:--"Gone northeast; that way went his
wagons; these we saw with our eyes." "Northeast? Yes, to Glogau possibly
enough," thinks Daun: "Or may not he, cunning as he is and full of
feints, intend a stroke on Bautzen, in my absence?"--and hastens thither
again, and sits down on the Magazine-lid, glad to find nothing wrong
there.

This is all that Daun hears of Henri for the next four days. Plenty of
bad news from Saxony in these four days: the Finck-Haddick Action of
Korbitz, a dismal certainty before one started,--and Haddick on his
road to some Watering Place by this time! But no trace of Henri farther;
since that of the wagons wending northeast. "Gone to Glogau, to his
Brother: no use in pushing him, or trying to molest him there!" thinks
Daun; and waits, in stagnant humor, chewing the cud of bitter enough
thoughts, till confirmation of that guess arrive:--as it never will in
this world! Read an important Note:--

"To northward of Bautzen forty miles, and to westward forty miles,
the country is all Daun's; only towards Glogau, with the Russians and
Friedrich thereabouts, does it become disputable, or offer Prince Henri
any chance. Nevertheless it is not to Glogau, it is far the reverse,
that the nimble Henri has gone. Resting himself at Rothenburg 'three
hours' (speed is of all things the vitalest), Prince Henri starts again,
SUNDAY afternoon, straight westward this time. Marches, with his best
swiftness, with his best arrangements, through many sleeping
Villages, to Klitten, not a wakeful one: a march of 18 miles from
Rothenburg;--direct for the Saxon side of things, instead of the
Silesian, as Daun had made sure.

"At Klitten, MONDAY morning, bivouac again, for a few hours,--'has no
Camp, only waits three hours,' is Archenholtz's phrase: but I suppose
the meaning is, Waits till the several Columns, by their calculated
routes, have all got together; and till the latest in arriving has had
'three hours' of rest,--the earliest having perhaps gone on march again,
in the interim? There are 20 miles farther, still straight west, to
Hoyerswerda, where the outmost Austrian Division is: 'Forward towards
that; let us astonish General Wehla and his 3,000, and our March
is over!' All this too Prince Henri manages; never anything more
consummate, more astonishing to Wehla and his Master.

"Wehla and Brentano, readers perhaps remember them busy, from the Pirna
side, at the late Siege of Dresden. Siege gloriously done, Wehla
was ordered to Hoyerswerda, on the northwest frontier; Brentano to a
different point in that neighborhood; where Brentano escaped ruin, and
shall not be mentioned; but Wehla suddenly found it, and will require
a word. Wehla, of all people on the War-theatre, had been the least
expecting disturbance. He is on the remotest western flank; to westward
of him nothing but Torgau and the Finck-Wunsch people, from whom is
small likelihood of danger: from the eastern what danger can there be? A
Letter of Dauns, some days ago, had expressly informed him that, to all
appearance, there was none.

"And now suddenly, on the Tuesday morning, What is this? Prussians
reported to be visible in the Woods! 'Impossible!' answered Wehla;--did
get ready, however, what he could; Croat Regiments, pieces of Artillery
behind the Elster River and on good points; laboring more and more
diligently, as the news proved true. But all his efforts were to no
purpose. General Lentulus with his Prussians (the mute Swiss Lentulus,
whom we sometimes meet), who has the Vanguard this day, comes streaming
out of the woods across the obstacles; cannonades Wehla both in front
and rear; entirely swallows Wehla and Corps: 600 killed; the General
himself, with 28 Field-Officers, and of subalterns and privates 1,785,
falling prisoners to us; and the remainder scattered on the winds,
galloping each his own road towards covert and a new form of life.
Wehla is eaten, in this manner, Tuesday, September 25th:--metaphorically
speaking, the March of Fifty Hours ends in a comfortable twofold
meal (military-cannibal, as well as of common culinary meat), and in
well-deserved rest." [Tempelhof, iii. 255, 256; Seyfarth, _Beylagen;_
&c.]

The turning-point of the Campaign is reckoned to be this March of
Henri's; one of the most extraordinary on record. Prince Henri had a
very fast March INTO these Silesian-Lausitz Countries, early in July,
[Seyfarth, ii. 545.] and another very fast, from Bautzen, to intersect
with Schmottseifen, in the end of July: but these were as nothing
compared with the present. Tempelhof, the excellent solid man,--but who
puts all things, big and little, on the same level of detail, and has
unparalleled methods of arranging (what he reckons to be "arranging"),
and no vestige of index,--is distressingly obscure on this grand
Incident; but at length, on compulsion, does yield clear account.
[Tempelhof, iii. 253-258.] In Archenholtz it is not DATED at all;
who merely says as follows: "Most extraordinary march ever made; went
through 50 miles of Country wholly in the Enemy's possession; lasted 56
hours, in which long period there was no camp pitched, and only twice a
rest of three hours allowed the troops. During the other fifty hours the
march, day and night, continually proceeded. Ended (NO date) in surprise
of General Wehla at Hoyerswerda, cutting up 600 of his soldiers,
and taking 1,800 prisoners. Kalkreuth, since so famous," in the
Anti-Napoleon Wars, "was the Prince's Adjutant." [Archenholtz, i. 426.]

This is probably Prince Henri's cleverest feat,--though he did a great
many of clever; and his Brother used to say, glancing towards him,
"There is but one of us that never committed a mistake." A highly
ingenious dexterous little man in affairs of War, sharp as needles,
vehement but cautious; though of abstruse temper, thin-skinned,
capricious, and giving his Brother a great deal of trouble with his
jealousies and shrewish whims. By this last consummate little operation
he has astonished Daun as much as anybody ever did; shorn his elaborate
tissue of cunctations into ruin and collapse at one stroke; and in
effect, as turns out, wrecked his campaign for this Year.

Daun finds there is now no hope of Saxony, unless he himself at once
proceed thither. At once thither;--and leave Glogau and the Russians
to their luck,--which in such case, what is it like to be? Probably, to
Daun's own view, ominous enough; but he has no alternative. To this pass
has the March of Fifty Hours brought us. There is such a thing as being
too cunctatory, is not there, your Excellency? Every mortal, and more
especially every Feldmarschall, ought to strike the iron while it
is hot. The remainder of this Campaign, we will hope, can be made
intelligible in a more summary manner.




FRIEDRICH MANAGES (September 24th-October 24th) TO GET THE RUSSIANS SENT
HOME; AND HIMSELF FALLS LAMED WITH GOUT.

Friedrich's manoeuvres against Soltikof,--every reader is prepared to
hear that Soltikof was rendered futile by them: and none but military
readers could take delight in the details. Two beautiful short-cuts he
made upon Soltikof; pulled him up both times in mid career, as with hard
check-bit. The first time was at Zobelwitz: September 24th, Friedrich
cut across from Sagan, which is string to bow of the Russian march;
posted himself on the Heights of Zobelwitz, of Baunau, Milkau (at Baunau
Friedrich will write a LETTER this night, if readers bethink themselves;
Milkau is a place he may remember for rain-deluges, in the First
Silesian War [Supra, p. 323; ib. vol. vii. p. 311.]): "Let the Russians,
if they now dare, try the Pass of Neustadtel here!" A fortunate hour,
when he got upon this ground. Quartermaster-General Stoffel, our old
Custrin acquaintance, is found marking out a Camp with a view to that
Pass of Neustadtel; [Tempelhof, iii. 293; Retzow, ii. 163.] is, greatly
astonished to find the Prussian Army emerge on him there; and at once
vanishes, with his Hussar-Cossack retinues. "September 24th," it is
while Prince Henri was on the last moiety of his March of Fifty Hours.
This severe twitch flung Soltikof quite out from Glogau,--was like
to fling him home altogether, had it not been for Montalembert's
eloquence;--did fling him across the Oder. Where, again thanks to
Montalembert, he was circling on with an eye to Breslau, when Friedrich,
by the diameter, suddenly laid bridges, crossed at Koben, and again
brought Soltikof to halt, as by turnpike suddenly shut: "Must pay first;
must beat us first!"

These things had raised Friedrich's spirits not a little. Getting on
the Heights of Zobelwitz, he was heard to exclaim, "This is a lucky
day; worth more to me than a battle with victory." [Retzow, ii. 163.]
Astonishing how he blazed out again, quite into his old pride and
effulgence, after this, says Retzow. Had been so meek, so humbled,
and even condescended to ask advice or opinion from some about him.
Especially "from two Captains," says the Opposition Retzow, whose heads
were nearly turned by this sunburst from on high. Captain Marquart and
another,--I believe, he did employ them about Routes and marking of
Camps, which Retzow calls consulting: a King fallen tragically scarce of
persons to consult; all his Winterfelds, Schwerins, Keiths and Council
of Peers now vanished, and nothing but some intelligent-looking Captain
Marquart, or the like, to consult:--of which Retzow, in his splenetic
Opposition humor, does not see the tragedy, but rather the comedy: how
the poor Captains found their favor to be temporary, conditional, and
had to collapse again. One of them wrote an "ESSAY on the COUP-D'OEIL
MILITAIRE," over which Retzow pretends to weep. This was Friedrich's
marginal Note upon the MS., when submitted to his gracious perusal: "You
(ER) will do better to acquire the Art of marking Camps than to write
upon the Military Stroke of Eye." Beautifully written too, says Retzow;
but what, in the eyes of this King, is beautiful writing, to knowing
your business well? No friend he to writing, unless you have got
something really special, and urgent to be written.

Friedrich crassed the Oder twice. Took Soltikof on both sides of the
Oder, cut him out of this fond expectation, then of that; led him,
we perceive, a bad life. Latterly the scene was on the right bank;
Sophienthal, Koben, Herrnstadt and other poor places,--on that big
eastern elbow, where Oder takes his final bend, or farewell of Poland.
Ground, naturally, of some interest to Friedrich: ground to us unknown;
but known to Friedrich as the ground where Karl XII. gave Schulenburg
his beating, ["Near Guhrau" (while chasing August the Strong and him out
of Poland), "12th October, 1704:" vague account of it, dateless, and as
good as placeless, in Voltaire (_Charles Douse,_ liv. iii.), _OEuvres,_
xxx. 142-145.] which produced the "beautiful retreat" of Schulenburg.
The old Feldmarschall Schulenburg whom we used to hear of once,--whose
Nephew, a pipeclayed little gentleman, was well known to Friedrich and
us.

For the rest, I do not think he feels this out-manoeuvring of the
Russians very hard work. Already, from Zobelwitz Country, 25th
September, day of Henri at Hoyerswerda, Friedrich had written to
Fouquet: "With 21,000 your beaten and maltreated Servant has hindered
an Army of 50,000 from attacking him, and compelled them to retire on
Neusatz!" Evidently much risen in hope; and Henri's fine news not yet
come to hand. By degrees, Soltikof, rendered futile, got very
angry; especially when Daun had to go for Saxony. "Meal was becoming
impossible, at any rate," whimpers Daun: "O Excellency, do but consider,
with the nobleness natural to you! Our Court will cheerfully furnish
money, instead of meal."--"Money? My people cannot eat money!" growled
Soltikof, getting more and more angry; threatening daily to march for
Posen and his own meal-stores. What a time of it has Montalembert, has
the melancholy Loudon, with temper so hot!

At Sophienthal, October 10th, Friedrich falls ill of gout;--absolutely
lamed; for three weeks cannot stir from his room. Happily the outer
problem is becoming easier and easier; almost bringing its own solution.
At Sophienthal the lame Friedrich takes to writing about CHARLES XII.
AND HIS MILITARY CHARACTER,--not a very illuminative Piece, on the
first perusal, but I intend to read it again; [REFLEXIONS SUR LES TALENS
MILITAIRES ET SUR LE CARACTERE DE CHARLES XII. (_OEuvres de Frederic,_
vii. 69-88).]--which at least helps him to pass the time. Soltikof, more
and more straitened, meal itself running low, gets angrier and angrier.
His treatment of the Country, Montalembert rather encouraging, is
described as "horrible." One day he takes the whim, whim or little more,
of seizing Herrnstadt; a small Town, between the Two Armies, where the
Prussians have a Free Battalion. The Prussian Battalion resists;
drives Soltikof's people back. "Never mind," think they: "a place of no
importance to us; and Excellency Soltikof has ridden else-whither." By
ill-luck, in the afternoon, Excellency Soltikof happened to mention the
place again. Hearing that the Prussians still have it, Soltikof mounts
into a rage; summons the place, with answer still No; thereupon orders
instant bombardment of it, fiery storms of grenadoes for it; and has the
satisfaction of utterly burning poor Herrnstadt; the Prussian Free-Corps
still continuing obstinate. It was Soltikof's last act in those parts,
and betokens a sulphurous state of humor.

Next morning (October 24th), he took the road for Posen, and marched
bodily home. [Tempelhof, iii. 299, 291-300 (general account, abundantly
minute).] Home verily, in spite of Montalembert and all men. "And for
me, what orders has Excellency?" Loudon had anxiously inquired, on the
eve of that event. "None whatever!" answered Excellency: "Do your own
pleasure; go whithersoever seems good to you." And Loudon had to take
a wide sweep round, by Kalish, through the western parts of Poland; and
get home to the Troppau-Teschen Country as he best could.

By Kalish, by Czenstochow, Cracow, poor Loudon had to go: a dismal march
of 300 miles or more,--waited on latterly by Fouquet, with Werner, Goltz
and others, on the Silesian Border; whom Friedrich had ordered thither
for such end. Whom Loudon skilfully avoided to fight; having already, by
desertion and by hardships, lost half his men on the road. Glad enough
to get home and under roof, with his 20,000 gone to 10,000; and to make
bargain with Fouquet: "Truce, then, through Winter; neither of us
to meddle with the other, unless after a fortnight's warning given."
[Tempelhof, iii. 328-331.] NOVEMBER 1st, a month before this, the King,
carried on a litter by his soldiers, had quitted Sophienthal; and,
crossing the River by Koben, got to Glogau. [Rodenbeck, i. 396.] The
greater part of his force, 13,000 under Hulsen, he had immediately sent
on for Saxony; he himself intending to wait recovery in Glogau, with
this Silesian wing of the business happily brought to finis for the
present.

On the Saxon side, too, affairs are in such a course that the King
can be patient at Glogau till he get well. Everything is prosperous
in Saxony since that March on Hoyerswerda; Henri, with his Fincks and
Wunsches, beautifully posted in the Meissen-Torgau region; no dislodging
of him, let Daun, with his big mass of forces, try as he may. Daun,
through the month of October, is in various Camps, in Schilda last of
all: Henri successively in two; in Strehla for some ten days; then in
Torgau for about three weeks, carefully intrenched, [Tempelhof. iii.
276, 281, 284 (Henri in Strehla, October 4th-17th; thence to Torgau: 22d
October, Daun "quits his Camp of Belgern" for that of Schilda, which was
his last in those parts).]--where traces of him will turn up (not too
opportunely) next year. Daun, from whatever Camp, goes laboring on this
side and on that; on every side the deft Henri is as sharp as needles;
nothing to be made of him by the cunning movements and contrivances of
Daun. Very fine manoeuvring it was, especially on Henri's part; a charm
to the soldier mind;--given minutely in Tempelhof, and capable of
being followed (if you have Maps and Patience) into the last details.
Instructive really to the soldier;--but must be, almost all, omitted
here. One beautiful slap to Duke d'Ahremberg (a poor old friend of
Daun's and ours) we will remember: "Action of Pretsch" they call
it; defeat, almost capture of poor D'Ahremberg; who had been sent to
dislodge the Prince, by threatening his supplies, and had wheeled,
accordingly, eastward, wide away; but, to his astonishment, found, after
a march or two, Three select Prussian Corps emerging on him, by front,
by rear, by flank, with Horse-artillery (quasi-miraculous) bursting out
on hill-tops, too,--and, in short, nothing for it but to retreat,
or indeed to run, in a considerably ruinous style: poor D'Ahremberg!
[Seyfarth (_Beylagen,_ ii. 634-637), "HOFBERICHT VON DER AM 29 OCTOBER,
1759, BEY MEURO [chiefly BEY PRETSCH] VORGEFALLENEN ACTION;" ib. ii. 543
n.] On the whole, Daun is reduced to a panting condition; and knows not
what to do. His plans were intrinsically bad, says Tempelhof; without
beating Henri in battle, which he cannot bring himself to attempt,
he, in all probability, will, were it only for difficulties of the
commissariat kind, have to fall back Dresden-ward, and altogether take
himself away. [Tempelhof, iii. 287-289.]

After this sad slap at Pretsch, Daun paused for consideration; took
to palisading himself to an extraordinary degree, slashing the Schilda
Forests almost into ruin for this end; and otherwise sat absolutely
quiet. Little to be done but take care of oneself. Daun knows withal of
Hulsen's impending advent with the Silesian 13,000;--November 2d, Hulsen
is actually at Muskau, and his 13,000 magnified by rumor to 20,000.
Hearing of which, Daun takes the road (November 4th); quits his
gloriously palisaded Camp of Schilda; feels that retreat on Dresden, or
even home to Bohemia altogether, is the one course left.

And now, the important Bautzen Colloquy of SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER
15th, having here brought its three or more Courses of Activity to a
pause,--we will glance at the far more important THURSDAY, 13th, other
side the Ocean:--

ABOVE QUEBEC, NIGHT OF SEPTEMBER 12th-13th, In profound silence, on the
stream of the St. Lawrence far away, a notable adventure is going on.
Wolfe, from two points well above Quebec ("As a last shift, we will try
that way"), with about 5,000 men, is silently descending in boats; with
purpose to climb the Heights somewhere on this side the City, and be
in upon it, if Fate will. An enterprise of almost sublime nature;
very great, if it can succeed. The cliffs all beset to his left hand,
Montcalm in person guarding Quebec with his main strength.

Wolfe silently descends; mind made up; thoughts hushed quiet into one
great thought; in the ripple of the perpetual waters, under the grim
cliffs and the eternal stars. Conversing with his people, he was heard
to recite some passages of Gray's ELEGY, lately come out to those
parts; of which, says an ear-witness, he expressed his admiration to an
enthusiastic degree: "Ah, these are tones of the Eternal Melodies, are
not they? A man might thank Heaven had he such a gift; almost as WE
might for succeeding here, Gentlemen!" [Professor Robison, then a Naval
Junior, in the boat along with Wolfe, afterwards a well-known Professor
of Natural Philosophy at Edinburgh, was often heard, by persons whom I
have heard again, to repeat this Anecdote. See Playfair, BIOGRAPHICAL
ACCOUNT OF PROFESSOR ROBISON,--in _Transactions_ of Royal Society of
Edinburgh, vii. 495 et seq.] Next morning (Thursday, 13th September,
1759), Wolfe, with his 5,000, is found to have scrambled up by some
woody Neck in the heights, which was not quite precipitous; has trailed
one cannon with him, the seamen busy bringing up another; and by 10 of
the clock stands ranked (really somewhat in the Friedrich way, though
on a small scale); ready at all points for Montcalm, but refusing to be
over-ready.

Montcalm, on first hearing of him, had made haste: "OUI, JE LES VOIS OU
ILS NE DOIVENT PAS ETRE; JE VAIS LES E'CRASER (to smash them)!" said
he, by way of keeping his people in heart. And marches up, beautifully
skilful, neglecting none of his advantages. Has numerous Canadian
sharpshooters, preliminary Indians in the bushes, with a provoking fire:
"Steady!" orders Wolfe; "from you not one shot till they are within
thirty yards." And Montcalm, volleying and advancing, can get no
response, more than from Druidic stones; till at thirty yards the stones
become vocal,--and continue so at a dreadful rate; and, in a space
of seventeen minutes, have blown Montcalm's regulars, and the gallant
Montcalm himself, and their second in command, and their third, into
ruin and destruction. In about seven minutes more the agony was done;
"English falling on with the bayonet, Highlanders with the claymore;"
fierce pursuit, rout total:--and Quebec and Canada as good as finished.
The thing is yet well known to every Englishman; [The military details
of it seem to be very ill known (witness Colonel Beatson's otherwise
rather careful Pamphlet, THE PLAINS OF ABRAHAM, written quite lately,
which we are soon to cite farther); and they would well deserve
describing in the SEYFARTH-BEYLAGEN, or even in the TEMPELHOF
way,--could an English Officer, on the spot as this Colonel was, be
found to do it!--Details are in Beatson (quite another "Beatson"),
_Naval and Military History,_ ii. 300-308; in _Gentleman's Magazine_
for 1759, the Despatches and particulars: see also Walpole, _George the
Second,_ iii. 217-222.] and how Wolfe himself died in it, his beautiful
death.

Truly a bit of right soldierhood, this Wolfe. Manages his small
resources in a consummate manner; invents, contrives, attempts and
re-attempts, irrepressible by difficulty or discouragement, How could a
Friedrich himself have managed this Quebec in a more artistic way? The
small Battle itself, 5,000 to a side, and such odds of Savagery and
Canadians, reminds you of one of Friedrich's: wise arrangements; exact
foresight, preparation corresponding; caution with audacity; inflexible
discipline, silent till its time come, and then blazing out as we see.
The prettiest soldiering I have heard of among the English for several
generations. Amherst, Commander-in-chief, is diligently noosing, and
tying up, the French military settlements, Niagara, Ticonderoga; Canada
all round: but this is the heart or windpipe of it; keep this firm, and,
in the circumstances, Canada is yours.

Colonel Reatson, in his recent Pamphlet, THE PLAINS OF ABRAHAM,--which,
especially on the military side, is distressingly ignorant and shallow,
though NOT intentionally incorrect anywhere,--gives Extracts from a
Letter of Montcalm's ("Quebec, 24th August, 1759"), which is highly
worth reading, had we room. It predicts to a hair's-breadth, not only
the way "M. Wolfe, if he understands his trade, will take to beat and
ruin me if we meet in fight;" but also,--with a sagacity singular to
look at, in the years 1775-1777, and perhaps still more in the years
1860-1863,--what will be the consequences to those unruly English,
Colonial and other. "If he beat me here, France has lost America
utterly," thinks Montcalm: "Yes;--and one's only consolation is, In ten
years farther, America will be in revolt against England!" Montcalm's
style of writing is not exemplary; but his power of faithful
observation, his sagacity, and talent of prophecy are so considerable,
we are tempted to give the IPSISSIMA VERBA of his long Letter in regard
to those two points,--the rather as it seems to have fallen much out of
sight in our day:--

MONTCALM TO A COUSIN IN FRANCE.

"CAMP BEFORE QUEBEC, 24th August, 1759.

"MONSIEUR ET CHER COUSIN,--Here I am, for more than three months past,
at handgrips with M. Wolfe; who ceases not day or night to bombard
Quebec, with a fury which is almost unexampled in the Siege of a Place
one intends to retain after taking it."... Will never take it in that
way, however, by attacking from the River or south shore; only ruins us,
but does not enrich himself. Not an inch nearer his object than he was
three months ago; and in one month more the equinoctial storms will
blow his Fleet and him away.--Quebec, then, and the preservation of
the Colony, you think, must be as good as safe?" Alas, the fact is
far otherwise. The capture of Quebec depends on what we call a
stroke-of-hand--[But let us take to the Original now, for Prediction
First]:--

"La prise de Quebec depend d'un coup de main. Les Anglais sont maitres
de la riviere: ils n'ont qu'a effectuer une descente sur la rive ou
cette Ville, sans fortifications et sans defense, est situee. Les voila
en etat de me presenter la bataille; que je ne pourrais plus refuser,
et que je ne devrais pas gagner. M. Wolfe, en effet, s'il entend son
metier, n'a qu'a essuyer le premier feu, venir ensuite a grands pas
sur mon armee, faire a bout portant sa decharge; mes Canadiens, sans
discipline, sourds a la voix du tambour et des instrumens militaires,
deranges pa cette escarre, ne sauront plus reprendre leurs rangs. Ils
sont d'ailleurs sans baionettes pour repondre a celles de l'ennemi: il
ne leur reste qu'a fuir,--et me voila battu sans ressource. [This is a
curiously exact Prediction! I won't survive, however; defeat here, in
this stage of our affairs, means loss of America altogether:] il est
des situations ou il ne reste plus a un General que de perir avec
honneur.... Mes sentimens sont francais, et ils le seront jusque dans le
tombeau, si dans le tombeau on est encore quelque chose.

"Je me consolerai du moins de ma defaite, et de la perte de la Colonie,
par l'intime persuasion ou je suis [Prediction Second, which is still
more curious], que cette defaite vaudra, un jour, a ma Patrie plus
qu'une victoire; et que le vainqueur, en s'agrandissant, trouvera un
tombeau dans son agrandissement meme.

"Ce que j'avance ici, mon cher Cousin, vous paraitra un paradoxe: mais
un moment de reflexion politique, un coup d'oeil sur la situation des
choses en Amerique, et la verite de mon opinion brillera dans tout son
jour. [Nobody will obey, unless necessity compel him: VOILA LES HOMMES;
GENE of any kind a nuisance to them; and of all men in the world LES
ANGLAIS are the most impatient of obeying anybody.] Mais si ce sont-la
les Anglais de l'Europe, c'est encore plus les Anglais d'Amerique.
Une grande partie de ces Colons sont les enfans de ces hommes qui
s'expatrierent dans ces temps de trouble ou l'ancienne Angleterre, en
proie aux divisions, etait attaquee dans ses privileges et droits; et
allerent chercher en Amerique une terre ou ils pussent vivre et mourir
libres et presque independants:--et ces enfans n'ont pas degenere des
sentimens republicains de leurs peres. D'autres sont des hommes
ennemis de tout frein, de tout assujetissement, que le gouvernement y
a transportes pour leurs crimes, D'autres, enfin, sont un ramas de
differentes nations de l'Europe, qui tiennent tres-peu a l'ancienne
Angleterre par le coeur et le sentiment; tous, en general, ne ce
soucient gueres du Roi ni du Parlement d'Angleterre.

"Je les connais bien,--non sur des rapports etrangers, mais sur
des correspondances et des informations secretes, que j'ai moi-meme
menagees; et dont, un jour, si Dieu me prete vie, je pourrai faire usage
a l'avantage de ma Patrie. Pour surcroit de bonheur pour eux, tous ces
Colons sont parvenues, dans un etat tres-florissant; ils sont nombreux
et riches:--ils recueillent dans le sein de leur patrie toutes les
necessites de la vie. L'ancienne Angleterre a ete assez sotte, et assez
dupe, pour leur laisser etablir chez eux les arts, les metiers, les
manufactures:--c'est a dire, qu'elle leur a laisse briser la chaine
de besoins qui les liait, qui les attachait a elle, et qui les fait
dependants. Aussi toutes ces Colonies Anglaises auraient-elles depuis
longtemps secoue le joug, chaque province aurait forme une petite
republique independante, si la crainte de voir les Francais a leur Porte
n'avait ete un frein qui les avait retenu. Maitres pour maitres, ils ont
pefere leurs compatriotes aux etrangers; prenant cependant pour maxime
de n'obeir que le moins qu'ils pourraient. Mais que le Canada vint a
etre conquis, et que les Canadiens et ces Colons ne fussent plus
qu'une seul peuple,--et la premiere occasion ou l'ancienne Angleterre
semblerait toucher a leurs interets, croyez-vous, mon cher Cousin, que
ces Colons obeiront? Et qu'auraient-ils a craindre en se revoltant?...
Je suis si sur de ce que j'ecris, que je ne donnerais pas dix ans apres
la conquete du Canada pour en voir l'accomplissement.

"Voila ce que, comme Francais, me console aujourd'hui du danger
imminent, que court ma Patrie, de voir cette Colonie perdue pour elle."
[In Beatson, Lieutenant-Colonel R.E., _The Plains of Abraham; Notes
original and selected_ (Gibraltar, Garrison Library Press, 1858), pp.
38 et seq.] Extract from _"Lettres de M. le Marquis de Montcalm a MM. De
Berryer et De la Mole:_ 1757-1759 (Londres, 1777),"--which is not in the
British-Museum Library, on applying; and seems to be a forgotten Book.
(NOTE OF FIRST EDITION, 1865.)

"A Copy is in the BOSTON ATHENAEUM LIBRARY, New-England: it is a
Pamphlet rather than a Book; contains Two Letters to Berryer MINISTRE
DE LA MARINE, besides this to Mole the Cousin: Publisher is the noted J.
Almon,--in French and English." (From _Boston Sunday Courier,_ of 19th
April, 1868, where this Letter is reproduced.)

In the Temple Library, London, I have since found a Copy: and, on
strict survey, am obliged to pronounce the whole Pamphlet a
FORGERY,--especially the Two Letters to "Berryer MINISTER OF MARINE;"
who was not yet Minister of anything, nor thought of as likely to be,
for many months after the date of these Letters addressed to him as
such! Internal evidence too, were such at all wanted, is abundant in
these BERRYER Letters; which are of gross and almost stupid structure in
comparison to the MOLE one. As this latter has already got into various
Books, and been argued of in Parliaments and high places (Lord Shelburne
asserting it to be spurious, Lord Mansfield to be genuine: REPORT OF
PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES in _Gentleman's Magazine_ for NOVEMBER and for
DECEMBER, 1777, pp. 515, 560),--it may be allowed to continue here
in the CONDEMNED state. Forger, probably, some Ex-Canadian, or other
American ROYALIST, anxious to do the Insurgent Party and their British
Apologists an ill turn, in that critical year;--had shot off his
Pamphlet to voracious Almon; who prints without preface or criticism,
and even without correcting the press. (NOTE OF JULY, 1868.)

Montcalm had been in the Belleisle RETREAT FROM PRAG (December, 1742);
in the terrible EXILLES Business (July, 1747), where the Chevalier de
Belleisle and 4 or 5,000 lost their lives in about an hour. Captain
Cook was at Quebec, Master in the Royal Navy; "sounding the River,
and putting down buoys." Bougainville, another famous Navigator, was
Aide-de-Camp of Montcalm. There have been far-sounding Epics built
together on less basis than lies ready here, in this CAPTURE OF
QUEBEC;--which itself, as the Decision that America is to be English and
not French, is surely an Epoch in World-History! Montcalm was 48 when
he perished; Wolfe 33. Montcalm's skull is in the Ursulines Convent
at Quebec,--shown to the idly curious to this day. [Lieutenant-Colonel
Beatson, pp. 28, 15.]

It was on October 17th,--while Friedrich lay at Sophienthal, lamed
of gout, and Soltikof had privately fixed for home (went that day
week),--that this glorious bit of news reached England. It was only
three days after that other, bad and almost hopeless news, from the same
quarter; news of poor Wolfe's Repulse, on the other or eastern side
of Quebec, July 31st, known to us already, not known in England till
October 14th. Heightened by such contrast, the news filled all men with
a strange mixture of emotions. "The incidents of Dramatic Fiction,"
says one who was sharer in it, "could not have been conducted with more
address to lead an audience from despondency to sudden exultation, than
Accident had here prepared to excite the passions of a whole People.
They despaired; they triumphed; and they wept,--for Wolfe had fallen in
the hour of victory! Joy, grief, curiosity, astonishment, were
painted in every countenance: the more they inquired, the higher
their admiration rose. Not an incident but was heroic and affecting."
[Walpole, iii. 219.] America ours; but the noble Wolfe now not!

What Pitt himself said of these things, we do not much hear. On the
meeting of his Parliament, about a month hence, his Speech, somebody
having risen to congratulate and eulogize him, is still recognizably of
royal quality, if we evoke it from the Walpole Notes. Very modest, very
noble, true; and with fine pieties and magnanimities delicately audible
in it: "Not a week all Summer but has been a crisis, in which I have
not known whether I should not be torn to pieces, instead of being
commended, as now by the Honorable Member. The hand of Divine
Providence; the more a man is versed in business, the more he everywhere
traces that!... Success has given us unanimity, not unanimity success.
For my own poor share, I could not have dared as I have done, except in
these times. Other Ministers have hoped as well, but have not been so
circumstanced to dare so much.... I think the stone almost rolled to the
top of the hill; but let us have a care; it may rebound, and hideously
drag us down with it again." [Ib. iii. 225; Thackeray, i. 446.]

The essential truth, moreover, is, Pitt has become King of England;
so lucky has poor England, in its hour of crisis, again been. And
the difference between an England guided by some kind of Friedrich
(temporary Friedrich, absolute, though of insecure tenure), and by a
Newcastle and the Clack of Tongues, is very great! But for Pitt,
there had been no Wolfe, no Amherst; Duke Ferdinand had been the Royal
Highness of Cumberland,--and all things going round him in St. Vitus, at
their old rate. This man is a King, for the time being,--King really of
the Friedrich type;--and rules, Friedrich himself not more despotically,
where need is. Pitt's War-Offices, Admiralties, were not of themselves
quick-going entities; but Pitt made them go. Slow-paced Lords in Office
have remonstrated, on more than one occasion: "Impossible, Sir; these
things cannot be got ready at the time you order!" "My Lord, they
indispensably must," Pitt would answer (a man always reverent of coming
facts, knowing how inexorable they are); and if the Negative continued
obstinate in argument, he has been known to add: "My Lord, to the King's
service, it is a fixed necessity of time. Unless the time is kept, I
will impeach your Lordship!" Your Lordship's head will come to lie at
your Lordship's feet! Figure a poor Duke of Newcastle, listening to such
a thing;--and knowing that Pitt will do it; and that he can, such is his
favor with universal England;--and trembling and obeying. War-requisites
for land and for sea are got ready with a Prussian punctuality,--at what
multiple of the Prussian expense, is a smaller question for Pitt.

It is about eighteen months ago that Pownal, Governor of New England,
a kind of half-military person, not without sound sense, though sadly
intricate of utterance,--of whom Pitt, just entering on Office, has, I
suppose, asked an opinion on America, as men do of Learned Counsel on
an impending Lawsuit of magnitude,--had answered, in his long-winded,
intertwisted, nearly inextricable way, to the effect, "Sir, I incline to
fear, on the whole, that the Action will NOT lie,--that, on the
whole, the French will eat America from us in spite of our teeth." [In
THACKERAY, ii. 421-452, Pownal's intricate REPORT (his "DISCOURSE," or
whatever he calls it, "ON THE DEFENCE OF THE INLAND FRONTIERS," his &c.
&c.), of date "15th January, 1758."] January 15th, 1758, that is the
Pownal Opinion-of-Counsel;--and on September 13th, 1759, this is what
we have practically come to. And on September 7th, 1760: within twelve
months more,--Amherst, descending the Rapids from Ticonderoga side, and
two other little Armies, ascending from Quebec and Louisburg, to meet
him at Montreal, have proved punctual almost to an hour; and are in
condition to extinguish, by triple pressure (or what we call noosing),
the French Governor-General in Montreal, a Monsieur de Vaudreuil, and
his Montreal and his Canada altogether; and send the French bodily home
out of those Continents. [Capitulation between Amherst and Vaudreuil
("Montreal, 8th September, 1760"), in 55 Articles: in BEATSON, iii.
274-283.] Which may dispense us from speaking farther on the subject.

From the Madras region, too, from India and outrageous Lally, the news
are good. Early in Spring last, poor Lally,--a man of endless talent and
courage, but of dreadfully emphatic loose tongue, in fact of a blazing
ungoverned Irish turn of mind,--had instantly, on sight of some small
Succors from Pitt, to raise his siege of Madras, retire to Pondicherry;
and, in fact, go plunging and tumbling downhill, he and his India with
him, at an ever-faster rate, till they also had got to the Abyss. "My
policy is in these five words, NO ENGLISHMAN IN THIS PENINSULA," wrote
he, a year ago, on landing in India; and now it is to be No FRENCHMAN,
and there is one word in the five to be altered!--Of poor Lally, zealous
and furious over-much, and nearly the most unfortunate and worst-used
"man of genius" I ever read of, whose lion-like struggles against French
Official people, and against Pitt's Captains and their sea-fights and
siegings, would deserve a volume to themselves, we have said, and can
here say, as good as nothing,--except that they all ended, for Lally and
French India, in total surrender, 16th January, 1761; and that Lally,
some years afterwards, for toils undergone and for services done, got,
when accounts came to be liquidated, death on the scaffold. Dates I give
below. [28th April, 1758, Lands at Pondicherry; instantly proceeds
upon Fort St. David. 2d June, 1758, Takes it: meant to have gone now
on Madras; but finds he has no money;--goes extorting money from
Black Potentates about, Rajah of Travancore, &c., in a violent and
extraordinary style; and can get little. Nevertheless, 14th December,
1758, Lays Siege to Madras.]

16th February, 1759, Is obliged to quit trenches at Madras, and retire
dismally upon Pondicherry,--to mere indigence, mutiny ("ten mutinies"),
Official conspiracy, and chaos come again.

22d January, 1760, Makes outrush on Wandewash, and the English posted
there; is beaten, driven back into Pondicherry. April, 1760, Is besieged
in Pondicherry. 16th January, 1761, Is taken, Pondicherry, French India
and he;--to Madras he, lest the French Official party kill him, as they
attempt to do.

23d September, 1761, arrives, prisoner, in England: thence, on parole,
to France and Paris, 21st October. November, 1762, To Bastille; waits
trial nineteen months; trial lasts two years. 6th May, 1766, To be
BEHEADED,--9th May was. [See BEATSON, ii. 369-372, 96-110, &c.; Voltaire
(FRAGMENTS SUR L'INDE) in _OEuvres,_ xxix. 183-253; BIOGRAPHIC
UNIVERSELLE, Lally.]

"Gained Fontenoy for us," said many persons;--undoubtedly gained various
things for us, fought for us Berserkir-like on all occasions; hoped,
in the end, to be Marechal de France, and undertook a Championship of
India, which issues in this way! America and India, it is written,
are both to be Pitt's. Let both, if possible, remain silent to us
henceforth.

As to the Invasion-of-England Scheme, Pitt says he does not expect
the French will invade us; but if they do, he is ready. [Speech, 4th
November, supra.]




Chapter VII.--FRIEDRICH REAPPEARS ON THE FIELD, AND IN SEVEN DAYS AFTER
COMES THE CATASTROPHE OF MAXEN.

November 6th-8th, Daun had gone to Meissen Country: fairly ebbing
homeward; Henri following, with Hulsen joined,--not vehemently attacking
the rhinoceros, but judiciously pricking him forward. Daun goes at his
slowest step: in many divisions, covering a wide circuit; sticking
to all the strong posts, till his own time for quitting them: slow,
sullenly cautious; like a man descending dangerous precipices back
foremost, and will not be hurried. So it had lasted about a week; Daun
for the last four days sitting restive, obstinate, but Henri pricking
into him more and more, till the rhinoceros seemed actually about
lifting himself,--when Friedrich in person arrived in his Brother's
Camp. [Tempelhof, iii. 301-305.]

At the Schloss of Herschstein, a mile or two behind Lommatsch, which
is Henri's head-quarter (still to westward of Meissen; Daun hanging on,
seven or eight miles to southeastward ahead; loath to go, but actually
obliged),--it was there, Tuesday, November 13th, that the King met his
Brother again. A King free of his gout; in joyful spirits; and high of
humor,--like a man risen indignant, once more got to his feet, after
three months' oppressions and miseries from the unworthy. "Too high,"
mourns Retzow, in a gloomy tone, as others do in perhaps a more
indulgent one. Beyond doubt, Friedrich's farther procedures in this
grave and weighty Daun business were more or less imprudent; of a too
rapid and rash nature; and turned out bitterly unlucky to him. "Had
he left the management to Henri!" sighed everybody, after the unlucky
event.

Friedrich had not arrived above four-and-twenty hours, when news came
in: "The Austrians in movement again; actually rolling off Dresden-ward
again." "Haha, do they smell me already!" laughed he: "Well, I will send
Daun to the Devil,"--not adding, "if I can." And instantly ordered sharp
pursuit,--and sheer stabbing with the ox-goad, not soft and delicate
pricking, as Henri's lately. [Retzow, ii. 168; Tempelhof, iii. 306.]
Friedrich, in fact; was in a fiery condition against Daun: "You
trampled on me, you heavy buffalo, these three months; but that is over
now!"--and took personally the vanguard in this pursuit. And had a bit
of hot fighting in the Village of Korbitz (scene of that Finck-Haddick
"Action," 21st September last, and of poor Haddick's ruin, and
retirement to the Waters);--where the Austrians now prove very fierce
and obstinate; and will not go, till well slashed into, and torn out by
sheer beating:--which was visibly a kind of comfort to the King's humor.
"Our Prussians do still fight, then, much as formerly! And it was all
a hideous Nightmare, all that, and Daylight and Fact are come, and
Friedrich is himself again!"

They say Prince Henri took the liberty of counselling him, even of
entreating him: "Leave well alone; why run risks?" said Henri. Daun,
it was pretty apparent, had no outlook at the present but that of
sauntering home to Bohmen; leaving Dresden to be an easy prey again, and
his whole Campaign to fall futile, as the last had. Under Henri's gentle
driving he would have gone slower; but how salutary, if he only went!
These were Henri's views: but Friedrich was not in the slow humor;
impatient to be in Dresden; "will be quartered there in a week," writes
he, "and more at leisure than now." ["Wilsdruf, 17th November, 1759,"
and still more "19th November," Friedrich to Voltaire in high spirits
that way (_OEuvres de Frederic,_ xxiii. 66).] He is thinking of Leuthen,
of Rossbach, of Campaign 1757, so gloriously restored after ruin; and,
in the fire of his soul, is hoping to do something similar a second
time. That is Retzow's notion: who knows but there may be truth in it? A
proud Friedrich, got on his feet again after such usage;--nay, who knows
whether it was quite so unwise to be impressive on the slow rhinoceros,
and try to fix some thorn in his snout, or say (figuratively), to hobble
his hind-feet; which, I am told, would have been beautifully ruinous;
and, though riskish, was not impossible? [Tempelhof, iii. 311, &c.] Ill
it indisputably turned out; and we have, with brevity, to say how, and
leave readers to their judgment of it.

It was in the Village of Krogis, about six miles forward, on the
Meissen-Freyberg road, a mile or two on from Korbitz, and directly after
the fierce little tussle in that Village,--that Friedrich, his blood
still up, gave the Order for Maxen, which proved so unlucky to him.
Wunsch had been shot off in pursuit of the beaten Austrians; but they
ran too fast; and Wunsch came back without farther result, still early
in the day. Back as far as Krogis, where the next head-quarter is to
be;--and finds the King still in a fulminant condition; none the milder,
it is likely, by Wunsch's returning without result. "Go straight to
General Finck; bid him march at once!" orders the King; and rapidly
gives Wunsch the instructions Finck is to follow. Finck and his Corps
are near Nossen, some ten miles ahead of Krogis, some twenty west from
Dresden. There, since yesterday, stands Finck, infesting the left or
western flank of the Austrians,--what was their left, and will be again,
when they call halt and face round on us:--Let Finck now march at once,
quite round that western flank; by Freyberg, Dippoldiswalde, thence east
to Maxen; plant himself at Maxen (a dozen miles south of Dresden, among
the rocky hills), and stick diligently in the rear of those Austrians,
cutting off, or threatening to cut off, their communications with
Bohemia, and block the Pirna Country for them.

Friedrich calculates that, if Daun is for retreating by Pirna Country,
this will, at lowest, be a method to quicken him in that movement; or
perhaps it may prove a method to cut off such retreat altogether, and
force Daun to go circling by the Lausitz Hills and Wildernesses, exposed
to tribulations which may go nigh to ruin him. That is Friedrich's proud
thought: "an unfortunate Campaign; winding up, nevertheless, as 1757
did, in blazes of success!" And truly, if Friedrich could have made
himself into Two; and, while flashing and charging in Daun's front, have
been in command at Maxen in Daun's rear,--Friedrich could have made
a pretty thing of this waxen Enterprise; and might in good part have
realized his proud program. But there is no getting two Friedrichs.
Finck, a General of approved quality, he is the nearest approach we can
make to a second Friedrich;--and he, ill-luck too super-adding itself,
proves tragically inadequate. And sets all the world, and Opposition
Retzow, exclaiming, "See: Pride goes before a fall!"--

At 3 in the afternoon, Friedrich, intensely surveying from the heights
of Krogis the new Austrian movements and positions, is astonished, not
agreeably ("What, still only here, Herr General!"), by a personal visit
from Finck. Finck finds the Maxen business intricate, precarious; wishes
farther instructions, brings forward this objection and that. Friedrich
at last answers, impatiently: "You know I can't stand making of
difficulties (ER WEISS DASS ICH DIE DIFFICULTATEN NICHT LEIDEN KANN;
MACHE DASS ER FORT KOMMT); contrive to get it done!" With which
poor comfort Finck has to ride back to Nossen; and scheme out his
dispositions overnight.

Next morning, Thursday, 15th, Finck gets on march; drives the Reichsfolk
out of Freyberg; reaches Dippoldiswalde:--"Freyberg is to be my
Magazine," considers Finck; "Dippoldiswalde my half-way house; Four
Battalions of my poor Eighteen shall stand there, and secure the
meal-carts." Friday, 16th, Finck has his Vanguard, Wunsch leading it, in
possession of Maxen and the Heights; and on Saturday gets there himself,
with all his people and equipments. I should think about 12,000 men: in
a most intersected, intertwisted Hill Country; full of gullets, dells
and winding brooks;--it is forecourt of the Pirna rocks, our celebrated
Camp of Gahmig lies visible to north, Dohna and the Rothwasser
bounding us to east;--in grim November weather, some snow falling, or
snow-powder, alternating with sleet and glazing frosts: by no means a
beautiful enterprise to Finck. Nor one of his own choosing, had one a
choice in such cases.

To Daun nothing could be more unwelcome than this news of Finck,
embattled there at Maxen in the inextricable Hill Country, direct on
the road of Daun's meal-carts and Bohemian communications. And truly
withal,--what Daun does not yet hear, but can guess,--there is gone, in
supplement or as auxiliary to Finck, a fierce Hussar party, under GRUNE
Kleist, their fiercest Hussar since Mayer died; who this very day, at
Aussig, burns Daun's first considerable Magazine; and has others in view
for the same fate. [Friedrich's second Letter to Voltaire, Wilsdruf,
"19th November, 1759."] An evident thing to Daun, that Finck being
there, meal has ceased.

On the instant, Daun falls back on Dresden; Saturday, 17th, takes post
in the Dell of Plauen (PLAUEN'SCHE GRUND); an impassable Chasm, with
sheer steeps on both sides, stretching southward from Dresden in front
of the Hill Country: thither Daun marches, there to consider what is
to be done with Finck. Amply safe this position is; none better in the
world: a Village, Plauen, and a Brook, Weistritz, in the bottom of this
exquisite Chasm; sheer rock-walls on each side,--high especially on the
Daun, or south side;--head-quarters can be in Dresden itself; room for
your cavalry on the plain ground between Dresden and the Chasm. A post
both safe and comfortable; only you must not loiter in making up your
mind as to Finck; for Friedrich has followed on the instant. Friedrich's
head-quarter is already Wilsdruf, which an hour or two ago was Daun's:
at Kesselsdorf vigilant Ziethen is vanguard. So that Friedrich looks
over on you from the northern brow of your Chasm; delays are not good
near such a neighbor.

Daun--urged on by Lacy, they say--is not long in deciding that, in this
strait, the short way out will be to attack Finck in the Hills. Daun is
in the Hills, as well as Finck (this Plauen Chasm is the boundary-ditch
of the Hills): Daun with 27,000 horse and foot, moving on from this
western part; 3,000 light people (one Sincere the leader of them)
moving simultaneously from Dresden itself, that is, from northward or
northwestward; 12,000 Reichsfolk, horse and foot, part of them already
to southeastward of Finck, other part stealing on by the Elbe bank
thitherward: here, from three different points of the compass, are
42,000. These simultaneously dashing in, from west, north, south, upon
Finck, may surely give account of his 12,000 and him! If only we can
keep Friedrich dark upon it; which surely our Pandours will contrive to
do.

Finck, directly on arriving at Maxen, had reported himself to the King;
and got answer before next morning: "Very well; but draw in those Four
Battalions you have left in Dippoldiswalde; hit with the whole of your
strength, when a chance offers." Which order Finck, literally and not
too willingly, obeys; leaves only some light remnant in Dippoldiswalde,
and reinforcement to linger within reach, till a certain Bread-convoy
come to him, which will be due next morning (Monday, 19th); and which
does then safely get home, though under annoyances from cannonading in
the distance.

SUNDAY, 18th, Finck fails not to reconnoitre from the highest Hill-top;
to inquire by every method: he finds, for certain, that the enemy are
coming in upon him. With his own eyes he sees Reichsfolk marching, in
quantity, southeastward by the Elbe shore: "Intending towards Dohna, as
is like?"--and despatched Wunsch, who, accordingly, drove them out of
Dohna. Of all this Finck, at once, sent word to Friedrich. Who probably
enough received the message; but who would get no new knowledge from
it,--vigilant Ziethen having, by Austrian deserters and otherwise,
discovered this of the Reichsfolk; and furthermore that Sincere with
3,000 was in motion, from the north, upon Finck. Sunday evening,
Friedrich despatches Ziethen's Report; which punctually came to Finck's
hand; but was the last thing he received from Friedrich, or Friedrich
from him. The intervening Pandours picked up all the rest. The Ziethen
REPORT, of two or three lines, most succinct but sufficient, like a
cutting of hard iron, is to be read in many Books: we may as well give
the Letter and it:--

FRIEDRICH'S LETTER (WILSDRUF, 18th NOVEMBER, 1759). "My dear
General-Lieutenant von Finck,--I send you the enclosed Report from
General Ziethen, showing what is the lie of matters as seen from this
side; and leave the whole to your disposition and necessary measures. I
am your well-affectioned King,--F." The Enclosure is as follows:--

GENERAL ZIETHEN'S REPORT (KESSELSDORF, 18th NOVEMBER, 1759). "To your
Royal Majesty, send [no pronoun "I" allowed] herewith a Corporal, who
has deserted from the Austrians. He says, Sincere with the Reserve did
march with the Reichs Army; but a league behind it, and turned towards
Dippoldiswalde. General Brentano [Wehla's old comrade, luckier than
Wehla], as this Deserter heard last night in Daun's head-quarter,--which
is in the southern Suburb of Dresden, in the Countess Moschinska's
Garden,--was yesterday to have been in Dohlen [looking into our outposts
from the hither side of their Plauen Dell], but was not there any
longer," as our Deserter passed, "and it was said that he had gone to
Maxen at three in the afternoon." [Tempelhof, iii. 309.]

Thus curtly is Finck authorized to judge for himself in the new
circumstances. Marginally is added, in Friedrich's own hand: "ER WIRD
ENTWEDER MIT DEN REICHERN ODER MIT SICEREN EINEN GANG HABEN,--Either
with the Reichers or with Sincere you will have a bout, I suppose."

MAP FACING PAGE 350, BOOK XIX GOES HERE----

Finck, from his own Hill-top, on Sunday and Monday, sees all this of
Ziethen, and much more. Sees the vanguard of Daun himself approaching
Dippoldiswalde, cannonading his meal-carts as they issue there; on all
sides his enemies encompassing him like bees;--and has a sphinx-riddle
on his mind, such as soldier seldom had. Shall he manoeuvre himself out,
and march away, bread-carts, baggages and all entire? There is still
time, and perfect possibility, by Dippoldiswalde there, or by other
routes and methods. But again, did not his Majesty expect, do not these
words "a bout" still seem to expect, a bit of fighting with somebody or
other? Finck was an able soldier, and his skill and courage well known;
but probably another kind of courage was wanted this day, of which Finck
had not enough. Finck was not king of this matter; Finck was under a
King who perhaps misjudged the matter. If Finck saw no method of doing
other than hurt and bad service to his King by staying here, Finck
should have had the courage to come away, and front the King's
unreasonable anger, expecting redress one day, or never any redress.
That was Finck's duty: but everybody sees how hard it was for flesh and
blood.

Finck, truer to the letter than to the spirit, determined to remain.
Did, all that Monday, his best to prepare himself; called in his
outposts ("Was not I ordered?" thinks Finck, too literally); and sees
his multitudes of enemies settle round him;--Daun alone has 27,000 men,
who take camp at Dippoldiswalde; and in sum-total they are as 4 to 1 of
Finck:--a Finck still resolute of face, though internally his thoughts
may be haggard enough. Doubtless he hopes, too, that Friedrich will do
something:--unaware that none of his messages reach Friedrich. As for
Daun, having seen his people safely encamped here, he returns to Dresden
for the night, to see that Friedrich is quiet. Friedrich is quiet
enough: Daun, at seven next morning (TUESDAY, 20th), appeared on the
ground again; and from all sides Finck is assaulted,--from Daun's side
nearest and soonest, with Daun's best vigor.

Dippoldiswalde is some seven miles from Maxen. Difficult hill-road
all the way: but the steepest, straitest and worst place is
at Reinhartsgrimma, the very first Hamlet after you are out of
Dippoldiswalde. There is a narrow gullet there, overhung with heights
all round. The roads are slippery, glazed with sleet and frost; Cavalry,
unroughened, make sad sliding and sprawling; hardly the Infantry
are secure on their feet: a terrible business getting masses of
artillery-wagons, horse and man, through such a Pass! It is thought, had
Finck garnished this Pass of Reinhartsgrimma, with the proper batteries,
the proper musketries, Daun never would have got through. Finck had not
a gun or a man in it: "Had not I order?" said he,--again too literally.
As it was, Daun, sliding and sprawling in the narrow steeps, had
difficulties almost too great; and, they say, would have given it up,
had it not been that a certain Major urged, "Can be done, Excellenz, and
shall!" and that the temper of his soldiers was everywhere excellent.
Unfortunate Finck had no artillery to bear on Daun's transit through the
Pass. Nothing but some weak body of hussars and infantry stood looking
into it, from the Hill of Hausdorf: even these might have given him
some slight hindrance; but these were played upon by endless Pandours,
"issuing from a wood near by," with musketries, and at length with
cannon batteries, one and another;--and had to fall back, or to be
called back, to Maxen Hill, where the main force is.

In the course of yesterday, by continual reconnoitring, by Austrian
deserters, and intense comparison of symptoms, Finck had completely
ascertained where the Enemy's Three Attacks were to be,--"on Maxen,
from Dippoldiswalde, Trohnitz, Dohna, simultaneously three attacks,"
it appears;--and had with all his skill arranged himself on the Maxen
summits to meet these. He stands now elaborately divided into Three
groups against those Three simultaneities; forming (sadly wide apart,
one would say, for such a force as Finck's) a very obtuse-angled
triangle:--the obtuse vertex of which (if readers care to look on their
Map) is Trohnitz, the road Brentano and Sincere are coming. On the
base-angles, Maxen and Dohna, Finck expects Daun and the Reich. From
Trohnitz to Maxen is near two miles; from Maxen to Dohna above four. At
Dohna stands Wunsch against the Reich; Finck himself at Maxen, expecting
Daun, as the pith of the whole affair. In this triangular way stands
Finck at the topmost heights of the country,--"Maxen highest, but
Hausdorf only a little lower,"--and has not thought of disputing the
climb upwards. Too literal an eye to his orders: alas, he was not
himself king, but only king's deputy!

The result is, about 11 A.M., as I obscurely gather, Daun has conquered
the climb; Daun's musketries begin to glitter on the top of Hausdorf;
and 26 or 32 heavy cannon open their throats there; and the Three
Attacks break loose. Finck's Maxen batteries (scarcely higher than
Daun's, and far inferior in weight) respond with all diligence, the poor
regimental fieldpieces helping what they can. Mutual cannonade, very
loud for an hour and half; terrific, but doing little mischief; after
which Daun's musketries (the ground now sufficiently clear to Daun),
which are the practical thing, begin opening, first from one point, then
from another: and there ensues, for five hours coming, at Maxen and at
the other two points of Finck's triangle, such a series of explosive
chargings, wheelings, worryings and intricate death-wrestlings, as it
would provoke every reader to attempt describing to him. Except indeed
he were a soldier, bound to know the defence of posts; in which case
I could fairly promise him that there are means of understanding the
affair, and that he might find benefit in it. [Tempelhof, iii. 307-317.
JOURNAL UND NACHRICHT VON DER GEFANGENNEHMUNG DES FINCK'SCHEN CORPS BEY
MAXEN, IM JAHRE 1759 (Seyfarth, _Beylagen,_ ii. 637-654).]

Daun's Grenadiers, and Infantry generally, are in triumphant spirits;
confident of victory, as they may reasonably be. Finck's people, too,
behave well, some of them conspicuously well, though in gloomier mood;
and make stubborn fight, successful here and there, but, as a whole, not
capable of succeeding. By 3 in the afternoon, the Austrians have forced
the Maxen Post; they "enter Maxen with great shoutings;" extrude the
obstinate Prussian remnants; and, before long, have the poor Village "on
fire in every part." Finck retreating northward to Schmorsdorf, towards
the obtuse angle of his triangle, if haply there may be help in that
quarter for him. Daun does not push him much; has Maxen safely burning
in every part.

From Schmorsdorf Finck pushes out a Cavalry charge on Brentano. "Could
we but repulse Brentano yonder," thinks he, "I might have those Four
Battalions to hand, and try again!" But Brentano makes such cannonading,
the Cavalry swerve to a Hollow on their right; then find they have not
ground, and retire quite fruitless. Finck's Cavalry, and the Cavalry
generally, with their horses all sliding on the frosty mountain-gnarls,
appear to be good for little this day. Brentano, victorious over the
Cavalry, comes on with such storm, he sweeps through the obtuse
angle, home upon Finck; and sweeps him out of Schmorsdorf Village to
Schmorsdorf Hill, there to take refuge, as the night sinks,--and to see
himself, if his wild heart will permit him to be candid, a ruined man.
Of the Three Attacks, Two have completely succeeded on him; only Wunsch,
at Dohna, stands victorious; he has held back the Reich all day,
and even chased it home to its posts on the Rothwasser (RED WATER),
multitudinous as it was.

Finck's mood, as the November shadows gathered on him,--the equal heart
may at least pity poor Finck! His resolution is fixed: "Cut ourselves
through, this night: Dohna is ours: other side that Red Water there are
roads;--perish or get through!" And the Generals (who are rallied now
"on the Heights of Falkenhain and Bloschwitz," midway between Maxen and
Dohna) get that Order from him. And proceed to arrange for executing
it,--though with outlook more and more desperate, as their scouts
report that every pass and post on the Red Water is beset by Reichsfolk.
"Wunsch, with the Cavalry, he at least may thread his way out, under
cloud of night, by the opposite or Daun side," calculates Finck. And
Wunsch sets out accordingly: a very questionable, winding, subterranean
march; difficult in the extreme,--the wearied SLIPshod horses going at
a snail's pace; and, in the difficult passes, needing to be dragged
through with bridle and even to be left altogether:--in which, withal,
it will prove of no use for Wunsch to succeed! Finck's Generals
endeavoring to rank and rearrange through the night, find that their
very cartridges are nearly spent, and that of men, such wounding, such
deserting has there been, they have, at this time, by precise count,
2,836 rank and file. Evidently desperate.

At daylight, Daun's cannon beginning again from the Maxen side, Finck
sends to capitulate. "Absolute surrender," answers Daun: "prisoners of
war, and you shall keep your private baggage. General Wunsch with the
Cavalry, he too must turn back and surrender!" Finck pleaded hard, on
this last score: "General Wunsch, as head of the Cavalry, is not under
me; is himself chief in that department." But it was of no use: Wunsch
had to return (not quite got through Daun's Lines, after such a night),
and to surrender, like everybody else. Like Eight other Generals; like
Wolfersdorf of Torgau, and many a brave Officer and man. Wednesday
morning, 21st November, 1769: it is Finck's fourth day on Maxen; his
last in the Prussian Service.

That same Wednesday Afternoon there were ranked in the GROSSE GARTEN at
Dresden, of dejected Prussian Prisoners from Maxen, what exact number
was never known: the Austrians said 15,000; but nobody well believed
them; their last certain instalment being only, in correct numbers,
2,836. Besides the killed, wounded and already captured, many had
deserted, many had glided clear off. It is judged that Friedrich
lost, by all these causes, about 12,000 men. Gone wholly,--with their
equipments and appurtenances wholly, which are not worth counting
in comparison. Finck and the other Generals, 8 of them, and 529
Officers,--Finck, Wunsch, Wolfersdorf, Mosel (of the Olmutz Convoy),
not to mention others of known worth, this is itself a sore loss to
Friedrich, and in present circumstances an irreparable. [Seyfarth, ii.
576; in _Helden-Geschichte,_ (v. 1115), the Vienna Account.]

The outburst and paroxysm of Gazetteer rumor, which arose in Europe
over this, must be left to the imagination; still more the whirlwind of
astonishment, grief, remorse and indignation that raged in the heart of
Friedrich on first hearing of it. "The Caudine Forks;" "Scene of Pirna
over again, in reverse form;" "Is not your King at last over with it?"
said and sang multifariously the Gazetteers. As counter-chorus to which,
in a certain Royal Heart: "That miserable purblind Finck, unequal to his
task;--that overhasty I, who drove him upon it! This disgrace, loss nigh
ruinous; in fine, this infernal Campaign (CETTE CAMPAGNE INFEMALE)!"
The Anecdote-Books abound in details of Friedrich's behavior at Wilsdruf
that day; mythical all, or in good part, but symbolizing a case that is
conceivable to everybody. Or would readers care to glance into the very
fact with their own eyes? As happens to be possible.


1. BEFORE MAXEN: FRIEDRICH TO D'ARGENS AND OTHERS.

TO D'ARGENS (Krogis, 15th November, order for Maxen just given).
"Yesterday I joined the Army [day before yesterday, but took the field
yesterday], and Daun decamped. I have followed him thus far, and will
continue it to the frontiers of Bohemia. Our measures are so taken
[Finck, to wit], that he will not get out of Saxony without considerable
losses. Yesterday cost him 500 men taken at Korgis here. Every movement
he makes will cost him as many." [_OEuvres de Frederic,_ xix. 101.]

TO VOLTAIRE (Wilsdruf, 17th November). "We are verging on the end of our
Campaign: and I will write to you in eight days from Dresden, with more
composure and coherency than now." [Ib. xxiii. 66.]

TO THE SAME (Wilsdruf, 19th November). "The Austrians are packing off
to Bohemia,--where, in reprisal for the incendiary operations they have
done in my countries, I have burnt them two big magazines. I render the
beatified Hero's retreat as difficult as possible; and I hope he
will come upon some bad adventures within a few days." [_OEuvres de
Frederic,_ xxiii. 66.]

SAME DAY AND PLACE, TO D'ARGENS. A volley of most rough-paced off-hand
Rhyming, direct from the heart; "Ode [as he afterwards terms it, or
irrepressible extempore LILT] TO FORTUNE:"

"MARQUIS, QUEL CHANGEMENT, what a change! I, a poor heretic creature,
never blessed by the Holy Father; indeed, little frequenting Church, nor
serving either Baal or the God of Israel; held down these many months,
and reported by more than one shaven scoundrel [priest-pamphleteer at
Vienna] to be quite extinct, and gone vagabond over the world,--see
how capricious Fortune, after all her hundred preferences of my rivals,
lifts me with helpful hand from the deep, and packs this Hero of the Hat
and Sword,--whom Popes have blessed what they could, and who has walked
in Pilgrimage before now [to Marienzell once, I believe, publicly at
Vienna],--out of Saxony; panting, harassed goes he, like a stranger
dog from some kitchen where the cook had flogged him out!" [Ib. xix.
103-106.]... (A very exultant Lilt, and with a good deal more of the
chanticleer in it than we are used to in this King!)


2. AFTER MAXEN.

TO D'ARGENS (Wilsdruf, 22d November). "Do with that [some small piece
of business] whatever you like, my dear Marquis. I am so stupefied
(E'TOURDI) with the misfortune which has befallen General Finck, that
I cannot recover from my astonishment. It deranges all my measures;
it cuts me to the quick. Ill-luck, which persecutes my old age, has
followed me from the Mark [Kunersdorf, in the Mark of Brandenburg]
to Saxony. I will still strive what I can. The little ODE I sent you,
addressed TO FORTUNE, had been written too soon! One should not sing
victory till the battle is over. I am so crushed down by these incessant
reverses and disasters, that I wish a thousand times I were dead;
and from day to day I grow wearier of dwelling in a body worn out and
condemned to suffer. I am writing to you in the first moment of my
grief. Astonishment, sorrow, indignation, scorn, all blended together,
lacerate my soul. Let us get to the end, then, of this execrable
Campaign; I will then write to you what is to become of me; and we will
arrange the rest. Pity me;--ad make no noise about me; bad news go fast
enough of themselves. Adieu, dear Marquis." [_OEuvres de Frederic, _
xix. 107.]

All this, of course, under such pressing call of actualities, had
very soon to transform itself into silence; into new resolution, and
determinate despatch of business. But the King retained a bitter memory
of it all his days. To Finck he was inexorable:--ordered him, the first
thing on his return from Austrian Captivity, Trial by Court-Martial;
which (Ziethen presiding, June, 1763) censured Finck in various
points, and gave him, in supplement to the Austrian detention, a
Year's Imprisonment in Spandau. No ray of pity visible for him, then
or afterwards, in the Royal mind. So that the poor man had to beg
his dismissal; get it, and go to Denmark for new promotion and
appreciation.--"Far too severe!" grumbled the Opposition voices, with
secret counter-severity. And truly it would have been more beautiful to
everybody, for the moment, to have made matters soft to poor Finck,--had
Friedrich ever gone on that score with his Generals and Delegates;
which, though the reverse of a cruel man, he never did. And truly, as
we often observe, the Laws of Fact are still severer than Friedrich
was:--so that, in the long-run, perhaps it is beautifulest of all for a
King, who is just, to be rhadamanthine in important cases.

Exulting Daun, instead of Bohemia for winter-quarters, pushes out now
for the prize of Saxony itself. Daun orders Beck to attack suddenly
another Outpost of Friedrich's, which stands rearward of him at Meissen,
under a General Dierecke,--the same whom, as Colonel Dierecke, we
saw march out of flamy Zittau, summer gone two years. Beck goes in
accordingly, 3d December; attacks Dierecke, not by surprise, but with
overwhelming superiority; no reinforcement possible: Dierecke is on
the wrong side of the Elbe, no retreat or reinforcement for him; has to
fight fiercely all day, Meissen Bridge being in a broken state; then, at
night, to ship his people across in Elbe boats, which are much delayed
by the floating ice, so that daylight found 1,500 of them still on that
northern side; all of whom, with General Dierecke himself, were made
prisoners by Beck. [Tempelhof, iii. 321: "3d-4th December, 1759."] A
comfortable supplement to Maxen, though not of the same magnificence.

After which, Daun himself issued minatory from the Plauen Chasm;
expecting, as all the world did, that Friedrich, who is 36,000 of
Unfortunate against, say, 72,000 of Triumphant, will, under penalty,
take himself away. But it proved otherwise. "If you beat us, Excellency
Feldmarschall, yes; but till then--!" Friedrich draws out in battalia;
Leo in wild ragged state and temper, VERSUS Bos in the reverse: "Come
on; then!" Rhinoceros Bos, though in a high frame of mind, dare not, on
cool survey; but retires behind the Plauen Chasm again. Will at least
protect Dresden from recapture; and wait here, in the interim; carting
his provision out of Bohemia,--which is a rough business, with Elbe
frozen, and the passes in such a choked wintry state. Upon whom
Friedrich, too, has to wait under arms, in grim neighborhood, for six
weeks to come: such a time as poor young Archenholtz never had before
or after. [Archenholtz, ii. 11-13.] It was well beyond New-year's day
before Friedrich could report of himself, and then only in a sense, as
will be seen: "We retired to this poor cottage [cottage still standing,
in the little Town of Freyberg]; Daun did the like; and this unfortunate
Campaign, as all things do, came actually to an end."

Daun holds Dresden and the Dell of Plauen; but Saxony, to the world's
amazement, he is as far as ever from holding. "Daun's front is a small
arc of a circle, bending round from Dresden to Dippoldiswalde; Friedrich
is at Freyberg in a bigger concave arc, concentric to Daun, well
overlapping Daun on that southward or landward side, and ready for him,
should he stir out; Kesselsdorf is his nearest post to Daun; and the
Plauen Chasm for boundary, which was not overpassed by either." In
Dresden, and the patch of hill-country to the southeastward of it by
Elbe side, which is instep or glacis of the Pirna rock-country, seventy
square miles or so, there rules Daun; and this--with its heights of
Gahmig, valuable as a defence for Dresden against Austria, but not
otherwise of considerable value--was all that Daun this year, or pretty
much in any coming year, could realize of conquest in Saxony.

Fabius Cunctator has not succeeded, as the public expected. In fact,
ever since that of Hochkirch and the Papal Hat, he has been a waning
man, more and more questionable to the undiscerning public. Maxen was
his last gleam upwards; a round of applause rose again on Maxen, feeble
in comparison with Hochkirch, but still arguing hope,--which, after
this, more and more died out; so that in two years more, poor Madam
Daun, going to Imperial Levee, "had her state-carriage half filled
with nightcaps, thrown into it by the Vienna people, in token of her
husband's great talent for sleep." [Archenholtz (Anno 1762, "last Siege
of Schweidnitz").]




Chapter VIII.--MISCELLANEA IN WINTER-QUARTERS, 1759-1760.

Friedrich was very loath to quit the field this Winter. In spite of
Maxen and ill-luck and the unfavorablest weather, it still was, for
about two months, his fixed purpose to recapture Dresden first, and
drive Daun home. "Had I but a 12,000 of Auxiliaries to guard my right
flank, while trying it!" said he. Ferdinand magnanimously sent him
the Hereditary Prince with 12,000, who stayed above two months; ["Till
February 15th;" List of the Regiments (German all), in SEYFARTH, ii.
578 n.] and Friedrich did march about, attempting that way, [_OEuvres de
Frederic,_ v. 32. Old Newspaper rumors: in _Gentleman's Magazine,_
xxix. 605, "29th December," &c.]--pushed forward to Maguire and
Dippoldiswalde, looked passionately into Maguire on all sides; but
found him, in those frozen chasms, and rock-labyrinths choked with snow,
plainly unattackable; him and everybody, in such frost-element;--and
renounced the passionate hope.

It was not till the middle of January that Friedrich put his troops into
partial cantonments, Head-quarter Freyberg; troops still mainly in the
Villages from Wilsdruf and southward, close by their old Camp there.
Camp still left standing, guarded by Six Battalions; six after six,
alternating week about: one of the grimmest camps in Nature; the canvas
roofs grown mere ice-plates, the tents mere sanctuaries of frost:--never
did poor young Archenholtz see such industry in dragging wood-fuel, such
boiling of biscuits in broken ice, such crowding round the embers to
roast one side of you, while the other was freezing. [Archenholtz (UT
SUPRA), ii. 11-15.] But Daun's people, on the opposite side of Plauen
Dell, did the like; their tents also were left standing in the frozen
state, guarded by alternating battalions, no better off than their
Prussian neighbors. This of the Tents, and Six frost-bitten Battalions
guarding them, lasted till April. An extraordinary obstinacy on the part
both of Daun and of Friedrich; alike jealous of even seeming to yield
one inch more of ground.

The Hereditary Prince, with his 12,000, marched home again in February;
indeed, ever after the going into cantonments, all use of the Prince
and his Force here visibly ceased; and, on the whole, no result whatever
followed those strenuous antagonisms, and frozen tents left standing for
three months; and things remained practically what they were. So that,
as the grand "Peace Negotiations" also came to nothing, we might omit
this of Winter-quarters altogether; and go forward to the opening of
Campaign Fifth;--were it not that characteristic features do otherwise
occur in it, curious little unveilings of the secret hopes and
industries of Friedrich:--besides which, there have minor private events
fallen out, not without interest to human readers. For whose behoof
mainly a loose intercalary Chapter may be thrown together here.




SERENE HIGHNESS OF WURTEMBERG, AT FULDA (November 30th, 1759), IS JUST
ABOUT "FIRING VICTORIA," AND GIVING A BALL TO BEAUTY AND FASHION, IN
HONOR OF A CERTAIN EVENT;--BUT IS UNPLEASANTLY INTERRUPTED.

November 21st, the very day while Finck was capitulating in the Hills of
Maxen, Duke Ferdinand, busy ever since his Victory at Minden, did, after
a difficult Siege of Munster, Siege by Imhof, with Ferdinand protecting
him, get Munster into hand again, which was reckoned a fine success to
him. Very busy has the Duke been: industriously reaping the fruits
of his Victory at Minden; and this, the conclusive rooting out of the
French from that Westphalian region, is a very joyful thing; and puts
Ferdinand in hopes of driving them over the Mayn altogether. Which some
think he would have done; had not he, with magnanimous oblivion of self
and wishes, agreed to send the Hereditary Prince and those 12,000 to
assist in Friedrich's affairs, looking upon that as the vital point in
these Allied Interests. Friedrich's attempts, we have said, turned out
impossible; nor would the Hereditary Prince and his 12,000, though
a good deal talked about in England and elsewhere, [Walpole, _George
Second,_ iii. 248 (in a sour Opposition tone); &c. &c.] require more
than mention; were it not that on the road thither, at Fulda ("Fulda is
half-way house to Saxony," thinks Ferdinand, "should Pitt and Britannic
Majesty be pleased to consent, as I dare presume they will"), the
Hereditary Prince had, in his swift way, done a thing useful for
Ferdinand himself, and which caused a great emotion, chiefly of
laughter, over the world, in those weeks.

"No Enemy of Friedrich's," says my Note, "is of feller humor than the
Serenity of Wurtemberg, Karl Eugen, Reigning Duke of that unfortunate
Country; for whom, in past days, Friedrich had been so fatherly, and
really took such pains. 'Fatherly? STEP-fatherly, you mean; and for his
own vile uses!' growled the Serenity of Wurtemberg:--always an ominous
streak of gloom in that poor man; streak which is spread now to whole
skies of boiling darkness, owing to deliriums there have been! Enough,
Karl Eugen, after divorcing his poor Wife, had distinguished himself
by a zeal without knowledge, beyond almost all the enemies of
Friedrich;--and still continues in that bad line of industry. His poor
Wife he has made miserable in some measure; also himself; and, in a
degree, his poor soldiers and subjects, who are with him by compulsion
in this Enterprise. The Wurtembergers are Protestants of old type; and
want no fighting against 'the Protestant Hero,' but much the reverse!
Serene Karl had to shoot a good few of these poor people, before they
would march at all; and his procedures were indeed, and continued to be,
of a very crying nature, though his poor Populations took them silently.
Always something of perverse in this Serene Highness; has it, I think,
by kind.

"Besides his quota to the Reich, Karl Eugen has 12,000 more on
foot,--and it is of them we are treating at present. In 1757 he had lent
these troops to the Empress Queen, for a consideration; it was they
that stood on the Austrian left, at Leuthen; and were the first that
got beaten, and had to cease standing,--as the Austrians were abundantly
loud in proclaiming. To the disgust of Serene Highness: 'Which of you
did stand, then? Was it their blame, led as they were?' argued he.
And next year, 1758, after Crefeld, he took his 12,000 to the French
('subsidy,' or consideration, 'to be paid in SALT,' it appears [_OEuvres
de Frederic,_ v. 10.]); with whom they marched about, and did nothing
considerable. The Serenity had pleaded, 'I must command them myself!'
'You?' said Belleisle, and would not hear of it. Next year again,
however, that is 1759, the Duke was positive, 'I must;' Belleisle not
less so, 'You cannot;'--till Minden fell out; and then, in the wreck of
Contades, Belleisle had to consent. Serenity of Wurtemberg, at that late
season, took the field accordingly; and Broglio now has him at Fulda,
'To cut off Ferdinand from Cassel;' to threaten Ferdinand's left flank
and his provision-carts in that quarter. May really become unpleasant
there to Ferdinand;--and ought to be cut out by the Hereditary Prince.
'To Fulda, then, and cut him out!'

"FULDA, FRIDAY, 30th NOVEMBER, 1759. Serene Highness is lying here for a
week past; abundantly strong for the task on hand,--has his own 12,000,
supplemented by 1,000 French Light Horse;--but is widely scattered
withal, posted in a kind of triangular form; his main posts being Fulda
itself, and a couple of others, each thirty miles from Fulda, and five
miles from one another,--with 'patrols to connect them,' better or
worse. Abundantly strong for the task, and in perfect security; and
indeed intends this day to 'fire VICTORIA' for the Catastrophe at Maxen,
and in the evening will give a Ball in farther honor of so salutary an
event:--when, about 9 A.M., news arrives at the gallop, 'Brunswickers
in full march; are within an hour of the Town-Bridge!' Figure to what
flurry of Serene Highness; of the victoria-shooting apparatus; of busy
man-milliner people, and the Beauty and Fashion of Fulda in general!

"The night before, a rumor of the French Post being driven in by
somebody had reached Serene Highness; who gave some vague order, not
thinking it of consequence. Here, however, is the Fact come to hand in
a most urgent and undeniable manner! Serene Highness gets on horseback;
but what can that help? One cannon (has nothing but light cannon) he
does plant on the Bridge; but see, here come premonitory bomb-shells
one and another, terrifying to the mind;--and a single Hessian dragoon,
plunging forward on the one unready cannon, and in the air making horrid
circles,--the gunners leave said cannon to him, take to their heels; and
the Bridge is open. The rest of the affair can be imagined. Retreat at
our swiftest, 'running fight,' we would fain call it, by various roads;
lost two flags, two cannon; prisoners were above 1,200, many of them
Officers. 'A merciful Providence saved the Duke's Serene Person from
hurt,' say the Stuttgard Gazetteers: which was true,--Serene Highness
having been inspired to gallop instantly to rearward and landward,
leaving an order to somebody, 'Do the best you can!'

"So that the Ball is up; dress-pumps and millineries getting all locked
into their drawers again,--with abundance of te-hee-ing (I hope, mostly
in a light vein) from the fair creatures disappointed of their dance
for this time. Next day Serene Highness drew farther back, and next day
again farther,--towards Frankenland and home, as the surest place;--and
was no more heard of in those localities." [Buchholz, ii. 332;
Mauvillon, ii. 80; _Helden-Geschichte,_ v. 1184-1193; Old Newspapers,
in _Gentleman's Magazine,_ xxix. 603.]

Making his first exit, not yet quite his final, from the War-Theatre,
amid such tempests of haha-ing and te-hee-ing. With what thoughts in his
own lofty opaque mind;--like a crowned mule, of such pace and carriage,
who had unexpectedly stepped upon galvanic wires!--

As to those poor Wurtembergers, and their notion of the "Protestant
Hero," I remark farther, that there is a something of real truth in it.
Friedrich's Creed, or Theory of the Universe, differed extremely, in
many important points, from that of Dr. Martin Luther: but in the vital
all-essential point, what we may call the heart's core of all Creeds
which are human, human and not simious or diabolic, the King and the
Doctor were with their whole heart at one: That it is not allowable,
that it is dangerous and abominable, to attempt believing what is
not true. In that sense, Friedrich, by nature and position, was a
Protestant, and even the chief Protestant in the world. What kind of
"Hero," in this big War of his, we are gradually learning;--in which
too, if you investigate, there is not wanting something of "PROTESTANT
Heroism," even in the narrow sense. For it does appear,--Maria Theresa
having a real fear of God, and poor Louis a real fear of the Devil,
whom he may well feel to be getting dangerous purchase over him,--some
hope-gleams of acting upon Schism, and so meriting Heaven, did mingle
with their high terrestrial combinations, on this unique opportunity,
more than are now supposed in careless History-Books.




WHAT IS PERPETUAL PRESIDENT MAUPERTUIS DOING, ALL THIS WHILE? IS HE
STILL IN BERLIN; OR WHERE IN THE UNIVERSE IS HE? ALAS, POOR MAUPERTUIS!

In the heat of this Campaign, "July 27th,"--some four days after the
Battle of Zullichau, just while Friedrich was hurrying off for that
Intersection at Sagan, and breathless Hunt of Loudon and Haddick,--poor
Maupertuis had quitted this world. July 27th, 1759; at Basel, on the
Swiss Borders, in his friend Bernouilli's house, after long months of
sickness painfully spent there. And our poor Perpetual President, at
rest now from all his Akakia burns, and pains and labors in flattening
the Earth and otherwise, is gone.

Many beautifuler men have gone within the Year, of whom we can say
nothing. But this is one whose grandly silent, and then occasionally
fulminant procedures, Akakia controversies, Olympian solemnities and
flamy pirouettings under the contradiction of sinners, we once saw; and
think with a kind of human pathos that we shall see no more. From his
goose of an adorer, La Beaumelle, I have riddled out the following
particulars, chiefly chronological,--and offer them to susceptible
readers. La Beaumelle is, in a sort, to be considered the speaker; or La
Beaumelle and this Editor in concert.

FINAL PILGRIMAGE OF THE PERPETUAL PRESIDENT. "Maupertuis had quitted
Berlin soon after Voltaire. That threat of visiting Voltaire with
pistols,--to be met by 'my syringe and vessel of dishonor' on Voltaire's
part,--was his last memorability in Berlin. His last at that time; or
indeed altogether, for he saw little of Berlin farther.

"End of April, 1753, he got leave of absence; set out homewards,
for recovery of health. Was at Paris through summer and autumn: very
taciturn in society; 'preferred pretty women to any man of science;'
would sententiously say a strong thing now and then, 'bitter but not
without BONHOMIE,' shaking slightly his yellow wig. Disdainful, to how
high a degree, of AKAKIA brabbles, and Voltaire gossip for or against!
In winter went to St. Malo; found his good Father gone; but a loving
Sister still there.

"June, 1754, the King wrote to him, 'VENEZ VITE, Come quickly:' July,
1754, he came accordingly, [_OEuvres de Frederic,_ xx. 49.] saw Berlin
again; did nothing noticeable there, except get worse in health; and
after eleven months, June, 1756, withdrew again on leave,--never to
return this time, though he well intended otherwise. But at St. Malo,
when, after a month or two of Paris, he got thither (Autumn, 1756),
and still more, next summer, 1757, when he thought of leaving St.
Malo,--what wars, and rumors of war, all over the world!

"June, 1757, he went to Bordeaux, intending to take ship for Hamburg,
and return; but the sea was full of English cruisers [Pitt's Descents
lying in store for St. Malo itself]. No getting to Berlin by the Hamburg
or sea route! 'Never mind, then,' wrote the King: 'Improve your health;
go to Italy, if you can.'

"Summer, 1757, Maupertuis made for Italy; got as far as
Toulouse;--stayed there till May following; sad, tragically stoical;
saying, sparingly, and rather to women than men, strong things, admired
by the worthier sort. Renounced thoughts of Italy: 'Europe bleeding, and
especially France and Prussia, how go idly touring?'

"May, 1758, Maupertuis left Toulouse: turned towards Berlin; slow, sad,
circuitous;--never to arrive. Saw Narbonne, Montpellier, Nimes; with
what meditations! At Lyons, under honors sky-high, health getting worse,
stays two months; vomits clots of blood there. Thence, July 24th, to
Neufchatel and the Lord Marischal; happy there for three months. Hears
there of Professor Konig's death (AKAKIA Konig): 'One scoundrel less in
the world,' ejaculated he; 'but what is one!'--October 16th, to the
road again, to Basel; stays perforce, in Bernouilli's house there, all
Winter; health falling lower and lower.

"April, 1759, one day he has his carriage at the door ('Homeward, at
all rates!'): but takes violent spasms in the carriage; can't; can no
farther in this world. Lingers here, under kind care, for above three
months more: dying slowly, most painfully. With much real stoicism; not
without a stiff-jointed algebraic kind of piety, almost pathetic in
its sort. 'Two Capuchins from a neighboring Convent daily gave him
consolations,' not entirely satisfactory; for daily withal, 'unknown to
the Capuchins, he made his Valet, who was a Protestant, read to him from
the Geneva Bible;'--and finds many things hard to the human mind. July
27th, 1759, he died." [La Beaumelle, _Vie de Maupertuis,_ pp. 196-216.]

Poor Maupertuis; a man of rugged stalwart type; honest; of an ardor, an
intelligence, not to be forgotten for La Beaumelle's pulings over them.
A man of good and even of high talent; unlucky in mistaking it for the
highest! His poor Wife, a born Borck,--hastening from Berlin, but again
and again delayed by industry of kind friends, and at last driving on
in spite of everything,--met, in the last miles, his Hearse and Funeral
Company. Adieu, a pitying adieu to him forever,--and even to his adoring
La Beaumelle, who is rather less a blockhead than he generally seems.

This of the Two Capuchins, the last consummation of collapse in man, is
what Voltaire cannot forget, but crows over with his shrillest
mockery; and seldom mentions Maupertuis without that last touch to his
life-drama.




GRAND FRENCH INVASION-SCHEME COMES ENTIRELY TO WRECK (Quiberon Bay, 20th
November, 1759): OF CONTROLLER-GENERAL SILHOUETTE, AND THE OUTLOOKS OF
FRANCE, FINANCIAL AND OTHER.

On the very day of Maxen, Tuesday, November 20th, the grand French
Invasion found its terminus,--not on the shores of Britain, but
of Brittany, to its surprise. We saw Rodney burn the Flat-bottom
manufactory at Havre; Boscawen chase the Toulon Squadron, till it ended
on the rocks of Lagos. From January onwards, as was then mentioned,
Hawke had been keeping watch, off Brest Harbor, on Admiral Conflans,
who presides there over multifarious preparations, with the last Fleet
France now has. At Vannes, where Hawke likewise has ships watching,
are multifarious preparations; new Flat-bottoms, 18,000 troops,--could
Conflans and they only get to sea. At the long last, they did get;--in
manner following:--

"November 9th, a wild gale of wind had blown Hawke out of sight; away
home to Torbay, for the moment. 'Now is the time!' thought Conflans, and
put to sea (November 14th); met by Hawke, who had weighed from Torbay
to his duty; and who, of course, crowded every sail, after hearing that
Conflans was out. At break of day, November 20th [in the very hours when
poor Finck was embattling himself round Maxen, and Daun sprawling up
upon him through the Passes], Hawke had had signal, 'A Fleet in sight;'
and soon after, 'Conflans in sight,'--and the day of trial come.

"Conflans is about the strength of Hawke, and France expects much of
him; but he is not expecting Hawke. Conflans is busy, at this moment,
in the mouth of Quiberon Bay, opening the road for Vannes and the
18,000;--in hot chase, at the moment, of a Commodore Duff and his small
Squadron, who have been keeping watch there, and are now running all
they can. On a sudden, to the astonishment of Conflans, this little
Squadron whirls round, every ship of it (with a sky-rending cheer, could
he hear it), and commences chasing! Conflans, taking survey, sees that
it is Hawke; he, sure enough, coming down from windward yonder at his
highest speed; and that chasing will not now be one's business!--

"About 11 A.M. Hawke is here; eight of his vanward ships are sweeping on
for action. Conflans, at first, had determined to fight Hawke; and drew
up accordingly, and did try a little: but gradually thought better
of it; and decided to take shelter in the shoaly coasts and nooks
thereabouts, which were unknown to Hawke, and might ruin him if he
should pursue, the day being short, and the weather extremely bad.
Weather itself almost to be called a storm. 'Shoreward, then; eastward,
every ship!' became, ultimately, Conflans's plan. On the whole, it was
2 in the afternoon before Hawke, with those vanward Eight, could get
clutch of Conflans. And truly he did then strike his claws into him in
a thunderously fervid manner, he and all hands, in spite of the roaring
weather:--a man of falcon, or accipitral, nature as well as name.

"Conflans himself fought well; as did certain of the others,--all, more
or less, so long as their plan continued steady:--thunderous miscellany
of cannon and tempest; Conflans with his plan steady, or Conflans with
his plan wavering, VERSUS those vanward Eight, for two hours or more.
But the scene was too dreadful; this ship sinking, that obliged to
strike; things all going awry for Conflans. Hawke, in his own Flagship,
bore down specially on Conflans in his,--who did wait, and exchange a
couple of broadsides; but then sheered off, finding it so heavy. French
Vice-Admiral next likewise gave Hawke a broadside; one only, and sheered
off, satisfied with the return. Some Four others, in succession, did
the like; 'One blast, as we hurry by' (making for the shore, mostly)! So
that Hawke seemed swallowed in volcanoes (though, indeed, their firing
was very bad, such a flurry among them), and his Blue Flag was invisible
for some time, and various ships were hastening to help him,--till a
Fifth French ship coming up with her broadside, Hawke answered her in
particular (LA SUPERBE, a Seventy-four) with all his guns together;
which sent the poor ship to the bottom, in a hideously sudden manner.
One other (the THESEE) had already sunk in fighting; two (the SOLEIL and
the HEROS) were already running for it,--the HEROS in a very unheroic
manner! But on this terrible plunge-home of the SUPERBE, the rest all
made for the shore;--and escaped into the rocky intricacies and the
darkness. Four of Conflans's ships were already gone,--struck, sunk,
or otherwise extinct,--when darkness fell, and veiled Conflans and his
distresses. 'Country people, to the number of 10,000,' crowded on the
shore, had been seen watching the Battle; and, 'as sad witnesses of the
White Flag's disgrace,' disappeared into the interior." [Beatson, ii.
327-345: and Ib. iii. 244-250. In _Gentleman's Magazine,_ (xxix. 557),
"A Chaplain's Letter," &c.]

It was such a night as men never witnessed before. Walpole says: "The
roaring of the elements was redoubled by the thunder from our ships; and
both concurred in that scene of horror to put a period to the Navy and
hopes of France. Seven ships of the line got into the River Vilaine
[lay there fourteen months, under strict watching, till their backs
were broken, "thumping against the shallow bottom every tide," and only
"three, with three frigates," ever got out again]; eight more escaped
to different ports," into the River Charente ultimately. "Conflans's own
ship and another were run on shore, and burnt. One we took." Two, with
their crews, had gone to the bottom; one under Hawke's cannon; one
partly by its own mismanagement. "Two of ours were lost in the storm
[chasing that SOLEIL and HEROS], but the crews saved. Lord Howe, who
attacked LA FORMIDABLE, bore down on her with such violence, that her
prow forced in his lower tier of guns. Captain Digby, in the DUNKIRK,
received the fire of twelve of the enemy's ships, and lost not a man.
Keppel's was full of water, and he thought it sinking: a sudden squall
emptied his ship; but he was informed all his powder was wet; 'Then,'
said he, 'I am sorry I am safe.' They came and told him a small quantity
was undamaged; 'Very well,' said he; 'then attack again.' Not above
eight of our ships were engaged in obtaining that decisive victory.
The Invasion was heard of no more." [Walpole, _George Second,_ iii.
232.--Here is the List, accurately riddled out: 1. FORMIDABLE, struck
(about 4 P.M.): 2. THESEE, sunk (by a tumble it made, while in action,
under an unskilful Captain): 3. SUPERBE, sunk: 4. HEROS, struck; could
not he boarded, such weather; and recommenced next day, but had to run
and strand itself, and be burnt by the English;--as did (5.) the SOLEIL
ROYAL (Conflans's Flagship), Conflans and crew (like those of the HEROS)
getting out in time.]

Invasion had been fully intended, and even, in these final days,
considerably expected. In the old London Newspapers we read this notice:
MONDAY, NOVEMBER 19th: "To-day there came Three Expresses,"--Three
Expresses, with what haste in their eyes, testifying successively of
Conflans's whereabouts. But it was believed that Hawke would still
manage. And, at any rate, Pitt wore such a look,--and had, in fact, made
such preparation on the coasts, even in failure of Hawke,--there was no
alarm anywhere. Indignation rather;--and naturally, when the news did
come, what an outburst of Illumination in the windows and the hearts of
men!

"Hawke continued watching the mouths of the Vilaine and Charente Rivers
for a good while after, and without interruption henceforth,--till the
storms of Winter had plainly closed them for one season. Supplies of
fresh provisions had come to him from England all Summer; but were
stopped latterly by the wild weather. Upon which, in the Fleet, arose
this gravely pathetic Stave of Sea-Poetry, with a wrinkle of briny humor
grinning in it:--

     Till Hawke did bang Monsieur Conflans [CONGFLANG],
     You sent us beef and beer;
     Now Monsieur's beat, we've nought to eat,
     Since you have nought to fear." [Beatson, ii. 342 n.]

The French mode of taking this catastrophe was rather peculiar. Hear
Barbier, an Eye-witness; dating PARIS, DECEMBER, 1759: "Since the first
days of December, there has been cried, and sold in the streets, a
Printed Detail of all that concerns the GRAND INVASION projected this
long while: to wit, the number of Ships of the Line, of Frigates,
Galiots,--among others 500 Flat-bottomed Boats, which are to carry over,
and land in England, more than 54,000 men;--with list of the Regiments,
and number of the King's Guards, that are also to go: there are
announced for Generals-in-Chief, M. le Prince de Conti [do readers
remember him since the Broglio-Maillebois time, and how King Louis
prophesied in autograph that he would be "the Grand Conti" one
day?]--Prince de Conti, Prince de Soubise [left his Conquest of
Frankfurt for this greater Enterprise], and Milord Thomont [Irish
Jacobite, whom I don't know]. As sequel to this Detail, there is a
lengthy Song on the DISEMBARKMENT IN ENGLAND, and the fear the English
must have of it!" Calculated to astonish the practical forensic mind.

"It is inconceivable", continues he, "how they have permitted such
a Piece to be printed; still more to be cried, and sold price one
halfpenny (DEUX LIARDS). This Song is indecent, in the circumstances of
the actual news from our Fleet at Brest (20th of last month);--in regard
to which bad adventure M. le Marquis de Conflans has come to Versailles,
to justify himself, and throw the blame on M. le Marquis de Beauffremont
[his Rear-Admiral, now safe in the Charente, with eight of our poor
ships]. Such things are the more out of place, as we are in a bad enough
position,--no Flat-bottoms stirring from the ports, no Troops of the
MAISON DU ROI setting out; and have reason to believe that we are now to
make no such attempt." [Barbier, iv. 336.]

Silhouette, the Controller-General, was thought to have a creative
genius in finance: but in the eighth month of his gestation, what
phenomena are these? October 26th, there came out Four Decrees of
Council, setting forth, That, "as the expenses of the War exceed not
only the King's ordinary revenues, but the extraordinaries he has had to
lay on his people, there is nothing for it but," in fact, Suspension of
Payment; actual Temporary Bankruptcy:--"Cannot pay you; part of you not
for a year, others of you not till the War end; will give you 5 per cent
interest instead." Coupled with which, by the same creative genius, is a
Declaration in the King's name, "That the King compels nobody, but does
invite all and sundry of loyal mind to send their Plate (on loan, of
course, and with due receipt for it) to the Mint to be coined, lest
Majesty come to have otherwise no money,"--his very valets, as is
privately known, having had no wages from him for ten months past.

Whereupon the rich Princes of the Blood, Due d'Orleans foremost, and
Official persons, Pompadour, Belleisle, Choiseul, do make an effort; and
everybody that has Plate feels uneasily that he cannot use it, and that
he ought to send it. And, November 5th, the King's own Plate, packed
ostentatiously in carts, went to the Mint;--the Dauphiness, noble
Saxon Lady, had already volunteered with a silver toilet-table of hers,
brand-new and of exquisite costly pattern; but the King forbade her. On
such examples, everybody had to make an effort, or uneasily try to make
one. King Friedrich, eight days after Maxen, is somewhat amused at these
proceedings in the distance:--

"The kettles and spoons of the French seem to me a pleasant resource,
for carrying on War!" writes he to D'Argens. ["Wilsdruf, 28th November,
1759," _OEuvres de Frederic,_ xix. 108.] "A bit of mummery to act on the
public feeling, I suppose. The result of it will be small: but as
the Belleisle LETTERS [taken in Contades's baggage, after Minden, and
printed by Duke Ferdinand for public edification] make always such
an outcry about poverty, those people are trying to impose on their
enemies, and persuade them that the carved and chiselled silver of the
Kingdom will suffice for making a vigorous Campaign. I see nothing else
that can have set them on imagining the farce they are now at. There is
Munster taken from them by the English-Hanoverian people; it is affirmed
that the French, on the 25th, quitted Giessen, to march on Friedberg
and repass the Rhine [might possibly have done so;--but the Hereditary
Prince and his 12,000 come to be needed elsewhere!]--Poor we are
opposite our enemies here, cantoned in the Villages about; the last
truss of straw, the last loaf of bread will decide which of us is to
remain in Saxony. And as the Austrians are extremely squeezed together,
and can get nothing out of Bohmen,"--one hopes it will not be they!

All through November, this sending of Plate, I never knew with what
net-result of moneys coinable, goes on in Paris; till, at the highest
tables, there is nothing of silver dishes left;--and a new crockery kind
(rather clumsy; "CULS NOIRS," as we derisively call them, pigment of
BOTTOM part being BLACK) has had to be contrived instead. Under what
astonishments abroad and at home, and in the latter region under what
execrations on Silhouette, may be imagined. "TOUT LE MONDE JURE BEAUCOUP
CONTRE M. DE SILHOUETTE, All the world swears much against him," says
Barbier;--but I believe probably he was much to be pitied: "A creative
genius, you; and this is what you come to?"

November 22d, the poor man got dismissed; France swearing at him, I
know not to what depth; but howling and hissing, evidently, with all
its might. The very tailors and milliners took him up,--trousers
without pockets, dresses without flounce or fold, which they called A LA
SILHOUETTE:--and, to this day, in France and Continental Countries,
the old-fashioned Shadow-Profile (mere outline, and vacant black) is
practically called a SILHOUETTE. So that the very Dictionaries have him;
and, like bad Count Reinhart, or REYNARD, of earlier date, he has become
a Noun Appellative, and is immortalized in that way. The first of
that considerable Series of Creative Financiers, Abbe Terray and the
rest,--brought in successively with blessings, and dismissed with
cursings and hissings,--who end in Calonne, Lomenie de Brienne, and
what Mirabeau Pere called "the General Overturn (CULBUTE GENERALE)."
Thitherward, privately, straight towards the General Overturn, is France
bound;--and will arrive in about thirty years.




FRIEDRICH, STRANGE TO SAY, PUBLISHES (March-June, 1760) AN EDITION OF
HIS POEMS. QUESTION, "WHO WROTE Matinees du Roi de Prusse?"--FOR THE
SECOND, AND POSITIVELY THE LAST TIME.

In this avalanche of impending destructions, what can be more surprising
than to hear of the Editing of Poems on his Majesty's part! Actual
publication of that OEuvre de Poesie, for which Voltaire, poor
gentleman, suffered such tribulation seven years ago. Now coming out
from choice: Reprint of it, not now to the extent of twelve copies for
highly special friends, but in copious thousands, for behoof of mankind
at large! The thing cost Friedrich very little meditating, and had
become necessary,--and to be done with speed.

Readers recollect the OEUVRE DE POESIE, and satirical hits said to be
in it. At Paris, about New-year's time 1760, some helpful Hand had
contrived to bring out, under the pretended date "Potsdam," a
cheap edition of that interesting Work. [_"OEuvres du Philosophe de
Sans-Souci:"_ 1 vol. 12 mo, "Potsdam [PARIS, in truth], 1760."] Merely
in the way of theft, as appeared to cursory readers, to D'Argens, for
example: [His Letter to the King, _OEuvres de Frederic,_ xix. 138.]
but, in deeper fact, for the purpose of apprising certain Crowned Heads,
friendly and hostile,--Czarish Majesty and George II. of England the
main two,--what this poetizing King was pleased to think of them in
his private moments. D'Argens declares himself glad of this theft, so
exquisitely clever is the Book. But Friedrich knows better: "March 17th,
when a Copy of it came to him," Friedrich sees well what is meant,--and
what he himself has to do in it. He instantly sets about making a few
suppressions, changes of phrase; sends the thing to D'Argens: "Publish
at once, with a little prefatory word." And, at the top of his speed,
D'Argens has, in three weeks' time, the suitable AVANT-PROPOS, or AVIS
AU LIBRAIRE, "circulating in great quantities, especially in London
and Petersburg" ("Thief Editor has omitted; and, what is far more,
has malignantly interpolated: here is the poor idle Work itself, not a
Counterfeit of it, if anybody care to read it"), and an Orthodox Edition
ready. [Came out April 9th [see MITCHELL, ii. 153], "and a second finer
Edition in June:" in _OEuvres de Frederic,_ x. p. x, xix. 137 n., 138;
especially in PREUSS, i. 467, 468 (if you will compare him with
HIMSELF on these different occasions, and patiently wind out his bit
of meaning), all manner of minutest details.] The diligent Pirate
Booksellers, at Amsterdam, at London, copiously reproduced this
authorized Berlin Edition too,--or added excerpts from it to their
reprints of the Paris one, by way of various-readings. And everybody
read and compared, what nobody will now do; theme, and treatment of
theme, being both now so heartily indifferent to us.

Who the Perpetrator of this Parisian maleficence was, remained
dark;--and would not be worth inquiring into at all, except for two
reasons intrinsically trifling, but not quite without interest to
readers of our time. First, that Voltaire, whom some suspected (some,
never much Friedrich, that I hear of), appears to have been perfectly
innocent;--and indeed had been incapacitated for guilt, by Schmidt and
Freytag, and their dreadful Frankfurt procedures! This is reason FIRST;
poor Voltaire mutely asking us, Not to load him with more sins than his
own. Reason SECOND is, that, by a singular opportunity, there has, in
these very months, [Spring, 1863.] a glimmering of light risen on it to
this Editor; illustrating two other points as well, which readers here
are acquainted with, some time ago, as riddles of the insignificant
sort. The DEMON NEWSWRITER, with his "IDEA" of Friedrich, and the
"MATINEES DU ROI DE PRUSSE:" readers recollect both those Productions;
both enigmatic as to authorship;--but both now become riddles which can
more or less be read.

For the surprising circumstance (though in certain periods, when the
realm of very Chaos re-emerges, fitfully, into upper sunshine now and
then, nothing ought to surprise one as happening there) is, That, only
a few months ago, the incomparable MATINEES (known to my readers five
years since) has found a new Editor and reviver. Editor illuminated "by
the Secretary of the Great Napoleon," "by discovery of manuscripts," "by
the Duc de Rovigo," and I know not what; animated also, it is said, by
religious views. And, in short, the MATINEES is again abroad upon the
world,--"your London Edition twice reprinted in Germany, by the Jesuit
party since" (much good may it do the Jesuit party!)--a MATINEES again
in comfortable circumstances, as would seem. Probably the longest-eared
Platitude now walking the Earth, though there are a good many with ears
long. Unconscious, seemingly, that it has been killed thrice and four
times already; and that indeed, except in the realm of Nightmare, it
never was alive, or needed any killing; belief in it, doubt upon it
(I must grieve to inform the Duc de Rovigo and honorable persons
concerned), being evidence conclusive that you have not yet the faintest
preliminary shadow of correct knowledge about Friedrich or his habits or
affairs, and that you ought first to try and acquire some.

To me argument on this subject would have been too unendurable. But
argument there was on it, by persons capable and willing, more than one:
and in result this surprising brand-new London moon-calf of a MATINEES
was smitten through, and slit in pieces, for the fifth time,--as if
that could have hurt it much! "MIT DER DUMMHEIT," sings Schiller; "Human
Stupidity is stronger than the very Gods." However, in the course of
these new inspections into matters long since obsolete, there did--what
may truly be considered as a kind of profit by this Resuscitating of the
moon-calf MATINEES upon afflicted mankind, and is a net outcome from it,
real, though very small--some light rise as to the origin and genesis of
MATINEES; some twinkles of light, and, in the utterly dark element, did
disclose other monstrous extinct shapes looming to right and left of
said monster: and, in a word, the Authorship of MATINEES, and not of
MATINEES only, becomes now at last faintly visible or guessable. To
one of those industrious Matadors, as we may call them, Slayers of this
moon-calf for the fourth or fifth time, I owe the following Note; which,
on verifying, I can declare to be trustworthy:--

"The Author of MATINEES, it is nearly certain", says my Correspondent,
"is actually a 'M. de Bonneville,'--contrary to what you wrote five
years ago. [A.D. 1858 (SUPRA, v. 165, 166).] Not indeed the Bonneville
who is found in Dictionaries, who is visibly impossible; but a
Bonneville of the preceding generation, who was Marechal de Saxe's
Adjutant or Secretary, old enough to have been the Uncle or the Father
of that revolutionary Bonneville. Marechal de Saxe died November 30th,
1750; this senior Bonneville, still a young man, had been with him to
Potsdam on visit there. Bonneville, conscious of genius, and now out of
employment, naturally went thither again; lived a good deal there, or
went between France and there: and authentic History knows of him, by
direct evidence, and by reflex, the following Three Facts (the SECOND of
them itself threefold), of which I will distinguish the indubitable from
the inferentially credible or as good as certain:--

"1. Indubitable, That Bonneville sold to Friedrich certain Papers,
military Plans, or the like, of the late Marechal and was paid for them;
but by no means met the recognition his genius saw itself to merit.
These things are certain, though not dated, or datable except as of
the year 1750 or 1751. After which, for above twenty years, Bonneville
entered upon a series of adventures, caliginous, underground, for most
part; 'soldiering in America,' 'writing anonymous Pamphlets or Books,'
roaming wide over the world; and led a busy but obscure and uncertain
life, hanging by Berlin as a kind of centre, or by Paris and Berlin
as his two centres; and had a miscellaneous series of adventures,
subterranean many of them, unluminous all of them, not courting
the light; which lie now in naturally a very dark condition. Dimly
discernible, however, in the general dusk of Bonneville, dim and vague
of outline, but definitely steady beyond what could have been expected,
it does appear farther,--what alone entitles Bonneville to the least
memory here, or anywhere in Nature now or henceforth,--

"2. Inferentially credible, That, shortly after that first rebuff in
Potsdam, he, not another, in 1752, was your 'DEMON NEWSWRITER,' whom
we gazed at, some time since, devoutly crossing ourselves, for a little
while!

"Likewise that, in 1759-1760, after or before his American wanderings,
he, the same Bonneville, as was suspected at the time, ["Nicolai, _Ueber
Zimmermanns Fragmente,_ i. 181, 182, ii. 253, 254. Sketch of what is
authentically known about Bonneville: 'suspected both of MATINEES and
of the Stolen EDITION.'"] stole and edited this surreptitious
mischief-making _OEuvres du Philosophe de Sans-Souci_ (Paris or
Lyon, pretending to be 'Potsdam,' January, 1760)," which we are now
considering!" Encouraged, probably enough, by Choiseul himself, who, in
any case, is now known to have been the promoter of this fine bit of
mischief, [Choiseul's own Note, "To M. de Malesherbes, DIRECTEUR DE
LA LIBRAIRE, 10th December, 1759: 'By every method screen the King's
Government from being suspected;--and get the Edition out at once.'"
(Published in the _Constitutionnel, _ 2d December, 1850, by M.
Sainte-Beuve; copied in Preuss, _OEuvres de Frederic,_ xix. 168
n.)]--and who may thereupon [or may as probably, NOT "thereupon," if it
were of the least consequence to gods or men] have opened to Bonneville
a new military career in America? Career which led to as good as
nothing; French soldiering in America being done for, in the course of
1760. Upon which Bonneville would return to his old haunts, to his old
subterranean industries in Paris and Berlin.

"And that, finally, in 1765, he, as was again suspected at the time,
["Nicolai, Ueber Zimmermanns Fragmente, i. 181, 182, ii. 253, 254.
Sketch of what is authentically known about Bonneville: 'suspected both
of MATINEES and of the Stolen EDITION.'"] he and no other, did write
those MATINEES, which appeared next year in print (1766), and many times
since; and have just been reprinted, as a surprising new discovery, at
London, in Spring, 1863.

"3. Again indubitable, That either after or before those Editorial
exploits, Bonneville had sold the Marechal de Saxe's Plans and Papers,
which were already the King's, to some second person, and been a second
time paid for them. And was, in regard to this Swindling exploit, found
out; and by reason of that sale, or for what reason is not known, was
put into Spandau, and, one hopes, ended his life there." ["Nicolai, UBI
SUPRA;--and besides him, only the two following references, out of half
a cart-load: 1. Bachaumont, MEMOIRES SECRETES, '7th February, 1765' (see
Barbier, _Dictionnaire des Anonymes,_  Matinees), who calls MATINEES
'a development of the IDEE DE LA PERSONNE,' &c. (that is, of your 'DEMON
NEWSWRITER;' already known to Bachaumont, this 'IDEE,' it seems, as
well as the MATINEES in Manuscript). 2. LETTER of Grimm to Duchess of
Sachsen-Gotha [OUR Duchess], dated 'Paris, 15th April, 1765:' not in
printed _Correspondance de Grimm,_ but still in the Archives of Gotha,
in company with a MS. of MATINEES, probably the oldest extant (see,--in
the GRENZBOTEN Periodical, Leipzig, 1863, pp. 473-484, 500-519,--K.
SAMWER, who is Chief MALLEUS of this new London moon-calf, and will
inform the curious of every particular)]."

MATINEES was first printed 1766 (no place), and seven or eight times
since, in different Countries; twice or thrice over, as "an interesting
new discovery:"--very wearisome to this Editor; who read MATINEES (in
poor LONDON print, that too) many years ago,--with complete satisfaction
as to Matinees, and sincere wish not to touch it again even with a pair
of tongs;--and has since had three "priceless MSS. of it" offered him,
at low rates, as a guerdon to merit.

Fact No. 2, which alone concerns us here,--and which, in its three
successive stages, does curiously cohere with itself and with other
things,--comes, therefore, not by direct light, which indeed, by the
nature of the case, would be impossible. Not by direct light, but by
various reflex lights, and convergence of probabilities old and new,
which become the stronger the better they are examined; and may be
considered as amounting to what is called a moral certainty,--"certain"
enough for an inquiry of that significance. To a kind of moral
certainty: kind of moral consolation too; only One individual of Adam's
Posterity, not Three or more, having been needed in these multifarious
acts of scoundrelism; and that One receiving payment, or part payment,
so prompt and appropriate, in the shape of a permanent cannon-ball at
his ankle.

This is the one profit my readers or I have yet derived from the late
miraculous Resuscitation of MATINEES ROYALES; the other items of profit
in that Enterprise shall belong, not to us in the least measure, but to
Bonneville, and to his well or ill disposed Coadjutors and Copartners in
the Adventure. Adieu to it, and to him and to them, forever and a day!




PEACE-NEGOTIATIONS HOPEFUL TO FRIEDRICH ALL THROUGH WINTER; BUT THE
FRENCH WON'T. VOLTAIRE, AND HIS STYLE OF CORRESPONDING.

This Winter there was talk of Peace, more specifically than ever.
November 15th, at the Hague, as a neutral place, there had been, by the
two Majesties, Britannic and Prussian, official DECLARATION, "We, for
our part, deeply lament these horrors, and are ready to treat of Peace."
This Declaration was presented November 15th, 1759, by Prince Ludwig of
Brunswick (Head General of the Dutch, and a Brother of Prince Ferdinand
our General's, suitable for such case), to the Austrian-French
Excellencies at the Hague. By whom it had been received with the due
politeness, "Will give it our profoundest consideration;" [DECLARATION
(by the two Majesties) that they are ready to treat of Peace, 15th
November, 1759, presented by, &c. (as above); ANSWER from France, in
stingy terms, and not till 3d April, 1760: are in _London Gazette;_ in
_Gentleman's Magazine,_ xxix. 603, xxx. 188; in &c. &c.]--which indeed
the French, for some time, privately did; though the Austrians privately
had no need to do so, being already fixed for a negative response to the
proposal. But hereby rose actual talk of a "Congress;" and wagging of
Diplomatic wigs as to where it shall be. "In Breda," said some; "Breda
a place used to Congresses." "Why not in Nanci here?" said poor old
Ex-Polish Stanislaus, alive to the calls of benevolence, poor old
Titular soul. Others said "Leipzig;" others "Augsburg;"--and indeed
in Augsburg, according to the Gazetteers, at one time, there were
"upholsterers busy getting ready the apartments." So that, with such
rumor in the Diplomatic circles, the Gazetteer and outer world was full
of speculation upon Peace; and Friedrich had lively hopes of it, and had
been hoping three months before, as we transiently saw, though again it
came to nothing. All to nothing; and is not, in itself, worth the least
attention from us here,--a poor extinct fact, loud in those months and
filling the whole world, now silent and extinct to everybody,--except,
indeed, that it offers physiognomic traits here and there of a certain
King, and of those about him. For which reason we will dwell on it a few
minutes longer.

Nobody, in that Winter 1759-1760, could guess where, or from whom, this
big world-interesting Peace-Negotiation had its birth; as everybody now
can, when nobody now is curious on the question! At Sagan, in September
last, we all saw the small private source of it, its first outspurt into
daylight; and read Friedrich's ANSWERS to Voltaire and the noble
Duchess on it:--for the sake of which Two private Correspondents, and
of Friedrich's relation to them, possibly a few more Excerpts may still
have a kind of interest, now when the thing corresponded on has ceased
to have any. To the Duchess, a noble-minded Lady, beautifully zealous to
help if she could, by whose hand these multifarious Peace-Papers have to
pass, this is always Friedrich's fine style in transmitting them. Out of
many specimens, following that of Sagan which we gave, here are the Next
Three:--


FRIEDRICH TO THE DUCHESS OF SACHSEN-GOTHA (Three other Letters on the
"Peace").

1. "WILSDRUF, 21st November, 1759 [day after Maxen, SURRENDER was THIS
morning--of which he has not heard].

"MADAM,--Nothing but your generosities and your indulgence could justify
my incongruity [INCONGRUITE, in troubling you with the Enclosed]. You
will have it, Madam, that I shall still farther abuse those bounties,
which are so precious to me: at least remember that it is by your order,
if I forward through your hand this Letter, which does not merit such
honor.

"Chance, which so insolently mocks the projects of men, and delights to
build up and then pull down, has led us about, thus far,--to the end of
the Campaign [not quite ended yet, if we knew]. The Austrians are girt
in by the Elbe on this side; I have had two important Magazines of
theirs in Bohemia destroyed [Kleist's doing]. There have been some bits
of fighting (AFFAIRES), that have turned entirely to our advantage:--so
that I am in hopes of forcing M. Daun to repass the Elbe, to abandon
Dresden, and to take the road for Zittau and Bohemia.

"I talk to you, Madam, of what I am surrounded with; of what, being in
your neighborhood, may perhaps have gained your attention. I could go
to much greater length, if my heart dared to explain itself on the
sentiments of admiration, gratitude and esteem, with which I am,--Madam
my Cousin,--Your most faithful Cousin, Friend and Servant,--F."


2.

"FREYBERG, 18th December, 1759.

"MADAM,--You spoil me so by your indulgence, you so accustom me to have
obligations to you, that I reproach myself a hundred times with this
presumption. Certainly I should not continue to enclose these Letters to
your care, had not I the hope that perhaps the Correspondence may be of
some use to England, and even to Europe,--for without doubt Peace is
the desirable, the natural and happy state for all Nations. It is to
accelerate Peace, Madam, that I abuse your generosities. This motive
excuses me to myself for the incongruity of my procedures.

"The goodness you have to take interest in my situation obliges me to
give you some account of it. We have undergone all sorts of misfortune
here [Maxen, what not], at the moment we were least expecting them.
Nevertheless, there remains to us courage and hope; here are Auxiliaries
[Hereditary Prince and 12,000] on the point of arriving; there is reason
to think that the end of our Campaign will be less frightful than seemed
likely three weeks ago. May you, Madam, enjoy all the happiness that I
wish you. May all the world become acquainted with your virtues, imitate
them, and admire you as I do. May you be persuaded that...--F."


3.

"FREYBERG, 16th February, 1760.

"MADAM,--It is to my great regret that I importune Your Highness so
often with my Letters. Your bounties, Madam, have spoiled me;--it
will teach you to be more chary of them to others. I regard you as an
estimable Friend, to whose friendship I have recourse in straits.
The question is still Peace, Madam; and were not the object of my
importunities so beautiful, Madam, I should be inexcusable."--Goes then
into practical considerations, about "Cocceji" (King's Aide-de-Camp,
once Keith's, who carries this Letter), about a "Herr von Edelsheim,"
a "Bailli de Froulay", and the possible "Conditions of Peace,"--not of
consequence to us just now. [_OEuvres de Frederic,_ xviii. 174, 173,
172. Correspondence on this subject lasts from 22d September, 1759, to
8th May, 1760: IB. pp. 170-186. In that final Letter of 8th May is the
phrase, hardly worth restoring to its real ownership, though the context
considerably redeems it there,--"the prejudice I can't get rid of, that,
in war, DIEU EST POUR LES GROS ESCADRONS."]

As to Voltaire again, and the new Friedrich-Voltaire Style of
Correspondence, something more of detail will be requisite. Ever since
the black days of 1757, when poor Wilhelmina, with Rossbach and Leuthen
still hidden from her in a future gloomy as death, desperately brought
Voltaire to bear upon Cardinal Tencin in this matter, without success,
there has been a kind of regular corresponding between Voltaire and
Friedrich; characteristic on both sides. A pair of Lovers hopelessly
estranged and divorced; and yet, in a sense, unique and priceless to one
another. The Past, full of heavenly radiances, which issued, alas, in
flames and sooty conflagrations as of Erebus,--let us forget it, and be
taught by it! The Past is painful, and has been too didactic to some
of us: but here still is the Present with its Future; better than blank
nothing. Pleasant to hear the sound of that divine voice of my loved
one, were it only in commonplace remarks on the weather,--perhaps
intermixed with secret gibings on myself:--let us hear it while we can,
amid those world-wide crashing discords and piping whirlwinds of war.

Friedrich sends his new Verses or light Proses, which he is ever and
anon throwing off; Voltaire sends his, mostly in print, and of more
elaborate turn: they talk on matters that are passing round them, round
this King, the centre of them,--Friedrich usually in a rather swaggering
way (lest his Correspondent think of blabbing), and always with
something of banter audible in him;--as has Voltaire too, but in a finer
TREBLE tone, being always female in this pretty duet of parted lovers.
It rarely comes to any scolding between them; but there is or can be
nothing of cordiality. Nothing, except in the mutual admiration, which
one perceives to be sincere on both sides; and also, in the mutual
practical estrangement: "Nothing more of you,--especially of YOU,
Madam,--as a practical domestic article!"

After long reading, with Historical views, in this final section of the
Friedrich-Voltaire Correspondence, at first so barren otherwise and of
little entertainment, one finds that this too, when once you CAN "read"
it (that is to say, when the scene and its details are visible to
you), becomes highly dramatic, Shakspearean-comic or more, for this
is Nature's self, who far excels even Shakspeare;--and that the
inextricably dark condition of these Letters is a real loss to the
ingenuous reader, and especially to the student of Friedrich. Among the
frequently recurring topics, one that oftenest turns up on Voltaire's
side is that of Peace: Oh, if your Majesty would but make Peace! Does it
depend on me? thinks Friedrich always; and is, at last, once provoked to
say so:--


FRIEDRICH TO VOLTAIRE.

"REICH-HENNERSDORF, 2d July, 1759, [shortly before Schmottseifen, while
waiting Daun's slow movements].

"Asking ME for Peace: there is a bitter joke!--[In verse, this; flings
off a handful of crackers on the BIEN-AIME, whose Chamberlain you are,
on the HONGROISE QUI'IL ADORE, on the Russian QUE J'ABHORRE;--then
continues in prose]:

"It is to him," the Well-beloved Louis, "that you must address
yourself, or to his Amboise in Petticoats [his Pompadour, acting the
Cardinal-Premier on this occasion]. But these people have their heads
filled with ambitious projects: these people are the difficulty; they
wish to be the sovereign arbiters of sovereigns;--and that is what
persons of my way of thinking will by no means put up with. I love
Peace quite as much as you could wish; but I want it good, solid and
honorable. Socrates or Plato would have thought as I do on this subject,
had they found themselves placed in the accursed position which is now
mine in the world.

"Think you there is any pleasure in leading this dog of a life [CHIENNE,
she-dog]? In seeing and causing the butchery of people you know nothing
of; in losing daily those you do know and love; in seeing perpetually
your reputation exposed to the caprices of chance; in passing year after
year in disquietudes and apprehensions; in risking, without end, your
life and your fortune?

"I know right well the value of tranquillity, the sweets of society, the
charms of life; and I love to be happy, as much as anybody whatever. But
much as I desire these blessings, I will not purchase them by basenesses
and infamies. Philosophy enjoins us to do our duty; faithfully to serve
our Country, at the price of our blood, of our repose, and of every
sacrifice that can be required of us. The illustrious ZADIG went through
a good many adventures which were not to his taste, CANDIDE the like;
and nevertheless took their misfortune in patience. What finer example
to follow than that of those heroes?

"Take my word, our 'curt jackets,' as you call them [HABITS ECOURTES,
peculiar to the Prussian soldier at that time], are as good as your red
heels, as the Hungarian pelisses, and the green frocks of the Roxelans
[Russians]. We are actually on the heels of the latter [at least
poor Dohna is, and poor Dictator Wedell will be, not with the effect
anticipated!]--who by their stupidities give us fine chance. You will
see I shall get out of the scrape this Year too, and deliver myself
both from the Greens and the Dirty-Whites [Austrian color of coat].
My neighbor of the Sacred Hat,--I think, in spite of Holy Father's
benediction, the Holy Ghost must have inspired him the reverse way; he
seems to have a great deal of lead in his bottom.... F." [_OEuvres de
Frederic,_ xxiii. 53.]

VOLTAIRE IN ANSWER.

"THE DELICES," guessed to be some time in "August, 1759."

"In whatever state you are, it is very certain that you are a great
man. It is not to weary your Majesty that I now write; it is to confess
myself,--on condition you will give me absolution! I have betrayed you;
that is the fact"--(really guilty this time, and HAVE shown something of
your writing; as your Majesty, oh how unjustly, is often suspecting that
I do, and with mischievous intention, instead of good, ah, Sire!)--In
fact, I have received that fine "MARCUS-AURELIUS" Letter (Letter we have
just read); exquisite Piece, though with biting "JUVENAL" qualities in
it too; and have shown it, keeping back the biting parts, to a beautiful
gillflirt of the Court, MINAUDIERE (who seems to be a Mistress of
Choiseul's), who is here attending Tissot for her health: MINAUDIERE
charmed with it; insists on my sending to Choiseul, "He admires the King
of Prussia, as he does all nobleness and genius; send it!" And I did
so;--and look here, what an Answer from Choiseul (Answer lost): and
may it not have a fine effect, and perhaps bring Peace--Oh, forgive me,
Sire. But read that Note of the great man. "Try if you can decipher
his writing. One may have very honest sentiments, and a great deal of
ESPRIT, and yet write like a cat....

"Sire, there was once a lion and a mouse (RAT); the mouse fell in love
with the lion, and went to pay him court. The lion, tired of it, gave
him a little scrape with his paw. The mouse withdrew into his mouse-hole
(SOURICIERE); but he still loved the lion; and seeing one day a net they
were spreading out to catch the lion and kill him, he gnawed asunder one
mesh of it. Sire, the mouse kisses very humbly your beautiful claws,
in all submissiveness:--he will never die between two Capuchins, as,
at Bale, the mastiff (DOGUE) of St. Malo has done [27th July last]. He
would have wished to die beside his lion. Believe that the mouse was
more attached than the mastiff."--V. [_OEuvres de Frederic,_ xxiii. 59,
60.]

To which we saw the Answer, pair of Answers, at Sagan, in September
last. This Note from Choiseul, conveyed by Voltaire, appears to have
been the trifling well-spring from which all those wide-spread waters
of Negotiation flowed. Pitt, when applied to, on the strength of
Friedrich's hopes from this small Document of Choiseul's, was of course
ready, "How welcome every chance of a just Peace!" and agreed to the
Joint Declaration at the Hague; and took what farther trouble I know
not,--probably less sanguine of success than Friedrich. Friedrich was
ardently industrious in the affair; had a great deal of devising and
directing on it, a great deal of corresponding with Voltaire and the
Duchess, only small fractions of which are now left. He searched out, or
the Duchess of Sachsen-Gotha did it for him, a proper Secret Messenger
for Paris: Secret Messenger, one Baron von Edelsheim, properly veiled,
was to consult a certain Bailli de Froulay, a friend of Friedrich's in
Paris;--which loyal-hearted Bailli did accordingly endeavor there; but
made out nothing. Only much vague talking; part of it, or most of it,
subdolous on Choiseul's side. Pitt would hear of no Peace which did
not include Prussia as well as England: some said this was the cause
of failure;--the real cause was that Choiseul never had any serious
intention of succeeding. Light Choiseul, a clever man, but an unwise,
of the sort called "dashing," had entertained the matter merely in the
optative form,--and when it came nearer, wished to use it for making
mischief between Pitt and Friedrich, and for worming out Edelsheim's
secrets, if he had any,--for which reason he finally threw Edelsheim
into the Bastille for a few days. [_OEuvres de Frederic,_ v. 38-41,
detailed account of the Affair.]

About the end of March I guess it to have been that Choiseul, by way of
worming out poor Edelsheim's secrets, flung him into the Bastille for
a day or two. Already in December foregoing, we have seen Choiseul's
Black-Artist busy upon the Stolen EDITION of Friedrich's Verses. A
Choiseul full of intrigues; adroit enough, ambitious enough; restlessly
industrious in making mischief, if there were nothing else to be made;
who greatly disgusted Friedrich, now and afterwards.

And this was what the grand Voltaire Pacification came to, though
it filled the world with temporary noise, and was so interesting to
Voltaire and another. What a heart-affecting generosity, humility and
dulcet pathos in that of the poor Mouse gnawing asunder a mesh of the
Lion's net! There is a good deal of that throughout, on the Voltaire
side,--that is to say, while writing to Friedrich. But while writing of
him, to third parties, sometimes almost simultaneously, the contrast
of styles is not a little startling; and the beautiful affectionately
chirping Mouse is seen suddenly to be an injured Wild-cat with its fur
up. All readers of Voltaire are aware of this; and how Voltaire handles
his "LUC" (mysterious nickname for KING FRIEDRICH ), when Luc's back is
turned. For alas, there is no man or thing but has its wrong side too;
least of all, a Voltaire,--doing TREBLE voice withal, if you consider
it, in such a Duet of estranged Lovers! Suppose we give these few
Specimens,--treble mostly, and a few of bass as well,--to illustrate
the nature of this Duet, and of the noises that went on round it, in a
war-convulsed world? And first of all, concerning the enigma "What is
Luc?"

What the LUC in Voltaire is? Shocking explanations have been hit
upon: but Wagniere (WAGNER, an intelligent Swiss man), Voltaire's old
Secretary, gives this plain reading of the riddle: "M. de Voltaire had,
at The Delices [near by Ferney, till the Chateau got built], a big
Ape, of excessively mischievous turn; who used to throw stones at the
passers-by, and sometimes would attack with its teeth friend or foe
alike. One day it thrice over bit M. de Voltaire's own leg. He had
called it LUC (Luke); and in conversation with select friends, as also
in Letters to such, he sometimes designated the King of Prussia by that
nickname: 'HE is like my Luc here; bites whoever caresses him!'--In 1756
M. de Voltaire, having still on his heart the Frankfurt Outrage, wrote
curious MEMOIRES [ah, yes, VIE PRIVEE]; and afterwards wished to burn
them; but a Copy had been stolen from him in 1768,"--and they still
afflict the poor world.

To the same effect speaks Johannes von Muller: "Voltaire had an Ape
called Luc; and the spiteful man, in thus naming the King, meant to
stigmatize him as the mere APE of greater men; as one without any
greatness of his own."--No; LUC was mischievous, flung stones after
passengers; had, according to Clogenson, "bitten Voltaire himself, while
being caressed by him;" that was the analogy in Voltaire's mind. Preuss
says, this Nickname first occurs "12th December, 1757." Suppose 11th
December to have been the day of getting one's leg bitten thrice over;
and that, in bed next morning,--stiff, smarting, fretful against the sad
ape-tricks and offences of this life,--before getting up to one's Works
and Correspondences, the angry similitude had shot, slightly fulgurous
and consolatory, athwart the gloom of one's mood? [Longchamp et Wagniere
_Memoires,_ i. 34; Johannes von Muller, _Works _ (12mo, Stuttgard,
1821), xxxi. 140 (LETTERS TO HIS BROTHER, No, 218, "July, 1796");
Clogenson's Note, in _OEuvres de Voltaire,_ lxxvii. 103; Preuss, ii.
71.] That will account for Luc.

Many of the Voltaire-Friedrich LETTERS are lost; and the remainder
lie in sad disorder in all the Editions, their sequence unintelligible
without lengthy explanation. So that the following Snatches cannot well
be arranged here in the way of Choral Strophe and Antistrophe, as would
have been desirable. We shall have to group them loosely under heads;
with less respect to date than to subject-matter, and to the reader's
convenience for understanding them.


VOLTAIRE ON FRIEDRICH, TO DIFFERENT THIRD-PARTIES, DURING THIS WAR.

TO D'ARGENTAL (Has not yet heard of LEUTHEN, which happened five days
before).... "I have tasted the vengeance of consoling the King of
Prussia, and that is enough for me. He goes beating on the one side, and
getting beaten on the other: except for another miracle [like Rossbach],
he will be ruined. Better have really been a philosopher, as he
pretended to be." [_OEuvres de Voltaire,_ lxvii. 139 ("The Delices, 10th
December, 1757").]

TO THE REVEREND COMTE DE BERNIS (outwardly still our flourishing
Prime-Minister, by grace of Pompadour, but soon to be extinguished under
a Red Hat. Date is six days before ZORNDORF).... "I cannot imagine
how some people have gone into suspecting that my heart might have the
weakness to lean a little towards WHOM you know, towards my Ingrate that
was! One is bound to have politeness; but one has memory as well;--and
one is attached, as warmly as superfluously, to the Good Cause, which
it belongs only to you to defend. Certain it is, poor I am not like the
three-fourths of the Germans in these days [since ROSSBACH, above all]!
I have everywhere seen Ladies'-fans with the Prussian Eagle painted on
them, eating the FLEUR-DE-LIS; the Hanover Horse giving a kick to M.
de Richelieu's bottom; a Courier carrying a bottle of Queen-of-Hungary
Water to Madame de Pompadour. My Nieces shall certainly not have
that fashion of Fans, at my poor little DELICES, whither I am just
returning." [Ib. lxxvii. 35 ("Soleure, 19th August, 1758").]

TO MADAME D'ARGENTAL (on occasion of MINDEN: Kunersdorf three days ago,
but not yet heard of).... "Truly, Madame, when M. de Contades leads to
the butchery all the descendants of our ancient chevaliers, and sets
them to attack eighty pieces of cannon [not in the least, if you knew
it; the reverse, if you knew it],--as Don Quixote did the windmills!
This horrible day pierces my soul. I am French to excess, especially
since those new favors [not worth mentioning here], which I owe to my
divine Angels and to M. le Duc de Choiseul.

"Luc--you know who Luc is [as do we]--is probably giving Battle to the
Austrians and Russians [KUNERSDORF, 12th; three days ago, did it,
and was beaten to your mind], at the moment while I have the honor of
writing to you; at least, he told me such was his Royal intention. If
they beat him, as may happen, what a shame for us to have been beaten by
the Duke of Brunswick! I wish you knew this Duke [as I have done; a Duke
of no ESPRIT, no gift of tongue, in fact no talent at all that I could
discern], you would be much astonished; and would say, 'The people whom
he beats must be great blockheads.' The truth of the fact is, that all
these troops are better disciplined than ours:" [_OEuvres de Voltaire,_
lxxviii, 186, 187 ("Delices, 15th August, 1759").]--Yes indeed, my
esteemed Voltaire; and also, perhaps, that ESPRIT, or gift of tongue, is
not the sole gift for Battles and Campaigns?--

TO D'ARGENTAL (seventh day after KUNERSDORF: "mouse upon lion's net"
nearly contemporaneous). "At last, then, I think my Russians must be
near Great Glogau [might have been, one thinks, after such a Kunersdorf;
did not start for a month yet; never could get very near at all]. Who
would have thought that Barberina [Mackenzie's Dancer once; sent to
Glogau, Cocceji and she, when their marriage became public] was going to
be besieged by the Russians, and in Glogau: O Destiny!--

"I don't love Luc, far from it: I never will pardon him his infamous
procedure with my Niece [at Frankfurt that time]; nor the face he has to
write me flattering things twice a month; without having ever repaired
his wrongs. I desire much his entire humiliation, the chastisement of
the sinner; whether his eternal damnation. I don't quite know." [Ib.
lxxviii. 195 ("19th August, 1759").] (Hear, hear!)

TO THE SAME (a month after MAXEN: "Peace" Negotiation very lively). ...
"Meanwhile, if Luc could be punished before this happy Peace! If, by
this last stroke of General Beck [tussle with Dierecke at Meissen, 4th
December, capture of Dierecke and 1,500; stroke not of an overwhelming
nature, but let us be thankful for our mercies], which has opened the
road from the Lausitz to Berlin [alas, not in the least], some Haddick
could pay Berlin a visit again! You see, in Tragedy I wish always to
have crime punished.

"There is talk of a great Battle fought the 6th [not a word of truth in
it] between Luc and him of the Consecrated Hat: said to have been very
murderous. I interest myself very much in this Piece" now playing under
the Sun. "Whenever the Austrians have any advantage, Kaunitz says to
Madame de Bentinck [litigant wandering Lady, known to me at Berlin and
elsewhere], 'Write that to our Friend Voltaire.' Whenever Luc has the
least success, he tells me, 'I have battered the oppressors of mankind.
Dear Angel, in these horrors I am the only one that has room to
laugh:--and yet I don't laugh either; owing to the CULS-NOIRS [base
crockery; one's Dinner Plate all vanished [Supra, p. 374.]], to the
Annuities, Lotteries, and to Pondicherry,--for I am always afraid about
that latter!" (Going, that, for certain; going, gone, and your East
Indies along with it!) [_OEuvres de Voltaire,_ lxxviii. 346 ("22d
December, 1759").]

TO PERPETUAL SECRETARY FORMEY (in forwarding a "Letter left with me").
"Health and peace, Monsieur; and be SECRETAIRE ETERNEL. Your King is
always a man unique, astonishing, inimitable. He makes charming verses,
in times when another could not write a line of prose; he deserves to
be happy: but will he be so? And if not, what becomes of you? For my own
part, I will not die between two Capuchins. Hardly worth while, exalting
one's soul for such a future as that. What a stupid and detestable farce
this world is!" [Ib. lxxviii. 348 (from SOUVENIRS D'UN CITOYEN, i. 302),
"11th January 1760."]

TO D'ARGENTAL ("Peace" Negotiations still at their briskest),... "But,
my dear Angel, you will see on Tuesday the great man who has turned my
head (DONT JE SUIS FOU), M. le Duc de Choiseul. The Letters he honors
me with enchant me. God will bless him, don't doubt it,"--after all! "We
have at Pondicherry a Lally, a devil of an Irish spirit,--who will cost
me, sooner or later, above 20,000 livres annually [have rents in our
INDIA COMPANY, say 1,000 pounds a year, as my Angels know], which used
to be the readiest item of my Pittance. But M. le Duc de Choiseul will
triumph over Luc in one way or other; then what joy! I suppose he shows
you my impertinent reveries. Do you know, Luc is so mad, that I don't
despair of bringing him to reason [persuading him to give up Cleve, and
knuckle as he should, in this Peace Affair]. That were what I should
call the true Comedy! I should like to have your advices on the
conduct of that Dramatic Piece." [_OEuvres de Voltaire,_ lxxviii. 375
("Delices, 15th February, 1760").]

The late "mouse" gnawing its mesh of net, what a subtle and mighty
hunter has it grown! This of Cleve, however, and of knuckling, would
not do. Hear the stiff Answer that comes: "'Conditions of Peace,' do you
call them? The people that propose such can have no wish to see Peace.
What a logic theirs! 'I might yield the Country of Cleve, because the
inhabitants are stupid'! What would your Ministers say if one required
the Province of Champagne from them, because the Proverb says,
Ninety-nine sheep and one Champagner make a Hundred head of cattle?"
[Friedrich to Voltaire, "Freyberg, 3d April, 1760:" _OEuvres de
Frederic,_ xxiii. 73, 74.]

AGAIN TO D'ARGENTAL (three or four months after; Luc having proved
obstinate, and still unsuccessful).... "I conjure you make use of all
your eloquence to tell him [the supreme Duc de Choiseul], that if Luc
misgo, it will be no misfortune to France. That Brandenburg will always
remain an Electorate; that it is good there be no Elector in it strong
enough to do without the protection of our King; and that all the
Princes of the Empire will always have recourse to that august
protection Most Christian Majesty's] CONTRA L'AQUILA GRIFAGNA,--were
the Prussian Kingship but abolished. Nota bene, if Luc were discomfited
this Year, we should have Peace next Winter." [_OEuvres de Voltaire,_
lxxix. 110 ("July, 1760").]

TO SUPREME CHOISEUL (a year later).... "He has been a bad man, this Luc;
and now, if one were to bet,--by the law of probability it would be 3
to 1 that Luc will go to pot (SERA PERDU), with his rhymings and his
banterings, and his injustices and politics, all as bad as himself."
[Ib. lxxx. 313 ("Chateau de Ferney, 13th July, 1761").]


VOLTAIRE ON SURROUNDING OBJECTS, CHIEFLY ON MAUPERTUIS, AND THE BATTLES.

TO D'ALEMBERT (in the Rossbach-Leuthen interval: on the Battle of
BRESLAU, 22d November, 1757; called by the Austrians "a Malplaquet," and
believed by Voltaire to be a Malplaquet and more). ... "The Austrians
do avenge us, and humble us [us, and our miserable Rossbachs], in a
terrible manner. Thirteen attacks on the Prussian intrenchments, lasted
six hours; never was Victory bloodier, or more horribly beautiful
[in the brain of certain men]. We pretty French fellows, we are more
expeditious, our job is done in five minutes. The King of Prussia is
always writing me Verses, now like a desperado, now like a hero; and
as for me, I try to live like a philosopher in my hermitage. He has
obtained what he always wished: to beat the French, to be admired by
them, to mock them; but the Austrians are mocking him in a very serious
way. Our shame of November 5th has given him glory; and with such glory,
which is but transient and dearly bought, he must content himself. He
will lose his own Countries, with those he has seized, unless the French
again discover [which they will] the secret of losing all their Armies,
as they did in 1741." [Ib. Lxxvii. 133, 134 ("Delices, 6th December,
1757," day after Leuthen).]


TO CLAIRAUT, THE MATHEMATICIAN (Maupertuis lately dead). An excellent
Treatise, this you have sent me, Monsieur! "Your war with the Geometers
on the subject of this Comet appears to me like a war of the gods in
Olympus, while on Earth there is going on a fight of dogs and cats....
Would to Heaven our friend Moreau-Maupertuis had cultivated his art
like you! That he had predicted comets, instead of exalting his soul
to predict the future; of dissecting the brains of giants to know the
nature of the soul; of japanning people with pitch to cure them of every
malady; of persecuting Konig; and of dying between Two Capuchins" (dead
three weeks ago, on those terms, poor soul)! [_OEuvres de Voltaire,_
lxxviii. 191 ("Delices, 19th August, 1759").]

TO D'ALEMBERT (a week later).... "What say you of Maupertuis dying
between Two Capuchins! He was ill, this long while, of a repletion of
pride; but I had not reckoned him either a hypocrite or an imbecile.
I don't advise you ever to go and fill his place at Berlin; you would
repent that. I am Astolpho warning Roger (Ruggiero) not to trust himself
to the Enchantress Alcina; but Roger was unadvisable." [Ib. lxxviii. 197
("Delices, 25th August, 1759").]

TO THE SAME (two years later: Luc, on certain grounds, may as well
be saved). "With regard to Luc, though I have my just causes of anger
against him, I own to you, in my quality of Frenchman and thinking
being, I am glad that a certain most Orthodox House has not swallowed
Germany, and that the Jesuits are not confessing in Berlin. Over towards
the Danube superstition is very powerful.... The INFAME--You are
well aware that I speak of superstition only; for as to the Christian
religion, I respect and love it, like you. Courage, Brethren! Preach
with force, and write with address: God will bless you.--Protect, you
my Brother, the Widow Calas all you can! She is a poor weak-minded
Huguenot, but her Husband was the victim of the WHITE PENITENTS. It
is the concern of Human Nature that the Fanatics of Toulouse be
confounded." (The case of Calas, SECOND act of it, getting on the
scene: a case still memorable to everybody. Stupendous bit of French
judicature; and Voltaire's noblest outburst, into mere transcendent
blaze of pity, virtuous wrath, and determination to bring rescue and
help against the whole world.) [_OEuvres de Voltaire,_ lxxviii. 52, 53
("Ferney, 28th November, 1762").]


FRIEDRICH TO VOLTAIRE, BEFORE AND DURING THESE PEACE NEGOTIATIONS.

AT SCHMOTTSEIFEN, FIVE DAYS BEFORE ZULLICHAU, TEN DAYS BEFORE THAT HUNT
OF LOUDON AND HADDICK (Voltaire, under rebuke for indiscretion, has been
whimpering a little. My discreet Niece burnt those LAST verses, Sire;
no danger there, at least! Truculent Bishop Something-AC tried to attack
your Majesty; but was done for by a certain person). Friedrich answers:
"In truth, you are a singular creature. When I think of scolding you,
you say two words, and the reproach expires. Impossible to scold you,
even when you deserve it....

"As to your Niece, let her burn me or roast me, I care little. Nor are
you to think me so sensitive to what your Bishops in IC or in AC may
say of me. I have the lot of all actors who play in public; applauded
by some, despised by others. One must prepare oneself for satires,
for calumnies, for a multitude of lies, which will be sent abroad into
currency against one: but need that trouble my tranquillity? I go my
road; I do nothing against the interior voice of my conscience; and I
concern myself very little in what way my actions paint themselves in
the brain of beings, not always very thinking, with two legs and without
feathers." ["Schmottseifen, 18th July, 1759;" _OEuvres de Frederic,_
xxiii. 55, 56.]

AT WILSDRUF, JUST BEFORE MAXEN (an exultant exuberant curious Letter;
too long for insertion,--part of it given above).... "For your Tragedy
of SOCRATE, thanks. At Paris they are going to burn it, the wretched
fools,--not aware that absurd fanaticism is their dominant vice. Better
burn the dose of medicine, however, than the useful Doctor. I, can I
join myself to that set? If I bite you, as you complain, it is without
my knowledge. But I am surrounded with enemies, one hitting me, another
pricking me, another daubing me with mud;--patience at last yields, and
one flies abroad into a general rage, too indiscriminate perhaps."

You talk of my Verses on Rossbach (my ADIEU TO THE HOOPERS on finding
their Bridge burnt [Supra, p. 21.]). "This Campaign I have had no
beatific vision, in the style of Moses. The barbarous Cossacks and
Tartars, infamous to look at on any side, have burnt and ravaged
countries, and committed atrocious inhumanities. This is all I saw of
THEM. Such melancholy spectacles don't tend to raise one's spirits.
[Breaks off into metre:] LA FORTUNE INCONSTANTE ET FIERE, Fortune
inconstant and proud. Does not treat her suitors Always in an equal
manner. Those fools called heroes, who run the country,

     Ces fous nommes heros, et qui courent les champs,
     Couverts de sang et de poussiere,
     Voltaire, n'ont pas tous les ans
     La faceur de voir le derriere
     De leurs ennemis insolents.

Can't expect that pleasure every year"!...

Maupertuis, say you? "Don't trouble the ashes of the dead; let the grave
at least put an end to your unjust hatreds. Reflect that even Kings make
peace after long battling; cannot you ever make it? I think you would
be capable, like Orpheus, of descending to Hell, not to soften Pluto and
bring back your beautiful Emilie, but to pursue into that Abode of Woe
an enemy whom your wrath has only too much persecuted in the world: for
shame!" [_OEuvres de Frederic,_ xxiii. 61-65 ("Wilsdruf, 17th November,
1759").]--and rebukes him, more than once elsewhere, in very serious
terms.

IN WINTER-QUARTERS, ON PEACE AND THE STOLEN EDITION. (Starts in verse,
which we abridge:) With how many laurels you have covered yourself in
all the fields of Literature! One laurel yet is wanting to the brow
of Voltaire. If, as the crown of so many perfect works, he could by a
skilful manoeuvre bring back Peace, I, and Europe with me, would think
that his masterpiece! [Takes to prose:]

"This is my thought and all Europe's. Virgil made as fine Verses as you;
but he never made a Peace. It will be a distinction you will have over
all your brethren of Parnassus, if you succeed.

"I know not who has betrayed me, and thought of printing [the
EDITION;--not you, surely!] a pack of rhapsodies which were good enough
to amuse myself, but were never meant for publication. After all, I
am so used to treacheries and bad manoeuvres,"--what matters this
insignificant one?

"I know not who the Bredow is [whom you speak of having met]; but he has
told you true. The sword and death have made frightful ravages among
us. And the worst is, we are not yet at the end of the tragedy. You may
judge what effect these cruel shocks made on me. I wrap myself in my
stoicism, the best I can. Flesh and blood revolt against such tyrannous
command; but it must be followed. If you saw me, you would scarcely know
me again: I am old, broken, gray-headed, wrinkled; I am losing my teeth
and my gayety: if this go on, there will be nothing of me left, but the
mania of making verses, and an inviolable attachment to my duties and
to the few virtuous men whom I know." [_OEuvres de Frederic,_ xxiii. 69
("Freyberg, 24th Feb. 1760").]

IN WINTER-QUARTERS, A MONTH LATER (comes still on "Peace" again). ...
"I will have you paid that bit of debt [perhaps of postage or the like],
that Louis of the Mill (Louis du Moulin," at Fontenoy, who got upon a
Windmill with his Dauphin, and caught that nickname from the common men)
"may have wherewithal to make war on me. Add tenth-penny tax to your tax
of twentieth-penny; impose new capitations, make titular offices to get
money; do, in a word, whatever you like. In spite of all your efforts,
you will not get a Peace signed by my hands, except on conditions
honorable to my Nation. Your people, blown up with self-conceit and
folly, may depend on these words. Adieu, live happy; and while you make
all your efforts to destroy Prussia, think that nobody has less deserved
it than I, either of you or of your French." [Ib. xxiii. 72 ("Freyberg,
20th March, 1760").]

STILL IN WINTER-QUARTERS (on "Peace" still; but begins with
"Maupertuis," which is all we will give). "What rage animates you
against Maupertuis? You accuse HIM of having published that Furtive
EDITION. Know that his Copy, well sealed by him, arrived here after his
death, and that he was incapable of such an indiscretion. [Breaks into
verse:]

     Leave in peace the cold ashes of Maupertuis:
     Truth can defend him, and will.
     His soul was faithful and noble:
     He pardoned you that scandalous Akakia (CE VIL LIBELLE
     QUE VOTRE FUREUR CRIMINELLE
     PRIT SOIN CHEZ MOI DE GRIFFONER); he did:--
     And you? Shame on such delirium as Voltaire's!
     What, this beautiful, what, this grand genius,
     Whom I admired with transport,
     Soils himself with calumny, and is ferocious on the dead?
     Flocking together, in the air uttering cries of joy,
     Vile ravens pounce down upon sepulchres,
     And make their prey of corpses:"--

Blush, repent, alas!

These Specimens will suffice. "The King of Prussia?" Voltaire would
sometimes say: "He is as potent and as malignant as the Devil; but he
is also as unhappy, not knowing friendship,"--having such a chance, too,
with some of us!




FRIEDRICH HAS SENT LORD MARISCHAL TO SPAIN: OTHER FOND HOPES OF
FRIEDRICH'S.

In the beginning of this Year, 1759, Earl Marischal had been called
out of his Neufchatel stagnancy, and launched into the Diplomatic field
again; sent on mission into Spain, namely. The case was this: Ferdinand
VI. of Spain (he who would not pay Friedrich the old Spanish debt, but
sent him merino rams, and a jar of Queen-Dowager snuff) had fallen into
one of his gloomy fits, and was thought to be dying;--did, in fact,
die, in a state nearly mad, on the 10th August following. By Treaty of
Aix-la-Chapelle, and by all manner of Treaties, Carlos of Naples, his
Half-Brother (Termagant's Baby Carlos, whom we all knew), was to succeed
him in Spain; Don Philip, the next Brother, now of Parma and Piacenza,
was to follow as King in Naples,--ceding those two litigious Duchies to
Austria, after all. Friedrich, vividly awake to every chance, foresaw,
in case of such disjunctures in Italy, good likelihood of quarrel there.
And has despatched the experienced old Marischal to be on the ground,
and have his eyes open. Marischal knows Spain very well; and has often
said, "He left a dear old friend there, the Sun." Marischal was under
way, about New-year's time; but lingered by the road, waiting how
Ferdinand would turn,--and having withal an important business of his
own, as he sauntered on. Did not arrive, I think, till Summer was at
hand, and his dear Old Friend coming out in vigor.

August 10th, 1759, Ferdinand died; and the same day Carlos became King
of Spain. But, instead of giving Naples to Don Philip, Carlos gave it
to a junior Son of his own; and left poor Philip to content himself with
Parma and Piacenza, as heretofore. Clear against the rights of Austria;
Treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle is perfectly explicit on that point! Will
not Austria vindicate its claim? Politicians say, Austria might have
recovered not only Parma and Piacenza, but the kingdom of Naples
itself,--no France at present able to hinder it, no Spain ever able. But
Austria, contrary to expectation, would not: a Country tenacious enough
of its rights, real and imaginary; greedy enough of Italy, but of
Silesia much more! The matter was deliberated in Council at Vienna; but
the result was magnanimously, No. "Finish this Friedrich first; finish
this Silesia. Nothing else till that!"

The Marischal's legationary function, therefore, proved a sinecure;
no Carlos needing Anti-Austrian assistance from Friedrich or another;
Austria magnanimously having let him alone. Doubtless a considerable
disappointment to Friedrich. Industrious Friedrich had tried, on
the other side of this affair, Whether the King of Sardinia, once
an adventurous fighting kind of man, could not be stirred up, having
interests involved? But no; he too, grown old, devotional, apprehensive,
held by his rosaries, and answered, No. Here is again a hope reasonable
to look at, but which proves fallacious.

Marischal continued in Spain, corresponding, sending news (the Prussian
Archives alone know what), for nearly a couple of years. [Returned
"April, 1762" (Friedrich's Letter to him, "10th April, 1762:" in
_OEuvres de Frederic,_ xx. 285).] His Embassy had one effect, which is
of interest to us here. On his way out, he had gone by London, with a
view of getting legal absolution for his Jacobitism,--so far, at least,
as to be able to inherit the Earldom of Kintore, which is likely to
fall vacant soon. By blood it is his, were the Jacobite incapacities
withdrawn. Kintore is a cadet branch of the Keiths; "John, younger Son
of William Sixth Lord Marischal," was the first Kintore. William Sixth's
younger Son, yes;--and William's Father, a man always venerable to me,
had (A.D. 1593) founded Marischal College, Aberdeen,--where, for a
few, in those stern granite Countries, the Diviner Pursuits are still
possible (thank God and this Keith) on frugal oatmeal. MARISCHAL-COLLEGE
Keith, or FIFTH Lord Marischal, was grandfather's grandfather of our
Potsdam Friend, who is tenth and last. [Douglas's _Scotch Peerage,_
pp. 448 et seq., 387 et seq.] Honor to the brave and noble, now fallen
silent under foot NOT of the nobler! In a word, the fourth Kintore was
about dying childless; and Marischal had come by London on that heritage
business.

He carried, naturally, the best recommendations. Britannic Majesty, Pitt
and everybody met him with welcome and furtherance; what he wished was
done, and in such a style of promptness and cordiality, Pitt pushing
it through, as quite gained the heart of old Marischal. And it is
not doubted, though particulars have not been published, That he sent
important Spanish notices to Pitt, in these years;-and especially
informed him that King Carlos and the French Bourbon had signed a FAMILY
COMPACT (15th August, 1761), or solemn covenant, to stand by one another
as brothers. Which was thenceforth, to Pitt privately, an important
fact, as perhaps we shall see; though to other men it was still only a
painful rumor and dubiety. Whether the old Marischal informed him, That
King Carlos hated the English; that he never had, in his royal mind,
forgiven that insult of Commodore Martin's (watch laid on the table, in
the Bay of Naples, long ago), I do not know; but that also was a fact. A
diligent, indignant kind of man, this Carlos, I am told; by no means an
undeserving King of Spain, though his Portraits declare him an ugly:
we will leave him in the discreet Marischal's hands, with the dear Old
Friend shining equally on both.

Singular to see how, in so veracious an intellect as Friedrich's, so
many fallacies of hope are constantly entertained. War in Italy, on
quarrel with King Carlos; Peace with France and the Pompadour, by help
of Edelsheim and the Bailli de Froulay; Peace with Russia and the INFAME
CATIN, by help of English briberies (Friedrich sent an agent this winter
with plenty of English guineas, but he got no farther than the Frontier,
not allowed even to try): sometimes, as again this winter, it is hope of
Denmark joining him (in alarm against the Russian views on Holstein; but
that, too, comes to nothing); above all, there is perennially, budding
out yearly, the brighter after every disappointment, a hope in the
Grand Turk and his adherencies. Grand Turk, or failing him, the Cham of
Tartary,--for certain, some of these will be got to fasten on the heels
of Austria, of Russia; and create a favorable diversion? Friedrich took
an immense deal of trouble about this latter hope. It is almost pathetic
to see with what a fond tenacity he clings to it; and hopes it over
again, every new Spring and Summer. [Preuss, ii. 121 et seq., 292 &c.;
Schoning, ii. iii. PASSIM.]

The hope that an INFAME CATIN might die some day (for she is now deep
in chaotic ailments, deepish even in brandy) seems never to have
struck him; at least there is nowhere any articulate hint of it,--the
eagle-flight of one's imagination soaring far above such a pettiness!
Hope is very beautiful; and even fallacious hope, in such a Friedrich.
The one hope that did not deceive him, was hope in his own best exertion
to the very death; and no fallacy ever for a moment slackened him in
that. Stand to thyself: in the wide domain of Imagination, there is no
other certainty of help. No other certainty;--and yet who knows through
what pettinesses Heaven may send help!




Chapter IX.--PRELIMINARIES TO A FIFTH CAMPAIGN.

It was April 25th before Friedrich quitted Freyberg, and took Camp; not
till the middle of June that anything of serious Movement came. Much
discouragement prevails in his Army, we hear: and indeed, it must
be owned, the horoscope of these Campaigns grows yearly darker. Only
Friedrich himself must not be discouraged! Nor is;--though there seldom
lay ahead of any man a more dangerous-looking Year than this that is
now dimly shaping itself to Friedrich. His fortune seems to have quitted
him; his enemies are more confident than ever.

This Year, it seems, they have bethought them of a new device against
him. "We have 90 million Population," count they; "he has hardly 5; in
the end, he must run out of men! Let us cease exchanging prisoners with
him." At Jagerndorf, in April, 1758 (just before our march to Olmutz),
there had been exchange; not without haggles; but this was the last on
Austria's part. Cartel of the usual kind, values punctually settled: a
Field-marshal is worth 3,000 common men, or 1,500 pounds; Colonel worth
130 men, or 65 pounds; common man is worth 10s. sterling, not a high
figure. [Archenholtz, ii. 53.] The Russians haggled still more, no
keeping of them to their word; but they tried it a second time, last
year (October, 1759); and by careful urging and guiding, were got
dragged through it, and the prisoners on both sides sent to their colors
again. After which, it was a settled line of policy, "No more exchanging
or cartelling; we will starve him out in that article!" And had
Friedrich had nothing but his own 5 millions to go upon, though these
contributed liberally, he had in truth been starved out. Nor could
Saxony, with Mecklenburg, Anhalt, Erfurt, and their 10,000 men a year,
have supplied him,--"had not there," says Archenholtz (a man rather fond
of superlatives),--

"Had not there risen a Recruiting system," or Crimping system, "the
like of which for kind and degree was never seen in the Earth before.
Prisoners, captive soldiers, if at all likely fellows, were by
every means persuaded, and even compelled, to take Prussian
service. Compelled, cudgel in hand," says Archenholtz (who is too
indiscriminating, I can see,--for there were Pfalzers, Wurtembergers,
Reichsfolk, who had FIRST been compelled the other way): "not asked if
they wished to serve, but dragged to the Prussian colors, obliged to
swear there, and fight against, their countrymen." Say at least,
against their countrymen's Governors, contumacious Serene Highnesses of
Wurtemberg, Mecklenburg and the like. Wurtemberg, we mentioned lately,
had to shoot a good few of his first levy against the Protestant
Champion, before they would march at all!--I am sorry for these poor
men; and wish the Reich had been what it once was, a Veracity and
Practical Reality, not an Imaginary Entity and hideously contemptible
Wiggery, as it now is! Contemptible, and hideous as well;--setting
itself up on that, fundamental mendacity; which is eternally tragical,
though little regarded in these days, and which entails mendacities
without end on parties concerned!--But, apart from all this, certain it
is,

"The whole German Reich was deluged with secret Prussian Enlisters.
The greater part of these were not actual Officers at all, but hungry
Adventurers, who had been bargained with, and who, for their own profit,
allowed themselves every imaginable art to pick up men. Head and centre
of them was the Prussian Colonel Colignon," one of the Free-Corps
people; "a man formed by nature for this business [what a beautiful
man!]--who gave all the others their directions, and taught them by his
own example. Colignon himself," in winter-time, "travelled about in all
manner of costumes and characters; persuading hundreds of people
into the Prussian service. He not only promised Commissions, but gave
such,--nominating loose young fellows (LAFFEN), students, merchants'
clerks and the like, to Lieutenancies and Captaincies in the Prussian
Army [about as likely as in the Seraphim and Cherubim, had they known
it]: in the Infantry, in the Cuirassiers, in the Hussars,--it is all
one, you have only to choose. The renown of the Prussian arms was so
universal, and combined with the notion of rich booty, that Colignon's
Commission-manufactory was continually busy. No need to provide
marching-money, hand-money [shillings for earnest]; Colignon's recruits
travelled mostly of will and at their own charge. In Franken, in
Schwaben, in the Rhine Countries, a dissolute son would rob his
father,--as shopmen their masters' tills, and managers their
cash-boxes,--and hie off to those magnanimous Prussian Officials, who
gave away companies like kreutzers, and had a value for young fellows
of spirit. They hastened to Magdeburg with their Commissions; where they
were received as common recruits, and put by force into the regiments
suitable. No use in resisting: the cudgel and the drill-sergeant,"--who
doubts it?--"till complete submission. By this and other methods
Colignon and his helpers are reckoned to have raised for the King, in
the course of this War, about 60,000 recruits." [Archenholtz, ii. 53.]

This Year, Daun, though his reputation is on the decline lately, is to
have the chief command, as usual; the Grand Army, with Saxony for field
of conquest, and the Reichsfolk to assist, is to be Daun's. But, what is
reckoned an important improvement, Loudon is to have a separate command,
and Army of his own. Loudon, hot of temper, melancholic, shy, is not a
man to recommend himself to Kriegshofrath people; but no doubt Imperial
Majesty has had her own wise eye on him. His merits are so undeniable;
the need of some Commander NOT of the Cunctator type is become so very
pressing. "Army of Silesia, 50,000;" that is to be Loudon's, with
40,000 Russians to co-operate and unite themselves with Loudon; and
try actually for conquest of Silesia, this Year; while Daun, conquering
Saxony, keeps the King busy.

At Petersburg, Versailles, Vienna, much planning there has been, and
arduous consulting: first at Petersburg, in time and in importance,
where Montalembert has again been very urgent in regard to those poor
Swedish people, and the getting of them turned to some kind of use:
"Stettin in conjunction with the Swedes; oh, listen to reason, and
take Stettin!" "Would not Dantzig by ourselves be the advisable thing?"
answers Soltikof: "Dantzig is an important Town, and the grand Baltic
Haven; and would be so convenient for our Preussen, since we have
determined to maintain that fine Conquest." So thinks Czarish Majesty,
as well as Soltikof, privately, though there are difficulties as to
Dantzig; and, in fine, except Colberg over again, there can be nothing
attempted of sieging thereabouts. A Siege of Colberg, however, there is
actually to be: Second Siege,--if perhaps it will prove luckier than
the First was, two years since? Naval Armament Swedish-Russian,
specific Land Armament wholly Russian, are to do this Second Siege, at a
favorable time; except by wishes, Soltikof will not be concerned in
it; nor, it is to be hoped, shall we,--in such pressure of haste as is
probably ahead for us.

"Silesia would be the place for sieges!" say the Vienna people always;
and Imperial Majesty is very urgent; and tries all methods,--eloquence,
flatteries, bribes,--to bring Petersburg to that view. Which is at
last adopted; heartily by Czarish Majesty, ever ready for revenge on
Friedrich, the more fatal and the more direct, the better. Heartily
by her; not so heartily by Soltikof and her Army people, who know the
Austrian habits; and privately decide on NOT picking chestnuts from
the fire, while the other party's paws keep idle, and only his jaws are
ready.

Of Small-War there is nothing or little to be said; indeed there occurs
almost none. Roving Cossack-Parties, under one Tottleben, whom we shall
hear of otherwise, infest Pommern, bickering with the Prussian posts
there; not ravaging as formerly, Tottleben being a civilized kind of
man. One of these called at the Castle of Schwedt, one day; found Prince
Eugen of Wurtemberg there (nearly recovered of his Kunersdorf
wounds), who is a Son-in-law of the House, married to a Daughter of
Schwedt;--ancestor of the now Russian Czars too, had anybody then known
it. Him these Cossacks carried off with them, a march or two; then,
taking his bond for a certain ransom, let him go. Bond and bondholder
being soon after captured by the Prussians, Eugen paid no ransom; so
that to us his adventure is without moment, though it then made some
noise among the Gazetteers.

Two other little passages, and only two, we will mention; which have in
themselves a kind of memorability. First, that of General Czetteritz and
the MANUSCRIPT he lost. Of posts across the Elbe I find none mentionable
here, and believe there is none, except only Czetteritz's; who stands at
Cosdorf, well up towards Torgau Country, as sentry over Torgau and the
Towns there. On Czetteritz there was, in February, an attempt made
by the active General Beck, whom Daun had detached for that object.
Extremely successful, according to the Austrian Gazetteers; but in
reality amounting to as good as nothing:--Surprisal of Czetteritz's
first vedette, in the dawn of a misty February morning (February 21st,
1760); non-surprisal of his second, which did give fire and alarm,
whereupon debate; and Czetteritz springing into his saddle; retreat of
his people to rearward, with loss of 7 Officers and 200 prisoners;--but
ending in re-advance, with fresh force, a few hours after; [Seyfarth,
ii. 655.]--in repulse of Beck, in recovery of Cosdorf, and a general
state of AS-YOU-WERE in that part. A sputter of Post-War, not now worth
mentioning at all,--except only for one small circumstance: That in
the careering and swift ordering, such as there was, on the rear-guard
especially, Major-General Czetteritz's horse happened to fall; whereby
not only was the General taken prisoner, but his quarters got plundered,
and in his luggage,--what is the notable circumstance,--there was found
a small Manuscript, MILITAIRISCHE INSTRUKZION FUR DIE GENERALE, such
as every Prussian General has, and is bound to keep religiously
secret.[Stands now in _OEuvres de Frederic,_ xxviii. 3 et. seq.; was
finished (the revisal of it was), by the King, "2d April, 1748)" see
PREUSS, i. 478-480; and (_OEuvres de Frederic,_ xxviii. PREFACE, for
endless indistinct details about the translations and editions of it.
London Edition, 1818, calls itself the FIFTH.] This, carried to Daun's
head-quarters, was duly prized, copied; and in the course of a year came
to print, in many shapes and places; was translated into English, under
the Title, MILITARY INSTRUCTIONS BY THE KING OF PRUSSIA, in 1762 (and
again, hardly so WELL, in 1797); and still languidly circulates among
the studious of our soldiers. Not a little admired by some of them; and
unfortunately nearly all they seem to know of this greatest of modern
Soldiers. [See, for example, in _Life of General Sir Charles Napier, by
his Brother_ (London, 1857), iii. 365 and elsewhere,--one of the best
judges in the world expressing his joy and admiration on discovery
of Friedrich; discovery, if you read well, which amounts to these
INSTRUCTIONS, and no more.]

Next, about a month after, we have something to report of Loudon from
Silesia, or rather of the Enemies he meets there; for it is not a
victorious thing. But it means a starting of the Campaign by an
Austrian invasion of Silesia; long before sieging time, while all these
Montalembert-Soltikof pleadings and counter-pleadings hang dubious at
Petersburg, and Loudon's "Silesian Army" is still only in a nascent or
theoretic state, and only Loudon himself is in a practical one.

Friedrich has always Fouquet at Landshut, in charge of the Silesian
Frontier; whose outposts, under Goltz as head of these, stretch, by
Neisse, far eastward, through the Hills to utmost Mahren; Fouquet's own
head-quarter being generally Landshut, the main gate of the Country.
Fouquet, long since, rooted himself rather firmly into that important
post; has a beautiful ring of fortified Hills around Landshut; battery
crossing battery, girdling it with sure destruction, under an expert
Fouquet,--but would require 30,000 men to keep it, instead of 13,000,
which is Fouquet's allotment. Upon whom Loudon is fully intending a
stroke this Year. Fouquet, as we know, has strenuously managed to
keep ward there for a twelvemonth past; in spite, often enough, of
new violent invadings and attemptings (violent, miscellaneous, but
intermittent) by the Devilles and others;--and always under many
difficulties of his own, and vicissitudes in his employment: a
Fouquet coming and going, waxing and waning, according to the King's
necessities, and to the intermittency or constancy of pressures on
Landshut. Under Loudon, this Year, Fouquet will have harder times than
ever;--in the end, too hard! But will resist, judge how by the following
small sample:--

"Besides Fouquet and his 13,000," says my Note, "the Silesian Garrisons
are all vigilant, are or ought to be; and there are far eastward of
him, for guarding of the Jagerndorf-Troppau Border, some 4 or 6,000,
scattered about, under Lieutenant-General Goltz, in various Hill
Posts,--the chief Post of which, Goltz's own, is the little Town of
Neustadt, northward of Jagerndorf [where we have billeted in the
old Silesian Wars]: Goltz's Neustadt is the chief; and Leobschutz,
southwestward of it, under 'General Le Grand' [once the Major GRANT of
Kolin Battle, if readers remember him, "Your Majesty and I cannot take
the Battery ourselves!"] is probably the second in importance. Loudon,
cantoned along the Moravian side of the Border, perceives that he can
assemble 32,000 foot and horse; that the Prussians are 13,000 PLUS
6,000; that Silesia can be invaded with advantage, were the weather
come. And that, in any kind of weather, Goltz and his straggle of
posts might be swept into the interior, perhaps picked up and pocketed
altogether, if Loudon were sharp enough. Swept into the interior Goltz
was; by no means pocketed altogether, as he ought to have been!

"MARCH 13th, 1760, Loudon orders general muster hereabouts for the 15th,
everybody to have two days, bread and forage; and warns Goltz, as bound
in honor: 'Excellenz, to-morrow is March 14th; to-morrow our pleasant
time of Truce is out,--the more the pity for both of us!' 'Yea,
my esteemed neighbor Excellenz!' answers Goltz, with the proper
compliments; but judges that his esteemed neighbor is intending mischief
almost immediately. Goltz instantly sends orders to all his posts: 'You,
Herr General Grant, you at Leobschutz, and all the rest of you, make
your packages; march without delay; rendezvous at Steinau and Upper
Glogau [far different from GREAT-Glogau], Neisse-ward; swift!' And would
have himself gone on the 14th, but could not,--his poor little Bakery
not being here, nor wagons for his baggages quite to be collected in a
moment,--and it was Saturday, 15th, 5 A.M., that Goltz appointed himself
to march.

"The last time we saw General Goltz was on the Green of Bautzen, above
two years ago,--when he delivered that hard message to the King's
Brother and his party, 'You deserve to be tried by Court-martial, and
have your heads cut off!' He was of that sad Zittau business of the late
Prince of Prussia's,--Goltz, Winterfeld, Ziethen, Schmettau and others?
Winterfeld and the Prince are both dead; Schmettau is fallen into
disaster; Goltz is still in good esteem with the King. A stalwart,
swift, flinty kind of man, to judge by the Portraits of him;
considerable obstinacy, of a tacitly intelligent kind, in that steady
eye, in that droop of the eyebrows towards the strong cheek-bones;
plenty of sleeping fire in Lieutenant-General Goltz.

"His principal force, on this occasion, is one Infantry Regiment;
REGIMENT MANTEUFFEL:--readers perhaps recollect that stout Pommern
Regiment, Manteuffel of Foot, and the little Dialogue it had with the
King himself, on the eve of Leuthen: 'Good-night, then, Fritz! To-morrow
all dead, or else the Enemy beaten.' Their conduct, I have heard, was
very shining at Leuthen, where everybody shone; and since then they
have been plunging about through the death-element in their old
rugged way,--and re-emerge here into definite view again, under
Lieutenant-General Goltz, issuing from the north end of Neustadt, in the
dim dawn of a cold spring morning, March 15th, 5 A.M.; weather latterly
very wet, as I learn. They intend Neisse-way, with their considerable
stock of baggage-wagons; a company of Dragoons is to help in escorting:
party perhaps about 2,000 in all. Goltz will have his difficulties this
day; and has calculated on them. And, indeed, at the first issuing, here
they already are.

"Loudon, with about 5,000 horse,--four Regiments drawn up here, and
by and by with a fifth (happily not with the grenadiers, as he had
calculated, who are detained by broken bridges, waters all in flood
from the rain),--is waiting for him, at the very environs of Neustadt.
Loudon, by a trumpet, politely invites him to surrender, being so
outnumbered; Goltz, politely thanking, disregards it, and marches on:
Loudon escorting, in an ominous way; till, at Buchelsdorf, the fifth
Regiment (best in the Austrian service) is seen drawn out across the
highway, plainly intimating, No thoroughfare to Goltz and Pommern.
Loudon sends a second trumpet: 'Surrender prisoners; honorablest terms;
keep all your baggage: refuse, and you are cut down every man.' 'You
shall yourself hear the answer,' said Goltz. Goltz leads this second
trumpet to the front; and, in Pommern dialect, makes known what General
Loudon's proposal is. The Pommerners answer, as one man, a No of such
emphasis as I have never heard; in terms which are intensely vernacular,
it seems, and which do at this day astonish the foreign mind: 'We will
for him something, WIR WOLLEN IHM WAS--' But the powers of translation
and even of typography fail; and feeble paraphrase must give it: 'We
will for him SOMETHING INEFFABLE CONCOCT,' of a surprisingly contrary
kind! 'WIR WOLLEN IHM WAS' (with ineffable dissyllabic verb governing
it)! growled one indignant Pommerner; 'and it ran like file-fire along
the ranks,' says Archenholtz; everybody growling it, and bellowing
it, in fierce bass chorus, as the indubitable vote of Pommern in those
circumstances.

"Loudon's trumpet withdrew. Pommern formed square round its baggage;
Loudon's 5,000 came thundering in, fit to break adamant; but met such
a storm of bullets from Pommern, they stopped about ten paces short,
in considerable amazement, and wheeled back. Tried it again, still
more amazement; the like a third time; every time in vain. After which,
Pommern took the road again, with vanguard, rearguard; and had peace for
certain miles,--Loudon gloomily following, for a new chance. How many
times Loudon tried again, and ever again, at good places, I forget,--say
six times in all. Between Siebenhufen and Steinau, in a dirty defile,
the jewel of the road for Loudon, who tried his very best there, one of
our wagons broke down; the few to rear of it, eighteen wagons and some
country carts, had to be left standing. Nothing more of Pommern was left
there or anywhere. Near Steinau there, Loudon gave it up as desperate,
and went his way. His loss, they say, was 300 killed, 500 wounded;
Pommern's was 35 killed, and above 100 left wounded or prisoners. One
of the stiffest day's works I have known: some twelve miles of march, in
every two an attack. Pommern has really concocted something surprising,
and kept its promise to Loudon! 'Thou knowest what the Pommerners can
do,' said they once to their own King. An obstinate, strong-boned,
heavy-browed people; not so stupid as you think. More or less of Jutish
or Anglish type; highly deficient in the graces of speech, and, I should
judge, with little call to Parliamentary Eloquence." [Preuss, ii. 241
(incorrect in some small points); Archenholtz, ii. 61; Seyfarth, ii.
640, and _Beylagen,_ ii. 657-660; Tempelhof, iv. 8-10; in ANONYMOUS OF
HAMBURG (iv. 68) the Austrian account.]

Friedrich is, this Year, considered by the generality of mankind, to be
ruined: "Lost 60,000 men last Campaign; was beaten twice; his luck is
done; what is to become of him?" say his enemies, and even the impartial
Gazetteer, with joy or sorrow. Among his own people there is gloom or
censure; hard commentaries on Maxen: "So self-willed, high, and deaf
to counsel from Prince Henri!" Henri himself, they say, is sullen;
threatening, as he often does, to resign "for want of health;" and as he
quite did, for a while, in the end of this Campaign, or interval between
this and next.

Friedrich has, with incredible diligence, got together his finance
(copper in larger dose than ever, Jew Ephraim presiding as usual); and,
as if by art-magic, has on their feet 100,000 men against his enemy's
280,000. Some higher Officers are secretly in bad spirits; but the men
know nothing of discouragement. Friedrich proclaims to them at marching,
"For every cannon you capture, 100 ducats; for every flag, 50; for
every standard (cavalry flag), 40;"--which sums, as they fell due,
were accordingly paid thenceforth. [Stenzel, v. 236, 237; ib. 243.] But
Friedrich, too, is abundantly gloomy, if that could help him; which he
knows well it cannot, and strictly hides it from all but a few;--or all
but D'Argens almost alone, to whom it can do no harm. Read carefully by
the light of contemporary occurrences, not vaguely in the vacant
haze, as the Editors give it, his correspondence with D'Argens becomes
interesting almost to a painful degree: an unaffected picture of one
of the bravest human souls weighed down with dispiriting labors and
chagrins, such as were seldom laid on any man; almost beyond bearing,
but incurable, and demanding to be borne. Wilhelmina is away, away; to
D'Argens alone of mortals does he whisper of these things; and to him
not wearisomely, or with the least prolixity, but in short sharp gusts,
seldom now with any indignation, oftenest with a touch of humor in them,
not soliciting any sympathy, nor expecting nearly as much as he will get
from the faithful D'Argens.

"I am unfortunate and old, dear Marquis; that is why they persecute
me: God knows what my future is to be this Year! I grieve to resemble
Cassandra with my prophecies; but how augur well of the desperate
situation we are in, and which goes on growing worse? I am so gloomy
to-day, I will cut short.... Write to me when you have nothing better
to do; and don't forget a poor Philosopher who, perhaps to expiate his
incredulity, is doomed to find his Purgatory in THIS world." [_OEuvres
de Frederic,_ xix. 138, 139 ("Freyberg, 20th March, 1760").]... To
another Friend, in the way of speech, he more deliberately says:
"The difficulties I had, last Campaign, were almost infinite: such a
multitude of enemies acting against me; Pommern, Brandenburg, Saxony,
Frontiers of Silesia, alike in danger, often enough all at one time.
If I escaped absolute destructiou, I must impute it chiefly to the
misconduct of my enemies; who gained such advantages, but had not the
sense to follow them up. Experience often corrects people of their
blunders: I cannot expect to profit by anything of that kind; on their
part, in the course of this Campaign:" judge if it will be a light
one, MON CHER. [To Mitchell, one evening, "Camp of Schlettau, May 23d"
(Mitchell, ii. 159).]

The symptoms we decipher in these Letters, and otherwise, are those of
a man drenched in misery; but used to his black element, unaffectedly
defiant of it, or not at the pains to defy it; occupied only to do
his very utmost in it, with or without success, till the end come.
Prometheus, chained on the Ocean-cliffs, with the New Ruling-Powers in
the upper hand, and their vultures gradually eating him; dumb Time and
dumb Space looking on, apparently with small sympathy: Prometheus and
other Titans, now and then, have touched the soul of some AEschylus,
and drawn tones of melodious sympathy, far heard among mankind. But with
this new Titan it is not so: nor, upon the whole, with the proper
Titan, in this world, is it usually so; the world being a--what shall
we say?--a poorish kind of world, and its melodies and dissonances,
its loves and its hatreds worth comparatively little in the long-run.
Friedrich does wonderfully without sympathy from almost anybody; and
the indifference with which he walks along, under such a cloud of sulky
stupidities, of mendacities and misconceptions from the herd of mankind,
is decidedly admirable to me.

But let us look into the Campaign itself. Perhaps--contrary to the
world's opinion, and to Friedrich's own when, in ultra-lucid moments, he
gazes into it in the light of cold arithmetic, and finds the aspect of
it "frightful"--this Campaign will be a little luckier to him than the
last? Unluckier it cannot well be:--or if so, it will at least be final
to him!

========================================
========================================

EARLY KINGS OF NORWAY.

by Thomas Carlyle


Transcriber's Note: The text has been taken from volume 19 of the
"Sterling Edition" of Carlyle's complete works. All footnotes have been
collected as endnotes. The pound (currency) symbol has been replaced by
the word "pounds".



The Icelanders, in their long winter, had a great habit of writing; and
were, and still are, excellent in penmanship, says Dahlmann. It is to
this fact, that any little history there is of the Norse Kings and their
old tragedies, crimes and heroisms, is almost all due. The Icelanders,
it seems, not only made beautiful letters on their paper or parchment,
but were laudably observant and desirous of accuracy; and have left
us such a collection of narratives (_Sagas_, literally "Says") as,
for quantity and quality, is unexampled among rude nations. Snorro
Sturleson's History of the Norse Kings is built out of these old
Sagas; and has in it a great deal of poetic fire, not a little faithful
sagacity applied in sifting and adjusting these old Sagas; and, in a
word, deserves, were it once well edited, furnished with accurate
maps, chronological summaries, &c., to be reckoned among the great
history-books of the world. It is from these sources, greatly aided by
accurate, learned and unwearied Dahlmann, [1] the German Professor, that
the following rough notes of the early Norway Kings are hastily thrown
together. In Histories of England (Rapin's excepted) next to nothing has
been shown of the many and strong threads of connection between English
affairs and Norse.



CHAPTER I. HARALD HAARFAGR.

Till about the Year of Grace 860 there were no kings in Norway, nothing
but numerous jarls,--essentially kinglets, each presiding over a kind of
republican or parliamentary little territory; generally striving each
to be on some terms of human neighborhood with those about him, but,--in
spite of "_Fylke Things_" (Folk Things, little parish parliaments),
and small combinations of these, which had gradually formed
themselves,--often reduced to the unhappy state of quarrel with them.
Harald Haarfagr was the first to put an end to this state of things, and
become memorable and profitable to his country by uniting it under
one head and making a kingdom of it; which it has continued to be ever
since. His father, Halfdan the Black, had already begun this rough but
salutary process,--inspired by the cupidities and instincts, by the
faculties and opportunities, which the good genius of this world,
beneficent often enough under savage forms, and diligent at all times to
diminish anarchy as the world's worst savagery, usually appoints in
such cases,--conquest, hard fighting, followed by wise guidance of the
conquered;--but it was Harald the Fairhaired, his son, who conspicuously
carried it on and completed it. Harald's birth-year, death-year, and
chronology in general, are known only by inference and computation; but,
by the latest reckoning, he died about the year 933 of our era, a man of
eighty-three.

The business of conquest lasted Harald about twelve years (A.D.
860-872?), in which he subdued also the vikings of the out-islands,
Orkneys, Shetlands, Hebrides, and Man. Sixty more years were given him
to consolidate and regulate what he had conquered, which he did with
great judgment, industry and success. His reign altogether is counted to
have been of over seventy years.

The beginning of his great adventure was of a romantic
character.--youthful love for the beautiful Gyda, a then glorious and
famous young lady of those regions, whom the young Harald aspired to
marry. Gyda answered his embassy and prayer in a distant, lofty manner:
"Her it would not beseem to wed any Jarl or poor creature of that kind;
let him do as Gorm of Denmark, Eric of Sweden, Egbert of England,
and others had done,--subdue into peace and regulation the confused,
contentious bits of jarls round him, and become a king; then, perhaps,
she might think of his proposal: till then, not." Harald was struck with
this proud answer, which rendered Gyda tenfold more desirable to him.
He vowed to let his hair grow, never to cut or even to comb it till this
feat were done, and the peerless Gyda his own. He proceeded accordingly
to conquer, in fierce battle, a Jarl or two every year, and, at the end
of twelve years, had his unkempt (and almost unimaginable) head of hair
clipt off,--Jarl Rognwald (_Reginald_) of More, the most valued and
valuable of all his subject-jarls, being promoted to this sublime barber
function;--after which King Harald, with head thoroughly cleaned, and
hair grown, or growing again to the luxuriant beauty that had no equal
in his day, brought home his Gyda, and made her the brightest queen
in all the north. He had after her, in succession, or perhaps even
simultaneously in some cases, at least six other wives; and by Gyda
herself one daughter and four sons.

Harald was not to be considered a strict-living man, and he had a great
deal of trouble, as we shall see, with the tumultuous ambition of his
sons; but he managed his government, aided by Jarl Rognwald and others,
in a large, quietly potent, and successful manner; and it lasted in this
royal form till his death, after sixty years of it.

These were the times of Norse colonization; proud Norsemen flying into
other lands, to freer scenes,--to Iceland, to the Faroe Islands, which
were hitherto quite vacant (tenanted only by some mournful hermit,
Irish Christian _fakir_, or so); still more copiously to the Orkney and
Shetland Isles, the Hebrides and other countries where Norse squatters
and settlers already were. Settlement of Iceland, we say; settlement
of the Faroe Islands, and, by far the notablest of all, settlement of
Normandy by Rolf the Ganger (A.D. 876?). [2]

Rolf, son of Rognwald, [3] was lord of three little islets far north,
near the Fjord of Folden, called the Three Vigten Islands; but his
chief means of living was that of sea robbery; which, or at least Rolf's
conduct in which, Harald did not approve of. In the Court of Harald,
sea-robbery was strictly forbidden as between Harald's own countries,
but as against foreign countries it continued to be the one profession
for a gentleman; thus, I read, Harald's own chief son, King Eric that
afterwards was, had been at sea in such employments ever since his
twelfth year. Rolf's crime, however, was that in coming home from one of
these expeditions, his crew having fallen short of victual, Rolf landed
with them on the shore of Norway, and in his strait, drove in some
cattle there (a crime by law) and proceeded to kill and eat; which, in a
little while, he heard that King Harald was on foot to inquire into and
punish; whereupon Rolf the Ganger speedily got into his ships again, got
to the coast of France with his sea-robbers, got infestment by the poor
King of France in the fruitful, shaggy desert which is since called
Normandy, land of the Northmen; and there, gradually felling the
forests, banking the rivers, tilling the fields, became, during the next
two centuries, Wilhelmus Conquaestor, the man famous to England, and
momentous at this day, not to England alone, but to all speakers of the
English tongue, now spread from side to side of the world in a wonderful
degree. Tancred of Hauteville and his Italian Normans, though important
too, in Italy, are not worth naming in comparison. This is a feracious
earth, and the grain of mustard-seed will grow to miraculous extent in
some cases.

Harald's chief helper, counsellor, and lieutenant was the
above-mentioned Jarl Rognwald of More, who had the honor to cut Harald's
dreadful head of hair. This Rognwald was father of Turf-Einar, who first
invented peat in the Orkneys, finding the wood all gone there; and
is remembered to this day. Einar, being come to these islands by King
Harald's permission, to see what he could do in them,--islands
inhabited by what miscellany of Picts, Scots, Norse squatters we do not
know,--found the indispensable fuel all wasted. Turf-Einar too may be
regarded as a benefactor to his kind. He was, it appears, a bastard;
and got no coddling from his father, who disliked him, partly perhaps,
because "he was ugly and blind of an eye,"--got no flattering even on
his conquest of the Orkneys and invention of peat. Here is the parting
speech his father made to him on fitting him out with a "long-ship"
(ship of war, "dragon-ship," ancient seventy-four), and sending him
forth to make a living for himself in the world: "It were best if thou
never camest back, for I have small hope that thy people will have honor
by thee; thy mother's kin throughout is slavish."

Harald Haarfagr had a good many sons and daughters; the daughters he
married mostly to jarls of due merit who were loyal to him; with the
sons, as remarked above, he had a great deal of trouble. They were
ambitious, stirring fellows, and grudged at their finding so little
promotion from a father so kind to his jarls; sea-robbery by no means
an adequate career for the sons of a great king, two of them, Halfdan
Haaleg (Long-leg), and Gudrod Ljome (Gleam), jealous of the favors won
by the great Jarl Rognwald, surrounded him in his house one night, and
burnt him and sixty men to death there. That was the end of Rognwald,
the invaluable jarl, always true to Haarfagr; and distinguished in world
history by producing Rolf the Ganger, author of the Norman Conquest of
England, and Turf-Einar, who invented peat in the Orkneys. Whether Rolf
had left Norway at this time there is no chronology to tell me. As to
Rolf's surname, "Ganger," there are various hypotheses; the likeliest,
perhaps, that Rolf was so weighty a man no horse (small Norwegian
horses, big ponies rather) could carry him, and that he usually walked,
having a mighty stride withal, and great velocity on foot.

One of these murderers of Jarl Rognwald quietly set himself in
Rognwald's place, the other making for Orkney to serve Turf-Einar in
like fashion. Turf-Einar, taken by surprise, fled to the mainland; but
returned, days or perhaps weeks after, ready for battle, fought with
Halfdan, put his party to flight, and at next morning's light searched
the island and slew all the men he found. As to Halfdan Long-leg
himself, in fierce memory of his own murdered father, Turf-Einar "cut an
eagle on his back," that is to say, hewed the ribs from each side of the
spine and turned them out like the wings of a spread-eagle: a mode of
Norse vengeance fashionable at that time in extremely aggravated cases!

Harald Haarfagr, in the mean time, had descended upon the Rognwald
scene, not in mild mood towards the new jarl there; indignantly
dismissed said jarl, and appointed a brother of Rognwald (brother, notes
Dahlmann), though Rognwald had left other sons. Which done, Haarfagr
sailed with all speed to the Orkneys, there to avenge that cutting of an
eagle on the human back on Turf-Einar's part. Turf-Einar did not resist;
submissively met the angry Haarfagr, said he left it all, what had been
done, what provocation there had been, to Haarfagr's own equity and
greatness of mind. Magnanimous Haarfagr inflicted a fine of sixty marks
in gold, which was paid in ready money by Turf-Einar, and so the matter
ended.



CHAPTER II. ERIC BLOOD-AXE AND BROTHERS.

In such violent courses Haarfagr's sons, I know not how many of them,
had come to an untimely end; only Eric, the accomplished sea-rover, and
three others remained to him. Among these four sons, rather impatient
for property and authority of their own, King Harald, in his old days,
tried to part his kingdom in some eligible and equitable way, and retire
from the constant press of business, now becoming burdensome to him. To
each of them he gave a kind of kingdom; Eric, his eldest son, to be head
king, and the others to be feudatory under him, and pay a certain yearly
contribution; an arrangement which did not answer well at all. Head-King
Eric insisted on his tribute; quarrels arose as to the payment,
considerable fighting and disturbance, bringing fierce destruction from
King Eric upon many valiant but too stubborn Norse spirits, and among
the rest upon all his three brothers, which got him from the Norse
populations the surname of _Blod-axe_, "Eric Blood-axe," his title in
history. One of his brothers he had killed in battle before his old
father's life ended; this brother was Bjorn, a peaceable, improving,
trading economic Under-king, whom the others mockingly called "Bjorn
the Chapman." The great-grandson of this Bjorn became extremely
distinguished by and by as _Saint_ Olaf. Head-King Eric seems to have
had a violent wife, too. She was thought to have poisoned one of her
other brothers-in-law. Eric Blood-axe had by no means a gentle life
of it in this world, trained to sea-robbery on the coasts of England,
Scotland, Ireland and France, since his twelfth year.

Old King Fairhair, at the age of seventy, had another son, to whom was
given the name of Hakon. His mother was a slave in Fairhair's house;
slave by ill-luck of war, though nobly enough born. A strange adventure
connects this Hakon with England and King Athelstan, who was then
entering upon his great career there. Short while after this Hakon came
into the world, there entered Fairhair's palace, one evening as Fairhair
sat Feasting, an English ambassador or messenger, bearing in his hand,
as gift from King Athelstan, a magnificent sword, with gold hilt and
other fine trimmings, to the great Harald, King of Norway. Harald
took the sword, drew it, or was half drawing it, admiringly from the
scabbard, when the English excellency broke into a scornful laugh, "Ha,
ha; thou art now the feudatory of my English king; thou hast accepted
the sword from him, and art now his man!" (acceptance of a sword in that
manner being the symbol of investiture in those days.) Harald looked
a trifle flurried, it is probable; but held in his wrath, and did
no damage to the tricksy Englishman. He kept the matter in his mind,
however, and next summer little Hakon, having got his weaning done,--one
of the prettiest, healthiest little creatures,--Harald sent him off,
under charge of "Hauk" (Hawk so called), one of his Principal, warriors,
with order, "Take him to England," and instructions what to do with him
there. And accordingly, one evening, Hauk, with thirty men escorting,
strode into Athelstan's high dwelling (where situated, how built,
whether with logs like Harald's, I cannot specifically say), into
Athelstan's high presence, and silently set the wild little cherub upon
Athelstan's knee. "What is this?" asked Athelstan, looking at the little
cherub. "This is King Harald's son, whom a serving-maid bore to him, and
whom he now gives thee as foster-child!" Indignant Athelstan drew his
sword, as if to do the gift a mischief; but Hauk said, "Thou hast taken
him on thy knee  [common symbol of adoption]; thou canst kill him if thou
wilt; but thou dost not thereby kill all the sons of Harald." Athelstan
straightway took milder thoughts; brought up, and carefully educated
Hakon; from whom, and this singular adventure, came, before very long,
the first tidings of Christianity into Norway.

Harald Haarfagr, latterly withdrawn from all kinds of business, died
at the age of eighty-three--about A.D. 933, as is computed; nearly
contemporary in death with the first Danish King, Gorm the Old, who had
done a corresponding feat in reducing Denmark under one head. Remarkable
old men, these two first kings; and possessed of gifts for bringing
Chaos a little nearer to the form of Cosmos; possessed, in fact, of
loyalties to Cosmos, that is to say, of authentic virtues in the savage
state, such as have been needed in all societies at their incipience in
this world; a kind of "virtues" hugely in discredit at present, but not
unlikely to be needed again, to the astonishment of careless persons,
before all is done!



CHAPTER III. HAKON THE GOOD.

Eric Blood-axe, whose practical reign is counted to have begun about
A.D. 930, had by this time, or within a year or so of this time, pretty
much extinguished all his brother kings, and crushed down recalcitrant
spirits, in his violent way; but had naturally become entirely unpopular
in Norway, and filled it with silent discontent and even rage against
him. Hakon Fairhair's last son, the little foster-child of Athelstan in
England, who had been baptized and carefully educated, was come to
his fourteenth or fifteenth year at his father's death; a very
shining youth, as Athelstan saw with just pleasure. So soon as the few
preliminary preparations had been settled, Hakon, furnished with a ship
or two by Athelstan, suddenly appeared in Norway got acknowledged by
the Peasant Thing in Trondhjem "the news of which flew over Norway, like
fire through dried grass," says an old chronicler. So that Eric, with
his Queen Gunhild, and seven small children, had to run; no other shift
for Eric. They went to the Orkneys first of all, then to England, and
he "got Northumberland as earldom," I vaguely hear, from Athelstan.
But Eric soon died, and his queen, with her children, went back to
the Orkneys in search of refuge or help; to little purpose there or
elsewhere. From Orkney she went to Denmark, where Harald Blue-tooth took
her poor eldest boy as foster-child; but I fear did not very faithfully
keep that promise. The Danes had been robbing extensively during the
late tumults in Norway; this the Christian Hakon, now established there,
paid in kind, and the two countries were at war; so that Gunhild's
little boy was a welcome card in the hand of Blue-tooth.

Hakon proved a brilliant and successful king; regulated many things,
public law among others (_Gule-Thing_ Law, _Frost-Thing_ Law: these
are little codes of his accepted by their respective Things, and had a
salutary effect in their time); with prompt dexterity he drove back the
Blue-tooth foster-son invasions every time they came; and on the whole
gained for himself the name of Hakon the Good. These Danish invasions
were a frequent source of trouble to him, but his greatest and continual
trouble was that of extirpating heathen idolatry from Norway, and
introducing the Christian Evangel in its stead. His transcendent anxiety
to achieve this salutary enterprise was all along his grand difficulty
and stumbling-block; the heathen opposition to it being also rooted
and great. Bishops and priests from England Hakon had, preaching and
baptizing what they could, but making only slow progress; much too slow
for Hakon's zeal. On the other hand, every Yule-tide, when the chief
heathen were assembled in his own palace on their grand sacrificial
festival, there was great pressure put upon Hakon, as to sprinkling
with horse-blood, drinking Yule-beer, eating horse-flesh, and the other
distressing rites; the whole of which Hakon abhorred, and with all
his steadfastness strove to reject utterly. Sigurd, Jarl of Lade
(Trondhjem), a liberal heathen, not openly a Christian, was ever a wise
counsellor and conciliator in such affairs; and proved of great help
to Hakon. Once, for example, there having risen at a Yule-feast, loud,
almost stormful demand that Hakon, like a true man and brother, should
drink Yule-beer with them in their sacred hightide, Sigurd persuaded him
to comply, for peace's sake, at least, in form. Hakon took the cup in
his left hand (excellent hot _beer_), and with his right cut the sign
of the cross above it, then drank a draught. "Yes; but what is this with
the king's right hand?" cried the company. "Don't you see?" answered
shifty Sigurd; "he makes the sign of Thor's hammer before drinking!"
which quenched the matter for the time.

Horse-flesh, horse-broth, and the horse ingredient generally, Hakon all
but inexorably declined. By Sigurd's pressing exhortation and entreaty,
he did once take a kettle of horsebroth by the handle, with a good deal
of linen-quilt or towel interposed, and did open his lips for what of
steam could insinuate itself. At another time he consented to a particle
of horse-liver, intending privately, I guess, to keep it outside the
gullet, and smuggle it away without swallowing; but farther than this
not even Sigurd could persuade him to go. At the Things held in regard
to this matter Hakon's success was always incomplete; now and then it
was plain failure, and Hakon had to draw back till a better time. Here
is one specimen of the response he got on such an occasion; curious
specimen, withal, of antique parliamentary eloquence from an
Anti-Christian Thing.

At a Thing of all the Fylkes of Trondhjem, Thing held at Froste in that
region, King Hakon, with all the eloquence he had, signified that it was
imperatively necessary that all Bonders and sub-Bonders should become
Christians, and believe in one God, Christ the Son of Mary; renouncing
entirely blood sacrifices and heathen idols; should keep every seventh
day holy, abstain from labor that day, and even from food, devoting the
day to fasting and sacred meditation. Whereupon, by way of universal
answer, arose a confused universal murmur of entire dissent. "Take away
from us our old belief, and also our time for labor!" murmured they in
angry astonishment; "how can even the land be got tilled in that way?"
"We cannot work if we don't get food," said the hand laborers and
slaves. "It lies in King Hakon's blood," remarked others; "his father
and all his kindred were apt to be stingy about food, though liberal
enough with money." At length, one Osbjorn (or Bear of the Asen or Gods,
what we now call Osborne), one Osbjorn of Medalhusin Gulathal,
stept forward, and said, in a distinct manner, "We Bonders (peasant
proprietors) thought, King Hakon, when thou heldest thy first Thing-day
here in Trondhjem, and we took thee for our king, and received our
hereditary lands from thee again that we had got heaven itself. But
now we know not how it is, whether we have won freedom, or whether thou
intendest anew to make us slaves, with this wonderful proposal that we
should renounce our faith, which our fathers before us have held, and
all our ancestors as well, first in the age of burial by burning, and
now in that of earth burial; and yet these departed ones were much our
superiors, and their faith, too, has brought prosperity to us. Thee, at
the same time, we have loved so much that we raised thee to manage all
the laws of the land, and speak as their voice to us all. And even now
it is our will and the vote of all Bonders to keep that paction which
thou gavest us here on the Thing at Froste, and to maintain thee as king
so long as any of us Bonders who are here upon the Thing has life left,
provided thou, king, wilt go fairly to work, and demand of us only such
things as are not impossible. But if thou wilt fix upon this thing with
so great obstinacy, and employ force and power, in that case, we Bonders
have taken the resolution, all of us, to fall away from thee, and to
take for ourselves another head, who will so behave that we may enjoy
in freedom the belief which is agreeable to us. Now shalt thou, king,
choose one of these two courses before the Thing disperse." "Whereupon,"
adds the Chronicle, "all the Bonders raised a mighty shout, 'Yes,
we will have it so, as has been said.'" So that Jarl Sigurd had to
intervene, and King Hakon to choose for the moment the milder branch of
the alternative. [4] At other Things Hakon was more or less successful.
All his days, by such methods as there were, he kept pressing forward
with this great enterprise; and on the whole did thoroughly shake
asunder the old edifice of heathendom, and fairly introduce some
foundation for the new and better rule of faith and life among his
people. Sigurd, Jarl of Lade, his wise counsellor in all these matters,
is also a man worthy of notice.

Hakon's arrangements against the continual invasions of Eric's sons,
with Danish Blue-tooth backing them, were manifold, and for a long time
successful. He appointed, after consultation and consent in the various
Things, so many war-ships, fully manned and ready, to be furnished
instantly on the King's demand by each province or fjord; watch-fires,
on fit places, from hill to hill all along the coast, were to be
carefully set up, carefully maintained in readiness, and kindled on any
alarm of war. By such methods Blue-tooth and Co.'s invasions were for a
long while triumphantly, and even rapidly, one and all of them, beaten
back, till at length they seemed as if intending to cease altogether,
and leave Hakon alone of them. But such was not their issue after all.
The sons of Eric had only abated under constant discouragement, had not
finally left off from what seemed their one great feasibility in
life. Gunhild, their mother, was still with them: a most contriving,
fierce-minded, irreconcilable woman, diligent and urgent on them, in
season and out of season; and as for King Blue-tooth, he was at all
times ready to help, with his good-will at least.

That of the alarm-fires on Hakon's part was found troublesome by his
people; sometimes it was even hurtful and provoking (lighting your
alarm-fires and rousing the whole coast and population, when it was
nothing but some paltry viking with a couple of ships); in short, the
alarm-signal system fell into disuse, and good King Hakon himself,
in the first place, paid the penalty. It is counted, by the latest
commentators, to have been about A.D. 961, sixteenth or seventeenth year
of Hakon's pious, valiant, and worthy reign. Being at a feast one day,
with many guests, on the Island of Stord, sudden announcement came
to him that ships from the south were approaching in quantity, and
evidently ships of war. This was the biggest of all the Blue-tooth
foster-son invasions; and it was fatal to Hakon the Good that night.
Eyvind the Skaldaspillir (annihilator of all other Skalds), in his famed
_Hakon's Song_, gives account, and, still more pertinently, the always
practical Snorro. Danes in great multitude, six to one, as people
afterwards computed, springing swiftly to land, and ranking themselves;
Hakon, nevertheless, at once deciding not to take to his ships and
run, but to fight there, one to six; fighting, accordingly, in his
most splendid manner, and at last gloriously prevailing; routing and
scattering back to their ships and flight homeward these six-to-one
Danes. "During the struggle of the fight," says Snorro, "he was very
conspicuous among other men; and while the sun shone, his bright gilded
helmet glanced, and thereby many weapons were directed at him. One of
his henchmen, Eyvind Finnson (_i.e._ Skaldaspillir, the poet), took a
hat, and put it over the king's helmet. Now, among the hostile first
leaders were two uncles of the Ericsons, brothers of Gunhild, great
champions both; Skreya, the elder of them, on the disappearance of the
glittering helmet, shouted boastfully, 'Does the king of the Norsemen
hide himself, then, or has he fled? Where now is the golden helmet?' And
so saying, Skreya, and his brother Alf with him, pushed on like fools or
madmen. The king said, 'Come on in that way, and you shall find the king
of the Norsemen.'" And in a short space of time braggart Skreya did
come up, swinging his sword, and made a cut at the king; but Thoralf the
Strong, an Icelander, who fought at the king's side, dashed his shield
so hard against Skreya, that he tottered with the shock. On the same
instant the king takes his sword "quernbiter" (able to cut _querns_
or millstones) with both hands, and hews Skreya through helm and head,
cleaving him down to the shoulders. Thoralf also slew Alf. That was what
they got by such over-hasty search for the king of the Norsemen. [5]

Snorro considers the fall of these two champion uncles as the crisis of
the fight; the Danish force being much disheartened by such a sight, and
King Hakon now pressing on so hard that all men gave way before him,
the battle on the Ericson part became a whirl of recoil; and in a few
minutes more a torrent of mere flight and haste to get on board their
ships, and put to sea again; in which operation many of them were
drowned, says Snorro; survivors making instant sail for Denmark in that
sad condition.

This seems to have been King Hakon's finest battle, and the most
conspicuous of his victories, due not a little to his own grand
qualities shown on the occasion. But, alas! it was his last also. He was
still zealously directing the chase of that mad Danish flight, or whirl
of recoil towards their ships, when an arrow, shot Most likely at a
venture, hit him under the left armpit; and this proved his death.

He was helped into his ship, and made sail for Alrekstad, where his
chief residence in those parts was; but had to stop at a smaller place
of his (which had been his mother's, and where he himself was born)--a
place called Hella (the Flat Rock), still known as "Hakon's Hella,"
faint from loss of blood, and crushed down as he had never before felt.
Having no son and only one daughter, he appointed these invasive sons
of Eric to be sent for, and if he died to become king; but to "spare his
friends and kindred." "If a longer life be granted me," he said, "I will
go out of this land to Christian men, and do penance for what I have
committed against God. But if I die in the country of the heathen, let
me have such burial as you yourselves think fittest." These are his
last recorded words. And in heathen fashion he was buried, and besung by
Eyvind and the Skalds, though himself a zealously Christian king. Hakon
the _Good_; so one still finds him worthy of being called. The sorrow on
Hakon's death, Snorro tells us, was so great and universal, "that he
was lamented both by friends and enemies; and they said that never again
would Norway see such a king."



CHAPTER IV. HARALD GREYFELL AND BROTHERS.

Eric's sons, four or five of them, with a Harald at the top, now at once
got Norway in hand, all of it but Trondhjem, as king and under-kings;
and made a severe time of it for those who had been, or seemed to be,
their enemies. Excellent Jarl Sigurd, always so useful to Hakon and his
country, was killed by them; and they came to repent that before very
long. The slain Sigurd left a son, Hakon, as Jarl, who became famous
in the northern world by and by. This Hakon, and him only, would the
Trondhjemers accept as sovereign. "Death to him, then," said the sons
of Eric, but only in secret, till they had got their hands free and
were ready; which was not yet for some years. Nay, Hakon, when actually
attacked, made good resistance, and threatened to cause trouble. Nor did
he by any means get his death from these sons of Eric at this time, or
till long afterwards at all, from one of their kin, as it chanced. On
the contrary, he fled to Denmark now, and by and by managed to come
back, to their cost.

Among their other chief victims were two cousins of their own, Tryggve
and Gudrod, who had been honest under-kings to the late head-king, Hakon
the Good; but were now become suspect, and had to fight for their lives,
and lose them in a tragic manner. Tryggve had a son, whom we shall hear
of. Gudrod, son of worthy Bjorn the Chapman, was grandfather of Saint
Olaf, whom all men have heard of,--who has a church in Southwark even,
and another in Old Jewry, to this hour. In all these violences, Gunhild,
widow of the late king Eric, was understood to have a principal hand.
She had come back to Norway with her sons; and naturally passed for the
secret adviser and Maternal President in whatever of violence went on;
always reckoned a fell, vehement, relentless personage where her own
interests were concerned. Probably as things settled, her influence on
affairs grew less. At least one hopes so; and, in the Sagas, hears less
and less of her, and before long nothing.

Harald, the head-king in this Eric fraternity, does not seem to have
been a bad man,--the contrary indeed; but his position was untowardly,
full of difficulty and contradictions. Whatever Harald could accomplish
for behoof of Christianity, or real benefit to Norway, in these cross
circumstances, he seems to have done in a modest and honest manner. He
got the name of _Greyfell_ from his people on a very trivial account,
but seemingly with perfect good humor on their part. Some Iceland trader
had brought a cargo of furs to Trondhjem (Lade) for sale; sale being
slacker than the Icelander wished, he presented a chosen specimen,
cloak, doublet, or whatever it was, to Harald; who wore it with
acceptance in public, and rapidly brought disposal of the Icelander's
stock, and the surname of _Greyfell_ to himself. His under-kings and he
were certainly not popular, though I almost think Greyfell himself, in
absence of his mother and the under-kings, might have been so. But here
they all were, and had wrought great trouble in Norway. "Too many of
them," said everybody; "too many of these courts and court people,
eating up any substance that there is." For the seasons withal, two or
three of them in succession, were bad for grass, much more for grain;
no _herring_ came either; very cleanness of teeth was like to come in
Eyvind Skaldaspillir's opinion. This scarcity became at last their share
of the great Famine Of A.D. 975, which desolated Western Europe (see the
poem in the Saxon Chronicle). And all this by Eyvind Skaldaspillir, and
the heathen Norse in general, was ascribed to anger of the heathen gods.
Discontent in Norway, and especially in Eyvind Skaldaspillir, seems to
have been very great.

Whereupon exile Hakon, Jarl Sigurd's son, bestirs himself in Denmark,
backed by old King Blue-tooth, and begins invading and encroaching in a
miscellaneous way; especially intriguing and contriving plots all round
him. An unfathomably cunning kind of fellow, as well as an audacious and
strong-handed! Intriguing in Trondhjem, where he gets the under-king,
Greyfell's brother, fallen upon and murdered; intriguing with Gold
Harald, a distinguished cousin or nephew of King Blue-tooth's, who had
done fine viking work, and gained, such wealth that he got the
epithet of "Gold," and who now was infinitely desirous of a share in
Blue-tooth's kingdom as the proper finish to these sea-rovings. He even
ventured one day to make publicly a distinct proposal that way to King
Harald Blue-tooth himself; who flew into thunder and lightning at the
mere mention of it; so that none durst speak to him for several days
afterwards. Of both these Haralds Hakon was confidential friend; and
needed all his skill to walk without immediate annihilation between such
a pair of dragons, and work out Norway for himself withal. In the end
he found he must take solidly to Blue-tooth's side of the question; and
that they two must provide a recipe for Gold Harald and Norway both at
once.

"It is as much as your life is worth to speak again of sharing this
Danish kingdom," said Hakon very privately to Gold Harald; "but could
not you, my golden friend, be content with Norway for a kingdom, if one
helped you to it?"

"That could I well," answered Harald.

"Then keep me those nine war-ships you have just been rigging for a new
viking cruise; have these in readiness when I lift my finger!"

That was the recipe contrived for Gold Harald; recipe for King Greyfell
goes into the same vial, and is also ready.

Hitherto the Hakon-Blue-tooth disturbances in Norway had amounted to but
little. King Greyfell, a very active and valiant man, has constantly,
without much difficulty, repelled these sporadic bits of troubles; but
Greyfell, all the same, would willingly have peace with dangerous old
Blue-tooth (ever anxious to get his clutches over Norway on any terms)
if peace with him could be had. Blue-tooth, too, professes every
willingness; inveigles Greyfell, he and Hakon do; to have a friendly
meeting on the Danish borders, and not only settle all these quarrels,
but generously settle Greyfell in certain fiefs which he claimed in
Denmark itself; and so swear everlasting friendship. Greyfell joyfully
complies, punctually appears at the appointed day in Lymfjord Sound,
the appointed place. Whereupon Hakon gives signal to Gold Harald, "To
Lymfjord with these nine ships of yours, swift!" Gold Harald flies to
Lymfjord with his ships, challenges King Harald Greyfell to land and
fight; which the undaunted Greyfell, though so far outnumbered, does;
and, fighting his very best, perishes there, he and almost all his
people. Which done, Jarl Hakon, who is in readiness, attacks Gold
Harald, the victorious but the wearied; easily beats Gold Harald, takes
him prisoner, and instantly hangs and ends him, to the huge joy of King
Blue-tooth and Hakon; who now make instant voyage to Norway; drive
all the brother under-kings into rapid flight to the Orkneys, to any
readiest shelter; and so, under the patronage of Blue-tooth, Hakon, with
the title of Jarl, becomes ruler of Norway. This foul treachery done on
the brave and honest Harald Greyfell is by some dated about A.D. 969, by
Munch, 965, by others, computing out of Snorro only, A.D. 975. For there
is always an uncertainty in these Icelandic dates (say rather, rare and
rude attempts at dating, without even an "A.D." or other fixed "year
one" to go upon in Iceland), though seldom, I think, so large a
discrepancy as here.



CHAPTER V. HAKON JARL.

Hakon Jarl, such the style he took, had engaged to pay some kind of
tribute to King Blue-tooth, "if he could;" but he never did pay any,
pleading always the necessity of his own affairs; with which excuse,
joined to Hakon's readiness in things less important, King Blue-tooth
managed to content himself, Hakon being always his good neighbor, at
least, and the two mutually dependent. In Norway, Hakon, without
the title of king, did in a strong-handed, steadfast, and at length,
successful way, the office of one; governed Norway (some count) for
above twenty years; and, both at home and abroad, had much consideration
through most of that time; specially amongst the heathen orthodox, for
Hakon Jarl himself was a zealous heathen, fixed in his mind against
these chimerical Christian innovations and unsalutary changes of creed,
and would have gladly trampled out all traces of what the last two kings
(for Greyfell, also, was an English Christian after his sort) had done
in this respect. But he wisely discerned that it was not possible, and
that, for peace's sake, he must not even attempt it, but must strike
preferably into "perfect toleration," and that of "every one getting to
heaven or even to the other goal in his own way." He himself, it is well
known, repaired many heathen temples (a great "church builder" in his
way!), manufactured many splendid idols, with much gilding and such
artistic ornament as there was,--in particular, one huge image of Thor,
not forgetting the hammer and appendages, and such a collar (supposed of
solid gold, which it was not quite, as we shall hear in time) round the
neck of him as was never seen in all the North. How he did his own
Yule festivals, with what magnificent solemnity, the horse-eatings,
blood-sprinklings, and other sacred rites, need not be told. Something
of a "Ritualist," one may perceive; perhaps had Scandinavian Puseyisms
in him, and other desperate heathen notions. He was universally believed
to have gone into magic, for one thing, and to have dangerous potencies
derived from the Devil himself. The dark heathen mind of him struggling
vehemently in that strange element, not altogether so unlike our own in
some points.

For the rest, he was evidently, in practical matters, a man of sharp,
clear insight, of steadfast resolution, diligence, promptitude; and
managed his secular matters uncommonly well. Had sixteen Jarls under
him, though himself only Hakon Jarl by title; and got obedience from
them stricter than any king since Haarfagr had done. Add to which
that the country had years excellent for grass and crop, and that the
herrings came in exuberance; tokens, to the thinking mind, that Hakon
Jarl was a favorite of Heaven.

His fight with the far-famed Jomsvikings was his grandest exploit in
public rumor. Jomsburg, a locality not now known, except that it was
near the mouth of the River Oder, denoted in those ages the impregnable
castle of a certain hotly corporate, or "Sea Robbery Association
(limited)," which, for some generations, held the Baltic in terror, and
plundered far beyond the Belt,--in the ocean itself, in Flanders and the
opulent trading havens there,--above all, in opulent anarchic England,
which, for forty years from about this time, was the pirates' Goshen;
and yielded, regularly every summer, slaves, Danegelt, and miscellaneous
plunder, like no other country Jomsburg or the viking-world had
ever known. Palnatoke, Bue, and the other quasi-heroic heads of this
establishment are still remembered in the northern parts. _Palnatoke_
is the title of a tragedy by Oehlenschlager, which had its run of
immortality in Copenhagen some sixty or seventy years ago.

I judge the institution to have been in its floweriest state, probably
now in Hakon Jarl's time. Hakon Jarl and these pirates, robbing Hakon's
subjects and merchants that frequented him, were naturally in quarrel;
and frequent fightings had fallen out, not generally to the profit of
the Jomsburgers, who at last determined on revenge, and the rooting out
of this obstructive Hakon Jarl. They assembled in force at the Cape of
Stad,--in the Firda Fylke; and the fight was dreadful in the extreme,
noise of it filling all the north for long afterwards. Hakon, fighting
like a lion, could scarcely hold his own,--Death or Victory, the word on
both sides; when suddenly, the heavens grew black, and there broke out
a terrific storm of thunder and hail, appalling to the human
mind,--universe swallowed wholly in black night; only the momentary
forked-blazes, the thunder-pealing as of Ragnarok, and the battering
hail-torrents, hailstones about the size of an egg. Thor with his hammer
evidently acting; but in behalf of whom? The Jomsburgers in the
hideous darkness, broken only by flashing thunder-bolts, had a dismal
apprehension that it was probably not on their behalf (Thor having a
sense of justice in him); and before the storm ended, thirty-five of
their seventy ships sheered away, leaving gallant Bue, with the other
thirty-five, to follow as they liked, who reproachfully hailed these
fugitives, and continued the now hopeless battle. Bue's nose and lips
were smashed or cut away; Bue managed, half-articulately, to exclaim,
"Ha! the maids ('mays') of Funen will never kiss me more. Overboard, all
ye Bue's men!" And taking his two sea-chests, with all the gold he had
gained in such life-struggle from of old, sprang overboard accordingly,
and finished the affair. Hakon Jarl's renown rose naturally to the
transcendent pitch after this exploit. His people, I suppose chiefly the
Christian part of them, whispered one to another, with a shudder, "That
in the blackest of the thunder-storm, he had taken his youngest little
boy, and made away with him; sacrificed him to Thor or some devil, and
gained his victory by art-magic, or something worse." Jarl Eric, Hakon's
eldest son, without suspicion of art-magic, but already a distinguished
viking, became thrice distinguished by his style of sea-fighting in this
battle; and awakened great expectations in the viking public; of him we
shall hear again.

The Jomsburgers, one might fancy, after this sad clap went visibly down
in the world; but the fact is not altogether so. Old King Blue-tooth was
now dead, died of a wound got in battle with his unnatural (so-called
"natural") son and successor, Otto Svein of the Forked Beard, afterwards
king and conqueror of England for a little while; and seldom, perhaps
never, had vikingism been in such flower as now. This man's name is Sven
in Swedish, Svend in German, and means boy or lad,--the English "swain."
It was at old "Father Bluetooth's funeral-ale" (drunken burial-feast),
that Svein, carousing with his Jomsburg chiefs and other choice spirits,
generally of the robber class, all risen into height of highest robber
enthusiasm, pledged the vow to one another; Svein that he would conquer
England (which, in a sense, he, after long struggling, did); and the
Jomsburgers that they would ruin and root out Hakon Jarl (which, as
we have just seen, they could by no means do), and other guests other
foolish things which proved equally unfeasible. Sea-robber volunteers
so especially abounding in that time, one perceives how easily the
Jomsburgers could recruit themselves, build or refit new robber fleets,
man them with the pick of crews, and steer for opulent, fruitful
England; where, under Ethelred the Unready, was such a field for
profitable enterprise as the viking public never had before or since.

An idle question sometimes rises on me,--idle enough, for it never can
be answered in the affirmative or the negative, Whether it was not these
same refitted Jomsburgers who appeared some while after this at Red Head
Point, on the shore of Angus, and sustained a new severe beating, in
what the Scotch still faintly remember as their "Battle of Loncarty"?
Beyond doubt a powerful Norse-pirate armament dropt anchor at the Red
Head, to the alarm of peaceable mortals, about that time. It was thought
and hoped to be on its way for England, but it visibly hung on for
several days, deliberating (as was thought) whether they would do this
poorer coast the honor to land on it before going farther. Did land, and
vigorously plunder and burn south-westward as far as Perth; laid siege
to Perth; but brought out King Kenneth on them, and produced that
"Battle of Loncarty" which still dwells in vague memory among the Scots.
Perhaps it might be the Jomsburgers; perhaps also not; for there were
many pirate associations, lasting not from century to century like the
Jomsburgers, but only for very limited periods, or from year to year;
indeed, it was mainly by such that the splendid thief-harvest of England
was reaped in this disastrous time. No Scottish chronicler gives the
least of exact date to their famed victory of Loncarty, only that it was
achieved by Kenneth III., which will mean some time between A.D. 975 and
994; and, by the order they put it in, probably soon after A.D. 975, or
the beginning of this Kenneth's reign. Buchanan's narrative, carefully
distilled from all the ancient Scottish sources, is of admirable quality
for style and otherwise quiet, brief, with perfect clearness, perfect
credibility even, except that semi-miraculous appendage of the
Ploughmen, Hay and Sons, always hanging to the tail of it; the grain of
possible truth in which can now never be extracted by man's art! [6] In
brief, what we know is, fragments of ancient human bones and armor
have occasionally been ploughed up in this locality, proof positive of
ancient fighting here; and the fight fell out not long after Hakon's
beating of the Jomsburgers at the Cape of Stad. And in such dim glimmer
of wavering twilight, the question whether these of Loncarty were
refitted Jomsburgers or not, must be left hanging. Loncarty is now the
biggest bleach-field in Queen Victoria's dominions; no village or hamlet
there, only the huge bleaching-house and a beautiful field, some six or
seven miles northwest of Perth, bordered by the beautiful Tay river
on the one side, and by its beautiful tributary Almond on the other; a
Loncarty fitted either for bleaching linen, or for a bit of fair duel
between nations, in those simple times.

Whether our refitted Jomsburgers had the least thing to do with it is
only matter of fancy, but if it were they who here again got a good
beating, fancy would be glad to find herself fact. The old piratical
kings of Denmark had been at the founding of Jomsburg, and to Svein of
the Forked Beard it was still vitally important, but not so to the great
Knut, or any king that followed; all of whom had better business than
mere thieving; and it was Magnus the Good, of Norway, a man of still
higher anti-anarchic qualities, that annihilated it, about a century
later.

Hakon Jarl, his chief labors in the world being over, is said to have
become very dissolute in his elder days, especially in the matter of
women; the wretched old fool, led away by idleness and fulness of bread,
which to all of us are well said to be the parents of mischief. Having
absolute power, he got into the habit of openly plundering men's pretty
daughters and wives from them, and, after a few weeks, sending them
back; greatly to the rage of the fierce Norse heart, had there been any
means of resisting or revenging. It did, after a little while, prove the
ruin and destruction of Hakon the Rich, as he was then called. It opened
the door, namely, for entry of Olaf Tryggveson upon the scene,--a very
much grander man; in regard to whom the wiles and traps of Hakon proved
to be a recipe, not on Tryggveson, but on the wily Hakon himself, as
shall now be seen straightway.



CHAPTER VI. OLAF TRYGGVESON.

Hakon, in late times, had heard of a famous stirring person, victorious
in various lands and seas, latterly united in sea-robbery with Svein,
Prince Royal of Denmark, afterwards King Svein of the Double-beard
("_Zvae Skiaeg_", _Twa Shag_) or fork-beard, both of whom had already
done transcendent feats in the viking way during this copartnery. The
fame of Svein, and this stirring personage, whose name was "Ole," and,
recently, their stupendous feats in plunder of England, siege of London,
and other wonders and splendors of viking glory and success, had gone
over all the North, awakening the attention of Hakon and everybody
there. The name of "Ole" was enigmatic, mysterious, and even
dangerous-looking to Hakon Jarl; who at length sent out a confidential
spy to investigate this "Ole;" a feat which the confidential spy did
completely accomplish,--by no means to Hakon's profit! The mysterious
"Ole" proved to be no other than Olaf, son of Tryggve, destined to blow
Hakon Jarl suddenly into destruction, and become famous among the heroes
of the Norse world.

Of Olaf Tryggveson one always hopes there might, one day, some real
outline of a biography be written; fished from the abysses where (as
usual) it welters deep in foul neighborhood for the present. Farther on
we intend a few words more upon the matter. But in this place all that
concerns us in it limits itself to the two following facts first, that
Hakon's confidential spy "found Ole in Dublin;" picked acquaintance with
him, got him to confess that he was actually Olaf, son of Tryggve (the
Tryggve, whom Blood-axe's fierce widow and her sons had murdered); got
him gradually to own that perhaps an expedition into Norway might have
its chances; and finally that, under such a wise and loyal guidance
as his (the confidential spy's, whose friendship for Tryggveson was so
indubitable), he (Tryggveson) would actually try it upon Hakon Jarl, the
dissolute old scoundrel. Fact second is, that about the time they two
set sail from Dublin on their Norway expedition, Hakon Jarl removed to
Trondhjem, then called Lade; intending to pass some months there.

Now just about the time when Tryggveson, spy, and party had landed in
Norway, and were advancing upon Lade, with what support from the public
could be got, dissolute old Hakon Jarl had heard of one Gudrun, a
Bonder's wife, unparalleled in beauty, who was called in those parts,
"Sunbeam of the Grove" (so inexpressibly lovely); and sent off a couple
of thralls to bring her to him. "Never," answered Gudrun; "never," her
indignant husband; in a tone dangerous and displeasing to these Court
thralls; who had to leave rapidly, but threatened to return in better
strength before long. Whereupon, instantly, the indignant Bonder and his
Sunbeam of the Grove sent out their war-arrow, rousing all the country
into angry promptitude, and more than one perhaps into greedy hope of
revenge for their own injuries. The rest of Hakon's history now rushes
on with extreme rapidity.

Sunbeam of the Grove, when next demanded of her Bonder, has the whole
neighborhood assembled in arms round her; rumor of Tryggveson is fast
making it the whole country. Hakon's insolent messengers are cut in
pieces; Hakon finds he cannot fly under cover too soon. With a single
slave he flies that same night;--but whitherward? Can think of no safe
place, except to some old mistress of his, who lives retired in that
neighborhood, and has some pity or regard for the wicked old Hakon. Old
mistress does receive him, pities him, will do all she can to protect
and hide him. But how, by what uttermost stretch of female artifice hide
him here; every one will search here first of all! Old mistress, by the
slave's help, extemporizes a cellar under the floor of her pig-house;
sticks Hakon and slave into that, as the one safe seclusion she can
contrive. Hakon and slave, begrunted by the pigs above them, tortured by
the devils within and about them, passed two days in circumstances
more and more horrible. For they heard, through their light-slit
and breathing-slit, the triumph of Tryggveson proclaiming itself by
Tryggveson's own lips, who had mounted a big boulder near by and was
victoriously speaking to the people, winding up with a promise of
honors and rewards to whoever should bring him wicked old Hakon's head.
Wretched Hakon, justly suspecting his slave, tried to at least keep
himself awake. Slave did keep himself awake till Hakon dozed or slept,
then swiftly cut off Hakon's head, and plunged out with it to the
presence of Tryggveson. Tryggveson, detesting the traitor, useful as the
treachery was, cut off the slave's head too, had it hung up along with
Hakon's on the pinnacle of the Lade Gallows, where the populace pelted
both heads with stones and many curses, especially the more important of
the two. "Hakon the Bad" ever henceforth, instead of Hakon the Rich.

This was the end of Hakon Jarl, the last support of heathenry in Norway,
among other characteristics he had: a stronghanded, hard-headed, very
relentless, greedy and wicked being. He is reckoned to have ruled in
Norway, or mainly ruled, either in the struggling or triumphant state,
for about thirty years (965-995?). He and his seemed to have formed,
by chance rather than design, the chief opposition which the Haarfagr
posterity throughout its whole course experienced in Norway. Such
the cost to them of killing good Jarl Sigurd, in Greyfell's time! For
"curses, like chickens," do sometimes visibly "come home to feed," as
they always, either visibly or else invisibly, are punctually sure to
do.

Hakon Jarl is considerably connected with the _Faroer Saga_ often
mentioned there, and comes out perfectly in character; an altogether
worldly-wise man of the roughest type, not without a turn for
practicality of kindness to those who would really be of use to him. His
tendencies to magic also are not forgotten.

Hakon left two sons, Eric and Svein, often also mentioned in this Saga.
On their father's death they fled to Sweden, to Denmark, and were busy
stirring up troubles in those countries against Olaf Tryggveson; till at
length, by a favorable combination, under their auspices chiefly, they
got his brief and noble reign put an end to. Nay, furthermore, Jarl Eric
left sons, especially an elder son, named also Eric, who proved a sore
affliction, and a continual stone of stumbling to a new generation of
Haarfagrs, and so continued the curse of Sigurd's murder upon them.

Towards the end of this Hakon's reign it was that the discovery of
America took place (985). Actual discovery, it appears, by Eric the Red,
an Icelander; concerning which there has been abundant investigation and
discussion in our time. _Ginnungagap_ (Roaring Abyss) is thought to be
the mouth of Behring's Straits in Baffin's Bay; _Big Helloland_, the
coast from Cape Walsingham to near Newfoundland; _Little Helloland_,
Newfoundland itself. _Markland_ was Lower Canada, New Brunswick, and
Nova Scotia. Southward thence to Chesapeake Bay was called _Wine Land_
(wild grapes still grow in Rhode Island, and more luxuriantly further
south). _White Man's Land_, called also _Great Ireland_, is supposed
to mean the two Carolinas, down to the Southern Cape of Florida. In
Dahlmann's opinion, the Irish themselves might even pretend to have
probably been the first discoverers of America; they had evidently got
to Iceland itself before the Norse exiles found it out. It appears to be
certain that, from the end of the tenth century to the early part of the
fourteenth, there was a dim knowledge of those distant shores extant
in the Norse mind, and even some straggling series of visits thither
by roving Norsemen; though, as only danger, difficulty, and no profit
resulted, the visits ceased, and the whole matter sank into oblivion,
and, but for the Icelandic talent of writing in the long winter nights,
would never have been heard of by posterity at all.



CHAPTER VII. REIGN OF OLAF TRYGGVESON.

Olaf Tryggveson (A.D. 995-1000) also makes a great figure in the _Faroer
Saga_, and recounts there his early troubles, which were strange and
many. He is still reckoned a grand hero of the North, though his _vates_
now is only Snorro Sturleson of Iceland. Tryggveson had indeed many
adventures in the world. His poor mother, Astrid, was obliged to fly, on
murder of her husband by Gunhild,--to fly for life, three months before
he, her little Olaf, was born. She lay concealed in reedy islands, fled
through trackless forests; reached her father's with the little baby in
her arms, and lay deep-hidden there, tended only by her father himself;
Gunhild's pursuit being so incessant, and keen as with sleuth-hounds.
Poor Astrid had to fly again, deviously to Sweden, to Esthland
(Esthonia), to Russia. In Esthland she was sold as a slave, quite parted
from her boy,--who also was sold, and again sold; but did at last
fall in with a kinsman high in the Russian service; did from him find
redemption and help, and so rose, in a distinguished manner, to manhood,
victorious self-help, and recovery of his kingdom at last. He even met
his mother again, he as king of Norway, she as one wonderfully lifted
out of darkness into new life and happiness still in store.

Grown to manhood, Tryggveson,--now become acquainted with his birth,
and with his, alas, hopeless claims,--left Russia for the one profession
open to him, that of sea-robbery; and did feats without number in that
questionable line in many seas and scenes,--in England latterly, and
most conspicuously of all. In one of his courses thither, after long
labors in the Hebrides, Man, Wales, and down the western shores to
the very Land's End and farther, he paused at the Scilly Islands for
a little while. He was told of a wonderful Christian hermit living
strangely in these sea-solitudes; had the curiosity to seek him out,
examine, question, and discourse with him; and, after some reflection,
accepted Christian baptism from the venerable man. In Snorro the story
is involved in miracle, rumor, and fable; but the fact itself seems
certain, and is very interesting; the great, wild, noble soul of fierce
Olaf opening to this wonderful gospel of tidings from beyond the world,
tidings which infinitely transcended all else he had ever heard or
dreamt of! It seems certain he was baptized here; date not fixable;
shortly before poor heart-broken Dunstan's death, or shortly after; most
English churches, monasteries especially, lying burnt, under continual
visitation of the Danes. Olaf such baptism notwithstanding, did not quit
his viking profession; indeed, what other was there for him in the world
as yet?

We mentioned his occasional copartneries with Svein of the Double-beard,
now become King of Denmark, but the greatest of these, and the alone
interesting at this time, is their joint invasion of England, and
Tryggveson's exploits and fortunes there some years after that adventure
of baptism in the Scilly Isles. Svein and he "were above a year in
England together," this time: they steered up the Thames with three
hundred ships and many fighters; siege, or at least furious assault, of
London was their first or main enterprise, but it did not succeed. The
Saxon Chronicle gives date to it, A.D. 994, and names expressly, as
Svein's co-partner, "Olaus, king of Norway,"--which he was as yet far
from being; but in regard to the Year of Grace the Saxon Chronicle is
to be held indisputable, and, indeed, has the field to itself in this
matter. Famed Olaf Tryggveson, seen visibly at the siege of London,
year 994, it throws a kind of momentary light to us over that disastrous
whirlpool of miseries and confusions, all dark and painful to the
fancy otherwise! This big voyage and furious siege of London is Svein
Double-beard's first real attempt to fulfil that vow of his at Father
Blue-tooth's "funeral ale," and conquer England,--which it is a pity he
could not yet do. Had London now fallen to him, it is pretty evident all
England must have followed, and poor England, with Svein as king over
it, been delivered from immeasurable woes, which had to last some
two-and-twenty years farther, before this result could be arrived at.
But finding London impregnable for the moment (no ship able to get
athwart the bridge, and many Danes perishing in the attempt to do it by
swimming), Svein and Olaf turned to other enterprises; all England in
a manner lying open to them, turn which way they liked. They burnt and
plundered over Kent, over Hampshire, Sussex; they stormed far and wide;
world lying all before them where to choose. Wretched Ethelred, as the
one invention he could fall upon, offered them Danegelt (16,000 pounds
of silver this year, but it rose in other years as high as 48,000
pounds); the desperate Ethelred, a clear method of quenching fire
by pouring oil on it! Svein and Olaf accepted; withdrew to
Southampton,--Olaf at least did,--till the money was got ready. Strange
to think of, fierce Svein of the Double-beard, and conquest of England
by him; this had at last become the one salutary result which remained
for that distracted, down-trodden, now utterly chaotic and anarchic
country. A conquering Svein, followed by an ably and earnestly
administrative, as well as conquering, Knut (whom Dahlmann compares
to Charlemagne), were thus by the mysterious destinies appointed the
effective saviors of England.

Tryggveson, on this occasion, was a good while at Southampton; and
roamed extensively about, easily victorious over everything, if
resistance were attempted, but finding little or none; and acting now
in a peaceable or even friendly capacity. In the Southampton country
he came in contact with the then Bishop of Winchester, afterwards
Archbishop of Canterbury, excellent Elphegus, still dimly decipherable
to us as a man of great natural discernment, piety, and inborn veracity;
a hero-soul, probably of real brotherhood with Olaf's own. He even made
court visits to King Ethelred; one visit to him at Andover of a very
serious nature. By Elphegus, as we can discover, he was introduced into
the real depths of the Christian faith. Elphegus, with due solemnity of
apparatus, in presence of the king, at Andover, baptized Olaf anew, and
to him Olaf engaged that he would never plunder in England any more;
which promise, too, he kept. In fact, not long after, Svein's conquest
of England being in an evidently forward state, Tryggveson (having made,
withal, a great English or Irish marriage,--a dowager Princess, who had
voluntarily fallen in love with him,--see Snorro for this fine romantic
fact!) mainly resided in our island for two or three years, or else in
Dublin, in the precincts of the Danish Court there in the Sister Isle.
Accordingly it was in Dublin, as above noted, that Hakon's spy found
him; and from the Liffey that his squadron sailed, through the Hebrides,
through the Orkneys, plundering and baptizing in their strange way,
towards such success as we have seen.

Tryggveson made a stout, and, in effect, victorious and glorious
struggle for himself as king. Daily and hourly vigilant to do so, often
enough by soft and even merry methods, for he was a witty, jocund man,
and had a fine ringing laugh in him, and clear pregnant words ever
ready,--or if soft methods would not serve, then by hard and even
hardest he put down a great deal of miscellaneous anarchy in Norway; was
especially busy against heathenism (devil-worship and its rites): this,
indeed, may be called the focus and heart of all his royal endeavor in
Norway, and of all the troubles he now had with his people there. For
this was a serious, vital, all-comprehending matter; devil-worship, a
thing not to be tolerated one moment longer than you could by any method
help! Olaf's success was intermittent, of varying complexion; but his
effort, swift or slow, was strong and continual; and on the whole he did
succeed. Take a sample or two of that wonderful conversion process:--

At one of his first Things he found the Bonders all assembled in
arms; resolute to the death seemingly, against his proposal and him.
Tryggveson said little; waited impassive, "What your reasons are,
good men?" One zealous Bonder started up in passionate parliamentary
eloquence; but after a sentence or two, broke down; one, and then
another, and still another, and remained all three staring in
open-mouthed silence there! The peasant-proprietors accepted the
phenomenon as ludicrous, perhaps partly as miraculous withal, and
consented to baptism this time.

On another occasion of a Thing, which had assembled near some heathen
temple to meet him,--temple where Hakon Jarl had done much repairing,
and set up many idol figures and sumptuous ornaments, regardless of
expense, especially a very big and splendid Thor, with massive gold
collar round the neck of him, not the like of it in Norway,--King Olaf
Tryggveson was clamorously invited by the Bonders to step in there,
enlighten his eyes, and partake of the sacred rites. Instead of which
he rushed into the temple with his armed men; smashed down, with his own
battle-axe, the god Thor, prostrate on the ground at one stroke, to set
an example; and, in a few minutes, had the whole Hakon Pantheon wrecked;
packing up meanwhile all the gold and preciosities accumulated there
(not forgetting Thor's illustrious gold collar, of which we shall hear
again), and victoriously took the plunder home with him for his own
royal uses and behoof of the state. In other cases, though a friend to
strong measures, he had to hold in, and await the favorable moment. Thus
once, in beginning a parliamentary address, so soon as he came to touch
upon Christianity, the Bonders rose in murmurs, in vociferations and
jingling of arms, which quite drowned the royal voice; declared, they
had taken arms against king Hakon the Good to compel him to desist from
his Christian proposals; and they did not think King Olaf a higher man
than him (Hakon the Good). The king then said, "He purposed coming to
them next Yule to their great sacrificial feast, to see for himself
what their customs were," which pacified the Bonders for this time. The
appointed place of meeting was again a Hakon-Jarl Temple, not yet done
to ruin; chief shrine in those Trondhjem parts, I believe: there should
Tryggveson appear at Yule. Well, but before Yule came, Tryggveson made a
great banquet in his palace at Trondhjem, and invited far and wide, all
manner of important persons out of the district as guests there. Banquet
hardly done, Tryggveson gave some slight signal, upon which armed men
strode in, seized eleven of these principal persons, and the king said:
"Since he himself was to become a heathen again, and do sacrifice, it
was his purpose to do it in the highest form, namely, that of Human
Sacrifice; and this time not of slaves and malefactors, but of the best
men in the country!" In which stringent circumstances the eleven seized
persons, and company at large, gave unanimous consent to baptism;
straightway received the same, and abjured their idols; but were not
permitted to go home till they had left, in sons, brothers, and other
precious relatives, sufficient hostages in the king's hands.

By unwearied industry of this and better kinds, Tryggveson had trampled
down idolatry, so far as form went,--how far in substance may be greatly
doubted. But it is to be remembered withal, that always on the back of
these compulsory adventures there followed English bishops, priests and
preachers; whereby to the open-minded, conviction, to all degrees of it,
was attainable, while silence and passivity became the duty or necessity
of the unconvinced party.

In about two years Norway was all gone over with a rough harrow of
conversion. Heathenism at least constrained to be silent and outwardly
conformable. Tryggveson, next turned his attention to Iceland, sent one
Thangbrand, priest from Saxony, of wonderful qualities, military as
well as theological, to try and convert Iceland. Thangbrand made a few
converts; for Olaf had already many estimable Iceland friends, whom he
liked much, and was much liked by; and conversion was the ready road
to his favor. Thangbrand, I find, lodged with Hall of Sida (familiar
acquaintance of "Burnt Njal," whose Saga has its admirers among us even
now). Thangbrand converted Hall and one or two other leading men;
but in general he was reckoned quarrelsome and blusterous rather than
eloquent and piously convincing. Two skalds of repute made biting
lampoons upon Thangbrand, whom Thangbrand, by two opportunities that
offered, cut down and did to death because of their skaldic quality.
Another he killed with his own hand, I know not for what reason. In
brief, after about a year, Thangbrand returned to Norway and king Olaf;
declaring the Icelanders to be a perverse, satirical, and inconvertible
people, having himself, the record says, "been the death of three men
there." King Olaf was in high rage at this result; but was persuaded by
the Icelanders about him to try farther, and by a wilder instrument. He
accordingly chose one Thormod, a pious, patient, and kindly man, who,
within the next year or so, did actually accomplish the matter; namely,
get Christianity, by open vote, declared at Thingvalla by the general
Thing of Iceland there; the roar of a big thunder-clap at the right
moment rather helping the conclusion, if I recollect. Whereupon Olaf's
joy was no doubt great.

One general result of these successful operations was the discontent,
to all manner of degrees, on the part of many Norse individuals, against
this glorious and victorious, but peremptory and terrible king of
theirs. Tryggveson, I fancy, did not much regard all that; a man of
joyful, cheery temper, habitually contemptuous of danger. Another
trivial misfortune that befell in these conversion operations, and
became important to him, he did not even know of, and would have much
despised if he had. It was this: Sigrid, queen dowager of Sweden,
thought to be amongst the most shining women of the world, was also
known for one of the most imperious, revengeful, and relentless, and had
got for herself the name of Sigrid the Proud. In her high widowhood she
had naturally many wooers; but treated them in a manner unexampled. Two
of her suitors, a simultaneous Two, were, King Harald Graenske (a cousin
of King Tryggveson's, and kind of king in some district, by sufferance
of the late Hakon's),--this luckless Graenske and the then Russian
Sovereign as well, name not worth mentioning, were zealous suitors of
Queen Dowager Sigrid, and were perversely slow to accept the negative,
which in her heart was inexorable for both, though the expression of
it could not be quite so emphatic. By ill-luck for them they came
once,--from the far West, Graenske; from the far East, the Russian;--and
arrived both together at Sigrid's court, to prosecute their importunate,
and to her odious and tiresome suit; much, how very much, to her
impatience and disdain. She lodged them both in some old mansion, which
she had contiguous, and got compendiously furnished for them; and there,
I know not whether on the first or on the second, or on what following
night, this unparalleled Queen Sigrid had the house surrounded, set on
fire, and the two suitors and their people burnt to ashes! No more of
bother from these two at least! This appears to be a fact; and it could
not be unknown to Tryggveson.

In spite of which, however, there went from Tryggveson, who was now a
widower, some incipient marriage proposals to this proud widow; by
whom they were favorably received; as from the brightest man in all the
world, they might seem worth being. Now, in one of these anti-heathen
onslaughts of King Olaf's on the idol temples of Hakon--(I think it
was that case where Olaf's own battle-axe struck down the monstrous
refulgent Thor, and conquered an immense gold ring from the neck of him,
or from the door of his temple),--a huge gold ring, at any rate, had
come into Olaf's hands; and this he bethought him might be a pretty
present to Queen Sigrid, the now favorable, though the proud. Sigrid
received the ring with joy; fancied what a collar it would make for her
own fair neck; but noticed that her two goldsmiths, weighing it on their
fingers, exchanged a glance. "What is that?" exclaimed Queen Sigrid.
"Nothing," answered they, or endeavored to answer, dreading mischief.
But Sigrid compelled them to break open the ring; and there was found,
all along the inside of it, an occult ring of copper, not a heart of
gold at all! "Ha," said the proud Queen, flinging it away, "he that
could deceive in this matter can deceive in many others!" And was in hot
wrath with Olaf; though, by degrees, again she took milder thoughts.

Milder thoughts, we say; and consented to a meeting next autumn, at some
half-way station, where their great business might be brought to a happy
settlement and betrothment. Both Olaf Tryggveson and the high dowager
appear to have been tolerably of willing mind at this meeting; but Olaf
interposed, what was always one condition with him, "Thou must consent
to baptism, and give up thy idol-gods." "They are the gods of all my
forefathers," answered the lady, "choose thou what gods thou pleasest,
but leave me mine." Whereupon an altercation; and Tryggveson, as was his
wont, towered up into shining wrath, and exclaimed at last, "Why should
I care about thee then, old faded heathen creature?" And impatiently
wagging his glove, hit her, or slightly switched her, on the face with
it, and contemptuously turning away, walked out of the adventure. "This
is a feat that may cost thee dear one day," said Sigrid. And in the end
it came to do so, little as the magnificent Olaf deigned to think of it
at the moment.

One of the last scuffles I remember of Olaf's having with his refractory
heathens, was at a Thing in Hordaland or Rogaland, far in the North,
where the chief opposition hero was one Jaernskaegg ("ironbeard")
Scottice ("Airn-shag," as it were!). Here again was a grand heathen
temple, Hakon Jarl's building, with a splendid Thor in it and much idol
furniture. The king stated what was his constant wish here as elsewhere,
but had no sooner entered upon the subject of Christianity than
universal murmur, rising into clangor and violent dissent, interrupted
him, and Ironbeard took up the discourse in reply. Ironbeard did not
break down; on the contrary, he, with great brevity, emphasis, and
clearness, signified "that the proposal to reject their old gods was in
the highest degree unacceptable to this Thing; that it was contrary
to bargain, withal; so that if it were insisted on, they would have to
fight with the king about it; and in fact were now ready to do so." In
reply to this, Olaf, without word uttered, but merely with some signal
to the trusty armed men he had with him, rushed off to the temple close
at hand; burst into it, shutting the door behind him; smashed Thor and
Co. to destruction; then reappearing victorious, found much confusion
outside, and, in particular, what was a most important item, the rugged
Ironbeard done to death by Olaf's men in the interim. Which entirely
disheartened the Thing from fighting at that moment; having now no
leader who dared to head them in so dangerous an enterprise. So that
every one departed to digest his rage in silence as he could.

Matters having cooled for a week or two, there was another Thing held;
in which King Olaf testified regret for the quarrel that had fallen out,
readiness to pay what _mulct_ was due by law for that unlucky homicide
of Ironbeard by his people; and, withal, to take the fair daughter of
Ironbeard to wife, if all would comply and be friends with him in other
matters; which was the course resolved on as most convenient: accept
baptism, we; marry Jaernskaegg's daughter, you. This bargain held on
both sides. The wedding, too, was celebrated, but that took rather a
strange turn. On the morning of the bride-night, Olaf, who had not been
sleeping, though his fair partner thought he had, opened his eyes, and
saw, with astonishment, the fair partner aiming a long knife ready
to strike home upon him! Which at once ended their wedded life; poor
Demoiselle Ironbeard immediately bundling off with her attendants home
again; King Olaf into the apartment of his servants, mentioning there
what had happened, and forbidding any of them to follow her.

Olaf Tryggveson, though his kingdom was the smallest of the Norse Three,
had risen to a renown over all the Norse world, which neither he
of Denmark nor he of Sweden could pretend to rival. A magnificent,
far-shining man; more expert in all "bodily exercises" as the Norse call
them, than any man had ever been before him, or after was. Could keep
five daggers in the air, always catching the proper fifth by its handle,
and sending it aloft again; could shoot supremely, throw a javelin with
either hand; and, in fact, in battle usually throw two together. These,
with swimming, climbing, leaping, were the then admirable Fine Arts of
the North; in all which Tryggveson appears to have been the Raphael and
the Michael Angelo at once. Essentially definable, too, if we look
well into him, as a wild bit of real heroism, in such rude guise and
environment; a high, true, and great human soul. A jovial burst of
laughter in him, withal; a bright, airy, wise way of speech; dressed
beautifully and with care; a man admired and loved exceedingly by those
he liked; dreaded as death by those he did not like. "Hardly any king,"
says Snorro, "was ever so well obeyed; by one class out of zeal and
love, by the rest out of dread." His glorious course, however, was not
to last long.

King Svein of the Double-Beard had not yet completed his conquest of
England,--by no means yet, some thirteen horrid years of that still
before him!--when, over in Denmark, he found that complaints against
him and intricacies had arisen, on the part principally of one Burislav,
King of the Wends (far up the Baltic), and in a less degree with the
King of Sweden and other minor individuals. Svein earnestly applied
himself to settle these, and have his hands free. Burislav, an aged
heathen gentleman, proved reasonable and conciliatory; so, too, the King
of Sweden, and Dowager Queen Sigrid, his managing mother. Bargain in
both these cases got sealed and crowned by marriage. Svein, who had
become a widower lately, now wedded Sigrid; and might think, possibly
enough, he had got a proud bargain, though a heathen one. Burislav also
insisted on marriage with Princess Thyri, the Double-Beard's sister.
Thyri, inexpressibly disinclined to wed an aged heathen of that stamp,
pleaded hard with her brother; but the Double-Bearded was inexorable;
Thyri's wailings and entreaties went for nothing. With some guardian
foster-brother, and a serving-maid or two, she had to go on this hated
journey. Old Burislav, at sight of her, blazed out into marriage-feast
of supreme magnificence, and was charmed to see her; but Thyri would not
join the marriage party; refused to eat with it or sit with it at all.
Day after day, for six days, flatly refused; and after nightfall of the
sixth, glided out with her foster-brother into the woods, into by-paths
and inconceivable wanderings; and, in effect, got home to Denmark.
Brother Svein was not for the moment there; probably enough gone to
England again. But Thyri knew too well he would not allow her to stay
here, or anywhere that he could help, except with the old heathen she
had just fled from.

Thyri, looking round the world, saw no likely road for her, but to Olaf
Tryggveson in Norway; to beg protection from the most heroic man she
knew of in the world. Olaf, except by renown, was not known to her; but
by renown he well was. Olaf, at sight of her, promised protection
and asylum against all mortals. Nay, in discoursing with Thyri Olaf
perceived more and more clearly what a fine handsome being, soul and
body, Thyri was; and in a short space of time winded up by proposing
marriage to Thyri; who, humbly, and we may fancy with what secret joy,
consented to say yes, and become Queen of Norway. In the due months they
had a little son, Harald; who, it is credibly recorded, was the joy of
both his parents; but who, to their inexpressible sorrow, in about a
year died, and vanished from them. This, and one other fact now to be
mentioned, is all the wedded history we have of Thyri.

The other fact is, that Thyri had, by inheritance or covenant, not
depending on her marriage with old Burislav, considerable properties in
Wendland; which, she often reflected, might be not a little behooveful
to her here in Norway, where her civil-list was probably but straitened.
She spoke of this to her husband; but her husband would take no hold,
merely made her gifts, and said, "Pooh, pooh, can't we live without old
Burislav and his Wendland properties?" So that the lady sank into
ever deeper anxiety and eagerness about this Wendland object; took to
weeping; sat weeping whole days; and when Olaf asked, "What ails thee,
then?" would answer, or did answer once, "What a different man my father
Harald Gormson was  [vulgarly called Blue-tooth], compared with some that
are now kings! For no King Svein in the world would Harald Gormson
have given up his own or his wife's just rights!" Whereupon Tryggveson
started up, exclaiming in some heat, "Of thy brother Svein I never was
afraid; if Svein and I meet in contest, it will not be Svein, I believe,
that conquers;" and went off in a towering fume. Consented, however,
at last, had to consent, to get his fine fleet equipped and armed, and
decide to sail with it to Wendland to have speech and settlement with
King Burislav.

Tryggveson had already ships and navies that were the wonder of the
North. Especially in building war ships, the Crane, the Serpent, last
of all the Long Serpent, [7]--he had, for size, for outward beauty, and
inward perfection of equipment, transcended all example.

This new sea expedition became an object of attention to all neighbors;
especially Queen Sigrid the Proud and Svein Double-Beard, her now king,
were attentive to it.

"This insolent Tryggveson," Queen Sigrid would often say, and had long
been saying, to her Svein, "to marry thy sister without leave had or
asked of thee; and now flaunting forth his war navies, as if he, king
only of paltry Norway, were the big hero of the North! Why do you suffer
it, you kings really great?"

By such persuasions and reiterations, King Svein of Denmark, King
Olaf of Sweden, and Jarl Eric, now a great man there, grown rich by
prosperous sea robbery and other good management, were brought to take
the matter up, and combine strenuously for destruction of King Olaf
Tryggveson on this grand Wendland expedition of his. Fleets and forces
were with best diligence got ready; and, withal, a certain Jarl Sigwald,
of Jomsburg, chieftain of the Jomsvikings, a powerful, plausible,
and cunning man, was appointed to find means of joining himself to
Tryggveson's grand voyage, of getting into Tryggveson's confidence, and
keeping Svein Double-Beard, Eric, and the Swedish King aware of all his
movements.

King Olaf Tryggveson, unacquainted with all this, sailed away in summer,
with his splendid fleet; went through the Belts with prosperous winds,
under bright skies, to the admiration of both shores. Such a fleet, with
its shining Serpents, long and short, and perfection of equipment and
appearance, the Baltic never saw before. Jarl Sigwald joined with new
ships by the way: "Had," he too, "a visit to King Burislav to pay; how
could he ever do it in better company?" and studiously and skilfully
ingratiated himself with King Olaf. Old Burislav, when they arrived,
proved altogether courteous, handsome, and amenable; agreed at once to
Olaf's claims for his now queen, did the rites of hospitality with a
generous plenitude to Olaf; who cheerily renewed acquaintance with that
country, known to him in early days (the cradle of his fortunes in the
viking line), and found old friends there still surviving, joyful to
meet him again. Jarl Sigwald encouraged these delays, King Svein and Co.
not being yet quite ready. "Get ready!" Sigwald directed them, and they
diligently did. Olaf's men, their business now done, were impatient to
be home; and grudged every day of loitering there; but, till Sigwald
pleased, such his power of flattering and cajoling Tryggveson, they
could not get away.

At length, Sigwald's secret messengers reporting all ready on the part
of Svein and Co., Olaf took farewell of Burislav and Wendland, and
all gladly sailed away. Svein, Eric, and the Swedish king, with their
combined fleets, lay in wait behind some cape in a safe little bay of
some island, then called Svolde, but not in our time to be found; the
Baltic tumults in the fourteenth century having swallowed it, as some
think, and leaving us uncertain whether it was in the neighborhood of
Rugen Island or in the Sound of Elsinore. There lay Svein, Eric, and Co.
waiting till Tryggveson and his fleet came up, Sigwald's spy messengers
daily reporting what progress he and it had made. At length, one bright
summer morning, the fleet made appearance, sailing in loose order,
Sigwald, as one acquainted with the shoal places, steering ahead, and
showing them the way.

Snorro rises into one of his pictorial fits, seized with enthusiasm at
the thought of such a fleet, and reports to us largely in what order
Tryggveson's winged Coursers of the Deep, in long series, for perhaps an
hour or more, came on, and what the three potentates, from their knoll
of vantage, said of each as it hove in sight, Svein thrice over guessed
this and the other noble vessel to be the Long Serpent; Eric, always
correcting him, "No, that is not the Long Serpent yet" (and aside
always), "Nor shall you be lord of it, king, when it does come." The
Long Serpent itself did make appearance. Eric, Svein, and the Swedish
king hurried on board, and pushed out of their hiding-place into
the open sea. Treacherous Sigwald, at the beginning of all this, had
suddenly doubled that cape of theirs, and struck into the bay out of
sight, leaving the foremost Tryggveson ships astonished, and uncertain
what to do, if it were not simply to strike sail and wait till Olaf
himself with the Long Serpent arrived.

Olaf's chief captains, seeing the enemy's huge fleet come out, and
how the matter lay, strongly advised King Olaf to elude this stroke of
treachery, and, with all sail, hold on his course, fight being now on so
unequal terms. Snorro says, the king, high on the quarter-deck where
he stood, replied, "Strike the sails; never shall men of mine think of
flight. I never fled from battle. Let God dispose of my life; but flight
I will never take." And so the battle arrangements immediately began,
and the battle with all fury went loose; and lasted hour after hour,
till almost sunset, if I well recollect. "Olaf stood on the Serpent's
quarter-deck," says Snorro, "high over the others. He had a gilt shield
and a helmet inlaid with gold; over his armor he had a short red coat,
and was easily distinguished from other men." Snorro's account of the
battle is altogether animated, graphic, and so minute that antiquaries
gather from it, if so disposed (which we but little are), what the
methods of Norse sea-fighting were; their shooting of arrows, casting
of javelins, pitching of big stones, ultimately boarding, and mutual
clashing and smashing, which it would not avail us to speak of here.
Olaf stood conspicuous all day, throwing javelins, of deadly aim, with
both hands at once; encouraging, fighting and commanding like a highest
sea-king.

The Danish fleet, the Swedish fleet, were, both of them, quickly dealt
with, and successively withdrew out of shot-range. And then Jarl Eric
came up, and fiercely grappled with the Long Serpent, or, rather, with
her surrounding comrades; and gradually, as they were beaten empty of
men, with the Long Serpent herself. The fight grew ever fiercer, more
furious. Eric was supplied with new men from the Swedes and Danes; Olaf
had no such resource, except from the crews of his own beaten ships, and
at length this also failed him; all his ships, except the Long Serpent,
being beaten and emptied. Olaf fought on unyielding. Eric twice boarded
him, was twice repulsed. Olaf kept his quarterdeck; unconquerable,
though left now more and more hopeless, fatally short of help. A tall
young man, called Einar Tamberskelver, very celebrated and important
afterwards in Norway, and already the best archer known, kept busy with
his bow. Twice he nearly shot Jarl Eric in his ship. "Shoot me that
man," said Jarl Eric to a bowman near him; and, just as Tamberskelver
was drawing his bow the third time, an arrow hit it in the middle
and broke it in two. "What is this that has broken?" asked King Olaf.
"Norway from thy hand, king," answered Tamberskelver. Tryggveson's men,
he observed with surprise, were striking violently on Eric's; but to no
purpose: nobody fell. "How is this?" asked Tryggveson. "Our swords are
notched and blunted, king; they do not cut." Olaf stept down to his
arm-chest; delivered out new swords; and it was observed as he did it,
blood ran trickling from his wrist; but none knew where the wound was.
Eric boarded a third time. Olaf, left with hardly more than one man,
sprang overboard (one sees that red coat of his still glancing in the
evening sun), and sank in the deep waters to his long rest.

Rumor ran among his people that he still was not dead; grounding on some
movement by the ships of that traitorous Sigwald, they fancied Olaf had
dived beneath the keels of his enemies, and got away with Sigwald, as
Sigwald himself evidently did. "Much was hoped, supposed, spoken," says
one old mourning Skald; "but the truth was, Olaf Tryggveson was never
seen in Norseland more." Strangely he remains still a shining figure to
us; the wildly beautifulest man, in body and in soul, that one has ever
heard of in the North.



CHAPTER VIII. JARLS ERIC AND SVEIN.

Jarl Eric, splendent with this victory, not to speak of that over the
Jomsburgers with his father long ago, was now made Governor of Norway:
Governor or quasi-sovereign, with his brother, Jarl. Svein, as partner,
who, however, took but little hand in governing;--and, under the
patronage of Svein Double-Beard and the then Swedish king (Olaf his
name, Sigrid the Proud, his mother's), administered it, they say, with
skill and prudence for above fourteen years. Tryggveson's death is
understood and laboriously computed to have happened in the year 1000;
but there is no exact chronology in these things, but a continual
uncertain guessing after such; so that one eye in History as regards
them is as if put out;--neither indeed have I yet had the luck to find
any decipherable and intelligible map of Norway: so that the other
eye of History is much blinded withal, and her path through those wild
regions and epochs is an extremely dim and chaotic one. An evil that
much demands remedying, and especially wants some first attempt at
remedying, by inquirers into English History; the whole period from
Egbert, the first Saxon King of England, on to Edward the Confessor,
the last, being everywhere completely interwoven with that of their
mysterious, continually invasive "Danes," as they call them, and
inextricably unintelligible till these also get to be a little
understood, and cease to be utterly dark, hideous, and mythical to us as
they now are.

King Olaf Tryggveson is the first Norseman who is expressly mentioned
to have been in England by our English History books, new or old; and of
him it is merely said that he had an interview with King Ethelred II. at
Andover, of a pacific and friendly nature,--though it is absurdly added
that the noble Olaf was converted to Christianity by that extremely
stupid Royal Person. Greater contrast in an interview than in this
at Andover, between heroic Olaf Tryggveson and Ethelred the forever
Unready, was not perhaps seen in the terrestrial Planet that day.
Olaf or "Olaus," or "Anlaf," as they name him, did "engage on oath to
Ethelred not to invade England any more," and kept his promise, they
farther say. Essentially a truth, as we already know, though the
circumstances were all different; and the promise was to a devout High
Priest, not to a crowned Blockhead and cowardly Do-nothing. One other
"Olaus" I find mentioned in our Books, two or three centuries before,
at a time when there existed no such individual; not to speak of several
Anlafs, who sometimes seem to mean Olaf and still oftener to mean nobody
possible. Which occasions not a little obscurity in our early History,
says the learned Selden. A thing remediable, too, in which, if any
Englishman of due genius (or even capacity for standing labor), who
understood the Icelandic and Anglo-Saxon languages, would engage in
it, he might do a great deal of good, and bring the matter into a
comparatively lucid state. Vain aspirations,--or perhaps not altogether
vain.

At the time of Olaf Tryggveson's death, and indeed long before, King
Svein Double-Beard had always for chief enterprise the Conquest of
England, and followed it by fits with extreme violence and impetus;
often advancing largely towards a successful conclusion; but never, for
thirteen years yet, getting it concluded. He possessed long since all
England north of Watling Street. That is to say, Northumberland, East
Anglia (naturally full of Danish settlers by this time), were fixedly
his; Mercia, his oftener than not; Wessex itself, with all the coasts,
he was free to visit, and to burn and rob in at discretion. There or
elsewhere, Ethelred the Unready had no battle in him whatever; and,
for a forty years after the beginning of his reign, England excelled in
anarchic stupidity, murderous devastation, utter misery, platitude, and
sluggish contemptibility, all the countries one has read of. Apparently
a very opulent country, too; a ready skill in such arts and fine arts
as there were; Svein's very ships, they say, had their gold dragons,
top-mast pennons, and other metallic splendors generally wrought for
them in England. "Unexampled prosperity" in the manufacture way not
unknown there, it would seem! But co-existing with such spiritual
bankruptcy as was also unexampled, one would hope. Read Lupus
(Wulfstan), Archbishop of York's amazing _Sermon_ on the subject, [8]
addressed to contemporary audiences; setting forth such a state of
things,--sons selling their fathers, mothers, and sisters as Slaves to
the Danish robber; themselves living in debauchery, blusterous gluttony,
and depravity; the details of which are well-nigh incredible, though
clearly stated as things generally known,--the humor of these poor
wretches sunk to a state of what we may call greasy desperation, "Let us
eat and drink, for to-morrow we die." The manner in which they treated
their own English nuns, if young, good-looking, and captive to the
Danes; buying them on a kind of brutish or subter-brutish "Greatest
Happiness Principle" (for the moment), and by a Joint-Stock arrangement,
far transcends all human speech or imagination, and awakens in one the
momentary red-hot thought, The Danes have served you right, ye accursed!
The so-called soldiers, one finds, made not the least fight anywhere;
could make none, led and guided as they were, and the "Generals" often
enough traitors, always ignorant, and blockheads, were in the habit,
when expressly commanded to fight, of taking physic, and declaring that
nature was incapable of castor-oil and battle both at once. This
ought to be explained a little to the modern English and their
War-Secretaries, who undertake the conduct of armies. The undeniable
fact is, defeat on defeat was the constant fate of the English; during
these forty years not one battle in which they were not beaten. No gleam
of victory or real resistance till the noble Edmund Ironside (whom it
is always strange to me how such an Ethelred could produce for son)
made his appearance and ran his brief course, like a great and far-seen
meteor, soon extinguished without result. No remedy for England in that
base time, but yearly asking the victorious, plundering, burning and
murdering Danes, "How much money will you take to go away?" Thirty
thousand pounds in silver, which the annual _Danegelt_ soon rose to,
continued to be about the average yearly sum, though generally on the
increasing hand; in the last year I think it had risen to seventy-two
thousand pounds in silver, raised yearly by a tax (Income-tax of its
kind, rudely levied), the worst of all remedies, good for the day only.
Nay, there was one remedy still worse, which the miserable Ethelred
once tried: that of massacring "all the Danes settled in England"
(practically, of a few thousands or hundreds of them), by treachery and
a kind of Sicilian Vespers. Which issued, as such things usually do, in
terrible monition to you not to try the like again! Issued, namely, in
redoubled fury on the Danish part; new fiercer invasion by Svein's
Jarl Thorkel; then by Svein himself; which latter drove the miserable
Ethelred, with wife and family, into Normandy, to wife's brother, the
then Duke there; and ended that miserable struggle by Svein's becoming
King of England himself. Of this disgraceful massacre, which it would
appear has been immensely exaggerated in the English books, we can
happily give the exact date (A.D. 1002); and also of Svein's victorious
accession (A.D. 1013), [9]--pretty much the only benefit one gets out of
contemplating such a set of objects.

King Svein's first act was to levy a terribly increased Income-Tax
for the payment of his army. Svein was levying it with a stronghanded
diligence, but had not yet done levying it, when, at Gainsborough one
night, he suddenly died; smitten dead, once used to be said, by St.
Edmund, whilom murdered King of the East Angles; who could not bear
to see his shrine and monastery of St. Edmundsbury plundered by the
Tyrant's tax-collectors, as they were on the point of being. In all ways
impossible, however,--Edmund's own death did not occur till two years
after Svein's. Svein's death, by whatever cause, befell 1014; his fleet,
then lying in the Humber; and only Knut, [10] his eldest son (hardly
yet eighteen, count some), in charge of it; who, on short counsel, and
arrangement about this questionable kingdom of his, lifted anchor;
made for Sandwich, a safer station at the moment; "cut off the feet and
noses" (one shudders, and hopes not, there being some discrepancy about
it!) of his numerous hostages that had been delivered to King Svein;
set them ashore;--and made for Denmark, his natural storehouse and
stronghold, as the hopefulest first thing he could do.

Knut soon returned from Denmark, with increase of force sufficient for
the English problem; which latter he now ended in a victorious, and
essentially, for himself and chaotic England, beneficent manner. Became
widely known by and by, there and elsewhere, as Knut the Great; and is
thought by judges of our day to have really merited that title. A most
nimble, sharp-striking, clear-thinking, prudent and effective man, who
regulated this dismembered and distracted England in its Church matters,
in its State matters, like a real King. Had a Standing Army (_House
Carles_), who were well paid, well drilled and disciplined, capable of
instantly quenching insurrection or breakage of the peace; and piously
endeavored (with a signal earnestness, and even devoutness, if we look
well) to do justice to all men, and to make all men rest satisfied with
justice. In a word, he successfully strapped up, by every true method
and regulation, this miserable, dislocated, and dissevered mass
of bleeding Anarchy into something worthy to be called an England
again;--only that he died too soon, and a second "Conqueror" of us,
still weightier of structure, and under improved auspices, became
possible, and was needed here! To appearance, Knut himself was capable
of being a Charlemagne of England and the North (as has been already
said or quoted), had he only lived twice as long as he did. But his
whole sum of years seems not to have exceeded forty. His father Svein
of the Forkbeard is reckoned to have been fifty to sixty when St. Edmund
finished him at Gainsborough. We now return to Norway, ashamed of this
long circuit which has been a truancy more or less.



CHAPTER IX. KING OLAF THE THICK-SET'S VIKING DAYS

King Harald Graenske, who, with another from Russia accidentally lodging
beside him, got burned to death in Sweden, courting that unspeakable
Sigrid the Proud,--was third cousin or so to Tryggve, father of our
heroic Olaf. Accurately counted, he is great-grandson of Bjorn the
Chapman, first of Haarfagr's sons whom Eric Bloodaxe made away with. His
little "kingdom," as he called it, was a district named the Greenland
(_Graeneland_); he himself was one of those little Haarfagr kinglets
whom Hakon Jarl, much more Olaf Tryggveson, was content to leave
reigning, since they would keep the peace with him. Harald had a loving
wife of his own, Aasta the name of her, soon expecting the birth of her
and his pretty babe, named Olaf,--at the time he went on that deplorable
Swedish adventure, the foolish, fated creature, and ended self and
kingdom altogether. Aasta was greatly shocked; composed herself however;
married a new husband, Sigurd Syr, a kinglet, and a great-grandson of
Harald Fairhair, a man of great wealth, prudence, and influence in those
countries; in whose house, as favorite and well-beloved stepson, little
Olaf was wholesomely and skilfully brought up. In Sigurd's house he had,
withal, a special tutor entertained for him, one Rane, known as Rane the
Far-travelled, by whom he could be trained, from the earliest basis, in
Norse accomplishments and arts. New children came, one or two; but
Olaf, from his mother, seems always to have known that he was the
distinguished and royal article there. One day his Foster-father,
hurrying to leave home on business, hastily bade Olaf, no other being
by, saddle his horse for him. Olaf went out with the saddle, chose the
biggest he-goat about, saddled that, and brought it to the door by way
of horse. Old Sigurd, a most grave man, grinned sardonically at the
sight. "Hah, I see thou hast no mind to take commands from me; thou art
of too high a humor to take commands." To which, says Snorro, Boy Olaf
answered little except by laughing, till Sigurd saddled for himself, and
rode away. His mother Aasta appears to have been a thoughtful, prudent
woman, though always with a fierce royalism at the bottom of her memory,
and a secret implacability on that head.

At the age of twelve Olaf went to sea; furnished with a little fleet,
and skilful sea-counsellor, expert old Rane, by his Foster-father,
and set out to push his fortune in the world. Rane was a steersman and
counsellor in these incipient times; but the crew always called Olaf
"King," though at first, as Snorro thinks, except it were in the hour of
battle, he merely pulled an oar. He cruised and fought in this capacity
on many seas and shores; passed several years, perhaps till the age
of nineteen or twenty, in this wild element and way of life; fighting
always in a glorious and distinguished manner. In the hour of battle,
diligent enough "to amass property," as the Vikings termed it; and in
the long days and nights of sailing, given over, it is likely, to his
own thoughts and the unfathomable dialogue with the ever-moaning Sea;
not the worst High School a man could have, and indeed infinitely
preferable to the most that are going even now, for a high and deep
young soul.

His first distinguished expedition was to Sweden: natural to go thither
first, to avenge his poor father's death, were it nothing more. Which
he did, the Skalds say, in a distinguished manner; making victorious and
handsome battle for himself, in entering Maelare Lake; and in getting
out of it again, after being frozen there all winter, showing still more
surprising, almost miraculous contrivance and dexterity. This was the
first of his glorious victories, of which the Skalds reckon up some
fourteen or thirteen very glorious indeed, mostly in the Western and
Southern countries, most of all in England; till the name of Olaf
Haraldson became quite famous in the Viking and strategic world. He
seems really to have learned the secrets of his trade, and to have been,
then and afterwards, for vigilance, contrivance, valor, and promptitude
of execution, a superior fighter. Several exploits recorded of him
betoken, in simple forms, what may be called a military genius.

The principal, and to us the alone interesting, of his exploits seem
to have lain in England, and, what is further notable, always on the
anti-Svein side. English books do not mention him at all that I can
find; but it is fairly credible that, as the Norse records report,
in the end of Ethelred's reign, he was the ally or hired general of
Ethelred, and did a great deal of sea-fighting, watching, sailing, and
sieging for this miserable king and Edmund Ironside, his son. Snorro
says expressly, London, the impregnable city, had to be besieged again
for Ethelred's behoof (in the interval between Svein's death and young
Knut's getting back from Denmark), and that our Olaf Haraldson was
the great engineer and victorious captor of London on that singular
occasion,--London captured for the first time. The Bridge, as usual,
Snorro says, offered almost insuperable obstacles. But the engineering
genius of Olaf contrived huge "platforms of wainscoting  [old walls
of wooden houses, in fact], bound together by withes;" these, carried
steadily aloft above the ships, will (thinks Olaf) considerably secure
them and us from the destructive missiles, big boulder stones, and
other, mischief profusely showered down on us, till we get under the
Bridge with axes and cables, and do some good upon it. Olaf's plan
was tried; most of the other ships, in spite of their wainscoting and
withes, recoiled on reaching the Bridge, so destructive were the boulder
and other missile showers. But Olaf's ships and self got actually under
the Bridge; fixed all manner of cables there; and then, with the river
current in their favor, and the frightened ships rallying to help in
this safer part of the enterprise, tore out the important piles and
props, and fairly broke the poor Bridge, wholly or partly, down into
the river, and its Danish defenders into immediate surrender. That is
Snorro's account.

On a previous occasion, Olaf had been deep in a hopeful combination with
Ethelred's two younger sons, Alfred and Edward, afterwards King Edward
the Confessor: That they two should sally out from Normandy in strong
force, unite with Olaf in ditto, and, landing on the Thames, do
something effectual for themselves. But impediments, bad weather or the
like, disheartened the poor Princes, and it came to nothing. Olaf was
much in Normandy, what they then called Walland; a man held in honor by
those Norman Dukes.

What amount of "property" he had amassed I do not know, but could prove,
were it necessary, that he had acquired some tactical or even strategic
faculty and real talent for war. At Lymfjord, in Jutland, but some
years after this (A.D. 1027), he had a sea-battle with the great Knut
himself,--ships combined with flood-gates, with roaring, artificial
deluges; right well managed by King Olaf; which were within a
hair's-breadth of destroying Knut, now become a King and Great; and did
in effect send him instantly running. But of this more particularly by
and by.

What still more surprises me is the mystery, where Olaf, in this
wandering, fighting, sea-roving life, acquired his deeply religious
feeling, his intense adherence to the Christian Faith. I suppose it
had been in England, where many pious persons, priestly and other, were
still to be met with, that Olaf had gathered these doctrines; and that
in those his unfathomable dialogues with the ever-moaning Ocean, they
had struck root downwards in the soul of him, and borne fruit upwards to
the degree so conspicuous afterwards. It is certain he became a deeply
pious man during these long Viking cruises; and directed all his
strength, when strength and authority were lent him, to establishing
the Christian religion in his country, and suppressing and abolishing
Vikingism there; both of which objects, and their respective worth and
unworth, he, must himself have long known so well.

It was well on in A.D. 1016 that Knut gained his last victory, at
Ashdon, in Essex, where the earth pyramids and antique church near by
still testify the thankful piety of Knut,--or, at lowest his joy at
having _won_ instead of lost and perished, as he was near doing there.
And it was still this same year when the noble Edmund Ironside, after
forced partition-treaty "in the Isle of Alney," got scandalously
murdered, and Knut became indisputable sole King of England, and
decisively settled himself to his work of governing there. In the year
before either of which events, while all still hung uncertain for Knut,
and even Eric Jarl of Norway had to be summoned in aid of him, in that
year 1015, as one might naturally guess and as all Icelandic hints
and indications lead us to date the thing, Olaf had decided to give
up Vikingism in all its forms; to return to Norway, and try whether he
could not assert the place and career that belonged to him there. Jarl
Eric had vanished with all his war forces towards England, leaving only
a boy, Hakon, as successor, and Svein, his own brother,--a quiet man,
who had always avoided war. Olaf landed in Norway without obstacle; but
decided to be quiet till he had himself examined and consulted friends.

His reception by his mother Aasta was of the kindest and proudest, and
is lovingly described by Snorro. A pretty idyllic, or epic piece, of
_Norse_ Homeric type: How Aasta, hearing of her son's advent, set all
her maids and menials to work at the top of their speed; despatched a
runner to the harvest-field, where her husband Sigurd was, to warn him
to come home and dress. How Sigurd was standing among his harvest folk,
reapers and binders; and what he had on,--broad slouch hat, with veil
(against the midges), blue kirtle, hose of I forget what color, with
laced boots; and in his hand a stick with silver head and ditto ring
upon it;--a personable old gentleman, of the eleventh century, in those
parts. Sigurd was cautious, prudentially cunctatory, though heartily
friendly in his counsel to Olaf as to the King question. Aasta had a
Spartan tone in her wild maternal heart; and assures Olaf that she, with
a half-reproachful glance at Sigurd, will stand by him to the death in
this his just and noble enterprise. Sigurd promises to consult farther
in his neighborhood, and to correspond by messages; the result is, Olaf
resolutely pushing forward himself, resolves to call a Thing, and
openly claim his kingship there. The Thing itself was willing enough:
opposition parties do here and there bestir themselves; but Olaf
is always swifter than they. Five kinglets somewhere in the
Uplands, [11]--all descendants of Haarfagr; but averse to break the
peace, which Jarl Eric and Hakon Jarl both have always willingly allowed
to peaceable people,--seem to be the main opposition party. These five
take the field against Olaf with what force they have; Olaf, one night,
by beautiful celerity and strategic practice which a Friedrich or a
Turenne might have approved, surrounds these Five; and when morning
breaks, there is nothing for them but either death, or else instant
surrender, and swearing of fealty to King Olaf. Which latter branch of
the alternative they gladly accept, the whole five of them, and go home
again.

This was a beautiful bit of war-practice by King Olaf on land. By
another stroke still more compendious at sea, he had already settled
poor young Hakon, and made him peaceable for a long while. Olaf by
diligent quest and spy-messaging, had ascertained that Hakon, just
returning from Denmark and farewell to Papa and Knut, both now under way
for England, was coasting north towards Trondhjem; and intended on or
about such a day to land in such and such a fjord towards the end of
this Trondhjem voyage. Olaf at once mans two big ships, steers through
the narrow mouth of the said fjord, moors one ship on the north shore,
another on the south; fixes a strong cable, well sunk under water, to
the capstans of these two; and in all quietness waits for Hakon. Before
many hours, Hakon's royal or quasi-royal barge steers gaily into this
fjord; is a little surprised, perhaps, to see within the jaws of it two
big ships at anchor, but steers gallantly along, nothing doubting. Olaf
with a signal of "All hands," works his two capstans; has the cable
up high enough at the right moment, catches with it the keel of poor
Hakon's barge, upsets it, empties it wholly into the sea. Wholly into
the sea; saves Hakon, however, and his people from drowning, and brings
them on board. His dialogue with poor young Hakon, especially poor young
Hakon's responses, is very pretty. Shall I give it, out of Snorro, and
let the reader take it for as authentic as he can? It is at least
the true image of it in authentic Snorro's head, little more than two
centuries later.

"Jarl Hakon was led up to the king's ship. He was the handsomest man
that could be seen. He had long hair as fine as silk, bound about his
head with a gold ornament. When he sat down in the forehold the king
said to him:

_King._ "'It is not false, what is said of your family, that ye are
handsome people to look at; but now your luck has deserted you.'

_Hakon._ "'It has always been the case that success is changeable; and
there is no luck in the matter. It has gone with your family as with
mine to have by turns the better lot. I am little beyond childhood in
years; and at any rate we could not have defended ourselves, as we did
not expect any attack on the way. It may turn out better with us another
time.'

_King._ "'Dost thou not apprehend that thou art in such a condition
that, hereafter, there can be neither victory nor defeat for thee?'

_Hakon._ "'That is what only thou canst determine, King, according to
thy pleasure.'

_King._ "'What wilt thou give me, Jarl, if, for this time, I let thee
go, whole and unhurt?'

_Hakon._ "'What wilt thou take, King?'

_King._ "'Nothing, except that thou shalt leave the country; give up thy
kingdom; and take an oath that thou wilt never go into battle against
me.'" [12]

Jarl Hakon accepted the generous terms; went to England and King Knut,
and kept his bargain for a good few years; though he was at last driven,
by pressure of King Knut, to violate it,--little to his profit, as we
shall see. One victorious naval battle with Jarl Svein, Hakon's uncle,
and his adherents, who fled to Sweden, after his beating,--battle not
difficult to a skilful, hard-hitting king,--was pretty much all the
actual fighting Olaf had to do in this enterprise. He various times
met angry Bonders and refractory Things with arms in their hand; but by
skilful, firm management,--perfectly patient, but also perfectly ready
to be active,--he mostly managed without coming to strokes; and was
universally recognized by Norway as its real king. A promising young
man, and fit to be a king, thinks Snorro. Only of middle stature, almost
rather shortish; but firm-standing, and stout-built; so that they got
to call him Olaf the Thick (meaning Olaf the Thick-set, or Stout-built),
though his final epithet among them was infinitely higher. For the
rest, "a comely, earnest, prepossessing look; beautiful yellow hair in
quantity; broad, honest face, of a complexion pure as snow and rose;"
and finally (or firstly) "the brightest eyes in the world; such that,
in his anger, no man could stand them." He had a heavy task ahead, and
needed all his qualities and fine gifts to get it done.



CHAPTER X. REIGN OF KING OLAF THE SAINT.

The late two Jarls, now gone about their business, had both been
baptized, and called themselves Christians. But during their government
they did nothing in the conversion way; left every man to choose his own
God or Gods; so that some had actually two, the Christian God by land,
and at sea Thor, whom they considered safer in that element. And in
effect the mass of the people had fallen back into a sluggish heathenism
or half-heathenism, the life-labor of Olaf Tryggveson lying ruinous or
almost quite overset. The new Olaf, son of Harald, set himself with
all his strength to mend such a state of matters; and stood by his
enterprise to the end, as the one highest interest, including all
others, for his People and him. His method was by no means soft; on
the contrary, it was hard, rapid, severe,--somewhat on the model of
Tryggveson's, though with more of _bishoping_ and preaching superadded.
Yet still there was a great deal of mauling, vigorous punishing, and an
entire intolerance of these two things: Heathenism and Sea-robbery, at
least of Sea-robbery in the old style; whether in the style we moderns
still practise, and call privateering, I do not quite know. But
Vikingism proper had to cease in Norway; still more, Heathenism, under
penalties too severe to be borne; death, mutilation of limb, not to
mention forfeiture and less rigorous coercion. Olaf was inexorable
against violation of the law. "Too severe," cried many; to whom one
answers, "Perhaps in part _yes_, perhaps also in great part _no_;
depends altogether on the previous question, How far the law was the
eternal one of God Almighty in the universe, How far the law merely
of Olaf (destitute of right inspiration) left to his own passions and
whims?"

Many were the jangles Olaf had with the refractory Heathen Things and
Ironbeards of a new generation: very curious to see. Scarcely ever did
it come to fighting between King and Thing, though often enough near it;
but the Thing discerning, as it usually did in time, that the King was
stronger in men, seemed to say unanimously to itself, "We have lost,
then; baptize us, we must burn our old gods and conform." One new
feature we do slightly discern: here and there a touch of theological
argument on the heathen side. At one wild Thing, far up in the
Dovrefjeld, of a very heathen temper, there was much of that; not to be
quenched by King Olaf at the moment; so that it had to be adjourned till
the morrow, and again till the next day. Here are some traits of it,
much abridged from Snorro (who gives a highly punctual account), which
vividly represent Olaf's posture and manner of proceeding in such
intricacies.

The chief Ironbeard on this occasion was one Gudbrand, a very rugged
peasant; who, says Snorro, was like a king in that district. Some days
before, King Olaf, intending a religious Thing in those deeply heathen
parts, with alternative of Christianity or conflagration, is reported,
on looking down into the valley and the beautiful village of Loar
standing there, to have said wistfully, "What a pity it is that so
beautiful a village should be burnt!" Olaf sent out his message-token
all the same however, and met Gudbrand and an immense assemblage,
whose humor towards him was uncompliant to a high degree indeed. Judge
by this preliminary speech of Gudbrand to his Thing-people, while Olaf
was not yet arrived, but only advancing, hardly got to Breeden on the
other side of the hill: "A man has come to Loar who is called Olaf,"
said Gudbrand, "and will force upon us another faith than we had before,
and will break in pieces all our Gods. He says he has a much greater
and more powerful God; and it is wonderful that the earth does not burst
asunder under him, or that our God lets him go about unpunished when
he dares to talk such things. I know this for certain, that if we carry
Thor, who has always stood by us, out of our Temple that is standing
upon this farm, Olaf's God will melt away, and he and his men be made
nothing as soon as Thor looks upon them." Whereupon the Bonders all
shouted as one man, "Yea!"

Which tremendous message they even forwarded to Olaf, by Gudbrand's
younger son at the head of 700 armed men; but did not terrify Olaf with
it, who, on the contrary, drew up his troops, rode himself at the head
of them, and began a speech to the Bonders, in which he invited them to
adopt Christianity, as the one true faith for mortals.

Far from consenting to this, the Bonders raised a general shout, smiting
at the same time their shields with their weapons; but Olaf's men
advancing on them swiftly, and flinging spears, they turned and ran,
leaving Gudbrand's son behind, a prisoner, to whom Olaf gave his life:
"Go home now to thy father, and tell him I mean to be with him soon."

The son goes accordingly, and advises his father not to face Olaf; but
Gudbrand angrily replies: "Ha, coward! I see thou, too, art taken by
the folly that man is going about with;" and is resolved to fight. That
night, however, Gudbrand has a most remarkable Dream, or Vision: a Man
surrounded by light, bringing great terror with him, who warns Gudbrand
against doing battle with Olaf. "If thou dost, thou and all thy people
will fall; wolves will drag away thee and thine; ravens will tear
thee in stripes!" And lo, in telling this to Thord Potbelly, a sturdy
neighbor of his and henchman in the Thing, it is found that to Thord
also has come the self same terrible Apparition! Better propose truce to
Olaf (who seems to have these dreadful Ghostly Powers on his side), and
the holding of a Thing, to discuss matters between us. Thing assembles,
on a day of heavy rain. Being all seated, uprises King Olaf, and informs
them: "The people of Lesso, Loar, and Vaage, have accepted Christianity,
and broken down their idol-houses: they believe now in the True God, who
has made heaven and earth, and knows all things;" and sits down again
without more words.

"Gudbrand replies, 'We know nothing about him of whom thou speakest.
Dost thou call him God, whom neither thou nor any one else can see? But
we have a God who can be seen every day, although he is not out to-day
because the weather is wet; and he will appear to thee terrible and very
grand; and I expect that fear will mix with thy very blood when he comes
into the Thing. But since thou sayest thy God is so great, let him make
it so that to-morrow we have a cloudy day, but without rain, and then
let us meet again.'

"The king accordingly returned home to his lodging, taking Gudbrand's
son as a hostage; but he gave them a man as hostage in exchange. In
the evening the king asked Gudbrand's son What their God was like? He
replied that he bore the likeness of Thor; had a hammer in his hand; was
of great size, but hollow within; and had a high stand, upon which he
stood when he was out. 'Neither gold nor silver are wanting about him,
and every day he receives four cakes of bread, besides meat.' They then
went to bed; but the king watched all night in prayer. When day dawned
the king went to mass; then to table, and from thence to the Thing. The
weather was such as Gudbrand desired. Now the Bishop stood up in his
choir-robes, with bishop's coif on his head, and bishop's crosier in his
hand. He spoke to the Bonders of the true faith, told the many wonderful
acts of God, and concluded his speech well.

"Thord Potbelly replies, 'Many things we are told of by this learned man
with the staff in his hand, crooked at the top like a ram's horn. But
since you say, comrades, that your God is so powerful, and can do so
many wonders, tell him to make it clear sunshine to-morrow forenoon, and
then we shall meet here again, and do one of two things,--either agree
with you about this business, or fight you.' And they separated for the
day."

Overnight the king instructed Kolbein the Strong, an immense fellow,
the same who killed Gunhild's two brothers, that he, Kolbein, must
stand next him to-morrow; people must go down to where the ships of the
Bonders lay, and punctually bore holes in every one of them; _item_, to
the farms where their horses wore, and punctually unhalter the whole of
them, and let them loose: all which was done. Snorro continues:--

"Now the king was in prayer all night, beseeching God of his goodness
and mercy to release him from evil. When mass was ended, and morning was
gray, the king went to the Thing. When he came thither, some Bonders had
already arrived, and they saw a great crowd coming along, and bearing
among them a huge man's image, glancing with gold and silver. When
the Bonders who were at the Thing saw it, they started up, and bowed
themselves down before the ugly idol. Thereupon it was set down upon the
Thing field; and on the one side of it sat the Bonders, and on the other
the King and his people.

"Then Dale Gudbrand stood up and said, 'Where now, king, is thy God? I
think he will now carry his head lower; and neither thou, nor the man
with the horn, sitting beside thee there, whom thou callest Bishop, are
so bold to-day as on the former days. For now our God, who rules over
all, is come, and looks on you with an angry eye; and now I see well
enough that you are terrified, and scarcely dare raise your eyes. Throw
away now all your opposition, and believe in the God who has your fate
wholly in his hands.'

"The king now whispers to Kolbein the Strong, without the Bonders
perceiving it, 'If it come so in the course of my speech that the
Bonders look another way than towards their idol, strike him as hard as
thou canst with thy club.'

"The king then stood up and spoke. 'Much hast thou talked to us this
morning, and greatly hast thou wondered that thou canst not see our God;
but we expect that he will soon come to us. Thou wouldst frighten us
with thy God, who is both blind and deaf, and cannot even move about
without being carried; but now I expect it will be but a short time
before he meets his fate: for turn your eyes towards the east,--behold
our God advancing in great light.'

"The sun was rising, and all turned to look. At that moment Kolbein gave
their God a stroke, so that he quite burst asunder; and there ran out
of him mice as big almost as cats, and reptiles and adders. The Bonders
were so terrified that some fled to their ships; but when they sprang
out upon them the ships filled with water, and could not get away.
Others ran to their horses, but could not find them. The king then
ordered the Bonders to be called together, saying he wanted to speak
with them; on which the Bonders came back, and the Thing was again
seated.

"The king rose up and said, 'I do not understand what your noise and
running mean. You yourselves see what your God can do,--the idol you
adorned with gold and silver, and brought meat and provisions to. You
see now that the protecting powers, who used and got good of all that,
were the mice and adders, the reptiles and lizards; and surely they do
ill who trust to such, and will not abandon this folly. Take now your
gold and ornaments that are lying strewed on the grass, and give them to
your wives and daughters, but never hang them hereafter upon stocks and
stones. Here are two conditions between us to choose upon: either accept
Christianity, or fight this very day, and the victory be to them to whom
the God we worship gives it.'

"Then Dale Gudbrand stood up and said, 'We have sustained great damage
upon our God; but since he will not help us, we will believe in the God
whom thou believest in.'

"Then all received Christianity. The Bishop baptized Gudbrand and his
son. King Olaf and Bishop Sigurd left behind them teachers; and they who
met as enemies parted as friends. And afterwards Gudbrand built a church
in the valley." [13]

Olaf was by no means an unmerciful man,--much the reverse where he saw
good cause. There was a wicked old King Raerik, for example, one
of those five kinglets whom, with their bits of armaments, Olaf by
stratagem had surrounded one night, and at once bagged and subjected
when morning rose, all of them consenting; all of them except this
Raerik, whom Olaf, as the readiest sure course, took home with him;
blinded, and kept in his own house; finding there was no alternative but
that or death to the obstinate old dog, who was a kind of distant cousin
withal, and could not conscientiously be killed. Stone-blind old Raerik
was not always in murderous humor. Indeed, for most part he wore a
placid, conciliatory aspect, and said shrewd amusing things; but
had thrice over tried, with amazing cunning of contrivance, though
stone-blind, to thrust a dagger into Olaf and the last time had all but
succeeded. So that, as Olaf still refused to have him killed, it had
become a problem what was to be done with him. Olaf's good humor, as
well as _his_ quiet, ready sense and practicality, are manifested in his
final settlement of this Raerik problem. Olaf's laugh, I can perceive,
was not so loud as Tryggveson's but equally hearty, coming from the
bright mind of him!

Besides blind Raerik, Olaf had in his household one Thorarin, an
Icelander; a remarkably ugly man, says Snorro, but a far-travelled,
shrewdly observant, loyal-minded, and good-humored person, whom Olaf
liked to talk with. "Remarkably ugly," says Snorro, "especially in
his hands and feet, which were large and ill-shaped to a degree."
One morning Thorarin, who, with other trusted ones, slept in Olaf's
apartment, was lazily dozing and yawning, and had stretched one of his
feet out of the bed before the king awoke. The foot was still there when
Olaf did open his bright eyes, which instantly lighted on this foot.

"Well, here is a foot," says Olaf, gayly, "which one seldom sees the
match of; I durst venture there is not another so ugly in this city of
Nidaros."

"Hah, king!" said Thorarin, "there are few things one cannot match if
one seek long and take pains. I would bet, with thy permission, King, to
find an uglier."

"Done!" cried Olaf. Upon which Thorarin stretched out the other foot.

"A still uglier," cried he; "for it has lost the little toe."

"Ho, ho!" said Olaf; "but it is I who have gained the bet. The _less_ of
an ugly thing the less ugly, not the more!"

Loyal Thorarin respectfully submitted.

"What is to be my penalty, then? The king it is that must decide."

"To take me that wicked old Raerik to Leif Ericson in Greenland."

Which the Icelander did; leaving two vacant seats henceforth at Olaf's
table. Leif Ericson, son of Eric discoverer of America, quietly managed
Raerik henceforth; sent him to Iceland,--I think to father Eric himself;
certainly to some safe hand there, in whose house, or in some still
quieter neighboring lodging, at his own choice, old Raerik spent the
last three years of his life in a perfectly quiescent manner.

Olaf's struggles in the matter of religion had actually settled that
question in Norway. By these rough methods of his, whatever we may think
of them, Heathenism had got itself smashed dead; and was no more heard
of in that country. Olaf himself was evidently a highly devout and pious
man;--whosoever is born with Olaf's temper now will still find, as Olaf
did, new and infinite field for it! Christianity in Norway had the like
fertility as in other countries; or even rose to a higher, and what
Dahlmann thinks, exuberant pitch, in the course of the two centuries
which followed that of Olaf. Him all testimony represents to us as a
most righteous no less than most religious king. Continually vigilant,
just, and rigorous was Olaf's administration of the laws; repression
of robbery, punishment of injustice, stern repayment of evil-doers,
wherever he could lay hold of them.

Among the Bonder or opulent class, and indeed everywhere, for the poor
too can be sinners and need punishment, Olaf had, by this course of
conduct, naturally made enemies. His severity so visible to all, and
the justice and infinite beneficence of it so invisible except to a very
few. But, at any rate, his reign for the first ten years was victorious;
and might have been so to the end, had it not been intersected, and
interfered with, by King Knut in his far bigger orbit and current of
affairs and interests. Knut's English affairs and Danish being all
settled to his mind, he seems, especially after that year of pilgrimage
to Rome, and association with the Pontiffs and Kaisers of the world on
that occasion, to have turned his more particular attention upon Norway,
and the claims he himself had there. Jarl Hakon, too, sister's son of
Knut, and always well seen by him, had long been busy in this direction,
much forgetful of that oath to Olaf when his barge got canted over
by the cable of two capstans, and his life was given him, not without
conditions altogether!

About the year 1026 there arrived two splendid persons out of England,
bearing King Knut the Great's letter and seal, with a message, likely
enough to be far from welcome to Olaf. For some days Olaf refused to see
them or their letter, shrewdly guessing what the purport would be. Which
indeed was couched in mild language, but of sharp meaning enough: a
notice to King Olaf namely, That Norway was properly, by just heritage,
Knut the Great's; and that Olaf must become the great Knut's liegeman,
and pay tribute to him, or worse would follow. King Olaf listening to
these two splendid persons and their letter, in indignant silence till
they quite ended, made answer: "I have heard say, by old accounts
there are, that King Gorm of Denmark  [Blue-tooth's father, Knut's
great-grandfather] was considered but a small king; having Denmark only
and few people to rule over. But the kings who succeeded him thought
that insufficient for them; and it has since come so far that King Knut
rules over both Denmark and England, and has conquered for himself a
part of Scotland. And now he claims also my paternal bit of heritage;
cannot be contented without that too. Does he wish to rule over all the
countries of the North? Can he eat up all the kale in England itself,
this Knut the Great? He shall do that, and reduce his England to a
desert, before I lay my head in his hands, or show him any other kind
of vassalage. And so I bid you tell him these my words: I will defend
Norway with battle-axe and sword as long as life is given me, and will
pay tax to no man for my kingdom." Words which naturally irritated Knut
to a high degree.

Next year accordingly (year 1027), tenth or eleventh year of Olaf's
reign, there came bad rumors out of England: That Knut was equipping an
immense army,--land-army, and such a fleet as had never sailed before;
Knut's own ship in it,--a Gold Dragon with no fewer than sixty benches
of oars. Olaf and Onund King of Sweden, whose sister he had married,
well guessed whither this armament was bound. They were friends withal,
they recognized their common peril in this imminence; and had, in
repeated consultations, taken measures the best that their united skill
(which I find was mainly Olaf's but loyally accepted by the other) could
suggest. It was in this year that Olaf (with his Swedish king assisting)
did his grand feat upon Knut in Lymfjord of Jutland, which was already
spoken of. The special circumstances of which were these:

Knut's big armament arriving on the Jutish coasts too late in the
season, and the coast country lying all plundered into temporary wreck
by the two Norse kings, who shrank away on sight of Knut, there was
nothing could be done upon them by Knut this year,--or, if anything,
what? Knut's ships ran into Lymfjord, the safe-sheltered frith, or
intricate long straggle of friths and straits, which almost cuts Jutland
in two in that region; and lay safe, idly rocking on the waters there,
uncertain what to do farther. At last he steered in his big ship and
some others, deeper into the interior of Lymfjord, deeper and deeper
onwards to the mouth of a big river called the Helge (_Helge-aa_, the
Holy River, not discoverable in my poor maps, but certainly enough still
existing and still flowing somewhere among those intricate straits and
friths), towards the bottom of which Helge river lay, in some safe nook,
the small combined Swedish and Norse fleet, under the charge of Onund,
the Swedish king, while at the top or source, which is a biggish
mountain lake, King Olaf had been doing considerable engineering works,
well suited to such an occasion, and was now ready at a moment's notice.
Knut's fleet having idly taken station here, notice from the Swedish
king was instantly sent; instantly Olaf's well-engineered flood-gates
were thrown open; from the swollen lake a huge deluge of water was
let loose; Olaf himself with all his people hastening down to join his
Swedish friend, and get on board in time; Helge river all the while
alongside of him, with ever-increasing roar, and wider-spreading deluge,
hastening down the steeps in the night-watches. So that, along with Olaf
or some way ahead of him, came immeasurable roaring waste of waters
upon Knut's negligent fleet; shattered, broke, and stranded many of his
ships, and was within a trifle of destroying the Golden Dragon herself,
with Knut on board. Olaf and Onund, we need not say, were promptly there
in person, doing their very best; the railings of the Golden Dragon,
however, were too high for their little ships; and Jarl Ulf, husband
of Knut's sister, at the top of his speed, courageously intervening,
spoiled their stratagem, and saved Knut from this very dangerous pass.

Knut did nothing more this winter. The two Norse kings, quite unequal to
attack such an armament, except by ambush and engineering, sailed away;
again plundering at discretion on the Danish coast; carrying into Sweden
great booties and many prisoners; but obliged to lie fixed all winter;
and indeed to leave their fleets there for a series of winters,--Knut's
fleet, posted at Elsinore on both sides of the Sound, rendering all
egress from the Baltic impossible, except at his pleasure. Ulf's
opportune deliverance of his royal brother-in-law did not much bestead
poor Ulf himself. He had been in disfavor before, pardoned with
difficulty, by Queen Emma's intercession; an ambitious, officious,
pushing, stirring, and, both in England and Denmark, almost dangerous
man; and this conspicuous accidental merit only awoke new jealousy in
Knut. Knut, finding nothing pass the Sound worth much blockading, went
ashore; "and the day before Michaelmas," says Snorro, "rode with a great
retinue to Roeskilde." Snorro continues his tragic narrative of what
befell there:

"There Knut's brother-in-law, Jarl Ulf, had prepared a great feast for
him. The Jarl was the most agreeable of hosts; but the King was silent
and sullen. The Jarl talked to him in every way to make him cheerful,
and brought forward everything he could think of to amuse him; but the
King remained stern, and speaking little. At last the Jarl proposed a
game of chess, which he agreed to. A chess-board was produced, and they
played together. Jarl Ulf was hasty in temper, stiff, and in nothing
yielding; but everything he managed went on well in his hands: and he
was a great warrior, about whom there are many stories. He was the most
powerful man in Denmark next to the King. Jarl Ulf's sister, Gyda, was
married to Jarl Gudin (Godwin) Ulfnadson; and their sons were, Harald
King of England, and Jarl Tosti, Jarl Walthiof, Jarl Mauro-Kaare, and
Jarl Svein. Gyda was the name of their daughter, who was married to the
English King Edward, the Good (whom we call the Confessor).

"When they had played a while, the King made a false move; on which the
Jarl took a knight from him; but the King set the piece on the board
again, and told the Jarl to make another move. But the Jarl flew angry,
tumbled the chess-board over, rose, and went away. The King said, 'Run
thy ways, Ulf the Fearful.' The Jarl turned round at the door and said,
'Thou wouldst have run farther at Helge river hadst thou been left to
battle there. Thou didst not call me Ulf the Fearful when I hastened to
thy help while the Swedes were beating thee like a dog.' The Jarl then
went out, and went to bed.

"The following morning, while the King was putting on his clothes, he
said to his footboy, 'Go thou to Jarl Ulf and kill him.' The lad went,
was away a while, and then came back. The King said, 'Hast thou killed
the Jarl?' 'I did not kill him, for he was gone to St. Lucius's church.'
There was a man called Ivar the White, a Norwegian by birth, who was the
King's courtman and chamberlain. The King said to him, 'Go thou and kill
the Jarl.' Ivar went to the church, and in at the choir, and thrust
his sword through the Jarl, who died on the spot. Then Ivar went to the
King, with the bloody sword in his hand.

"The King said, 'Hast thou killed the Jarl?' 'I have killed him,' said
he. 'Thou hast done well,' answered the King." I

From a man who built so many churches (one on each battlefield where
he had fought, to say nothing of the others), and who had in him such
depths of real devotion and other fine cosmic quality, this does seem
rather strong! But it is characteristic, withal,--of the man, and
perhaps of the times still more. [14] In any case, it is an event worth
noting, the slain Jarl Ulf and his connections being of importance
in the history of Denmark and of England also. Ulf's wife was Astrid,
sister of Knut, and their only child was Svein, styled afterwards "Svein
Estrithson" ("Astrid-son") when he became noted in the world,--at this
time a beardless youth, who, on the back of this tragedy, fled hastily
to Sweden, where were friends of Ulf. After some ten years' eclipse
there, Knut and both his sons being now dead, Svein reappeared in
Denmark under a new and eminent figure, "Jarl of Denmark," highest
Liegeman to the then sovereign there. Broke his oath to said sovereign,
declared himself, Svein Estrithson, to be real King of Denmark; and,
after much preliminary trouble, and many beatings and disastrous flights
to and fro, became in effect such,--to the wonder of mankind; for he had
not had one victory to cheer him on, or any good luck or merit that one
sees, except that of surviving longer than some others. Nevertheless
he came to be the Restorer, so called, of Danish independence; sole
remaining representative of Knut (or Knut's sister), of Fork-beard,
Blue-tooth, and Old Gorm; and ancestor of all the subsequent kings
of Denmark for some 400 years; himself coming, as we see, only by the
Distaff side, all of the Sword or male side having died so soon. Early
death, it has been observed, was the Great Knut's allotment, and all his
posterity's as well;--fatal limit (had there been no others, which
we see there were) to his becoming "Charlemagne of the North" in any
considerable degree! Jarl Ulf, as we have seen, had a sister, Gyda by
name, wife to Earl Godwin ("Gudin Ulfnadsson," as Snorro calls him) a
very memorable Englishman, whose son and hers, King Harald, _Harold_
in English books, is the memorablest of all. These things ought to be
better known to English antiquaries, and will perhaps be alluded to
again.

This pretty little victory or affront, gained over Knut in _Lymfjord_,
was among the last successes of Olaf against that mighty man. Olaf, the
skilful captain he was, need not have despaired to defend his Norway
against Knut and all the world. But he learned henceforth, month by
month ever more tragically, that his own people, seeing softer prospects
under Knut, and in particular the chiefs of them, industriously bribed
by Knut for years past, had fallen away from him; and that his means of
defence were gone. Next summer, Knut's grand fleet sailed, unopposed,
along the coast of Norway; Knut summoning a Thing every here and
there, and in all of them meeting nothing but sky-high acclamation and
acceptance. Olaf, with some twelve little ships, all he now had, lay
quiet in some safe fjord, near Lindenaes, what we now call the Naze,
behind some little solitary isles on the southeast of Norway there;
till triumphant Knut had streamed home again. Home to England again
"Sovereign of Norway" now, with nephew Hakon appointed Jarl and
Vice-regent under him! This was the news Olaf met on venturing out;
and that his worst anticipations were not beyond the sad truth all, or
almost all, the chief Bonders and men of weight in Norway had declared
against him, and stood with triumphant Knut.

Olaf, with his twelve poor ships, steered vigorously along the coast to
collect money and force,--if such could now anywhere be had. He himself
was resolute to hold out, and try. "Sailing swiftly with a fair wind,
morning cloudy with some showers," he passed the coast of Jedderen,
which was Erling Skjalgson's country, when he got sure notice of an
endless multitude of ships, war-ships, armed merchant ships, all kinds
of shipping-craft, down to fishermen's boats, just getting under way
against him, under the command of Erling Skjalgson,--the powerfulest of
his subjects, once much a friend of Olaf's but now gone against him to
this length, thanks to Olaf's severity of justice, and Knut's abundance
in gold and promises for years back. To that complexion had it come with
Erling; sailing with this immense assemblage of the naval people and
populace of Norway to seize King Olaf, and bring him to the great Knut
dead or alive.

Erling had a grand new ship of his own, which far outsailed the general
miscellany of rebel ships, and was visibly fast gaining distance on Olaf
himself,--who well understood what Erling's puzzle was, between the tail
of his game (the miscellany of rebel ships, namely) that could not come
up, and the head or general prize of the game which was crowding all
sail to get away; and Olaf took advantage of the same. "Lower your
sails!" said Olaf to his men (though we must go slower).

"Ho you, we have lost sight of them!" said Erling to his, and put on all
his speed; Olaf going, soon after this, altogether invisible,--behind a
little island that he knew of, whence into a certain fjord or bay (Bay
of Fungen on the maps), which he thought would suit him. "Halt here, and
get out your arms," said Olaf, and had not to wait long till Erling came
bounding in, past the rocky promontory, and with astonishment beheld
Olaf's fleet of twelve with their battle-axes and their grappling-irons
all in perfect readiness. These fell on him, the unready Erling,
simultaneous, like a cluster of angry bees; and in a few minutes cleared
his ship of men altogether, except Erling himself. Nobody asked his
life, nor probably would have got it if he had. Only Erling still
stood erect on a high place on the poop, fiercely defensive, and very
difficult to get at. "Could not be reached at all," says Snorro, "except
by spears or arrows, and these he warded off with untiring dexterity;
no man in Norway, it was said, had ever defended himself so long alone
against many,"--an almost invincible Erling, had his cause been good.
Olaf himself noticed Erling's behavior, and said to him, from the
foredeck below, "Thou hast turned against me to-day, Erling." "The
eagles fight breast to breast," answers he. This was a speech of the
king's to Erling once long ago, while they stood fighting, not as now,
but side by side. The king, with some transient thought of possibility
going through his head, rejoins, "Wilt thou surrender, Erling?" "That
will I," answered he; took the helmet off his head; laid down sword and
shield; and went forward to the forecastle deck. The king pricked, I
think not very harshly, into Erling's chin or beard with the point of
his battle-axe, saying, "I must mark thee as traitor to thy Sovereign,
though." Whereupon one of the bystanders, Aslak Fitiaskalle, stupidly
and fiercely burst up; smote Erling on the head with his axe; so that
it struck fast in his brain and was instantly the death of Erling.
"Ill-luck attend thee for that stroke; thou hast struck Norway out of my
hand by it!" cried the king to Aslak; but forgave the poor fellow, who
had done it meaning well. The insurrectionary Bonder fleet arriving soon
after, as if for certain victory, was struck with astonishment at this
Erling catastrophe; and being now without any leader of authority,
made not the least attempt at battle; but, full of discouragement and
consternation, thankfully allowed Olaf to sail away on his northward
voyage, at discretion; and themselves went off lamenting, with Erling's
dead body.

This small victory was the last that Olaf had over his many enemies
at present. He sailed along, still northward, day after day; several
important people joined him; but the news from landward grew daily more
ominous: Bonders busily arming to rear of him; and ahead, Hakon still
more busily at Trondhjem, now near by, "--and he will end thy days,
King, if he have strength enough!" Olaf paused; sent scouts to a
hill-top: "Hakon's armament visible enough, and under way hitherward,
about the Isle of Bjarno, yonder!" Soon after, Olaf himself saw the
Bonder armament of twenty-five ships, from the southward, sail past in
the distance to join that of Hakon; and, worse still, his own ships, one
and another (seven in all), were slipping off on a like errand! He
made for the Fjord of Fodrar, mouth of the rugged strath called
Valdal,--which I think still knows Olaf and has now an "Olaf's Highway,"
where, nine centuries ago, it scarcely had a path. Olaf entered this
fjord, had his land-tent set up, and a cross beside it, on the small
level green behind the promontory there. Finding that his twelve poor
ships were now reduced to five, against a world all risen upon him, he
could not but see and admit to himself that there was no chance left;
and that he must withdraw across the mountains and wait for a better
time.

His journey through that wild country, in these forlorn and straitened
circumstances, has a mournful dignity and homely pathos, as described
by Snorro: how he drew up his five poor ships upon the beach, packed all
their furniture away, and with his hundred or so of attendants and their
journey-baggage, under guidance of some friendly Bonder, rode up into
the desert and foot of the mountains; scaled, after three days' effort
(as if by miracle, thought his attendants and thought Snorro), the
well-nigh precipitous slope that led across, never without miraculous
aid from Heaven and Olaf could baggage-wagons have ascended that path!
In short, How he fared along, beset by difficulties and the mournfulest
thoughts; but patiently persisted, steadfastly trusted in God; and was
fixed to return, and by God's help try again. An evidently very pious
and devout man; a good man struggling with adversity, such as the gods,
we may still imagine with the ancients, do look down upon as their
noblest sight.

He got to Sweden, to the court of his brother-in-law; kindly and nobly
enough received there, though gradually, perhaps, ill-seen by the now
authorities of Norway. So that, before long, he quitted Sweden; left his
queen there with her only daughter, his and hers, the only child they
had; he himself had an only son, "by a bondwoman," Magnus by name, who
came to great things afterwards; of whom, and of which, by and by. With
this bright little boy, and a selected escort of attendants, he moved
away to Russia, to King Jarroslav; where he might wait secure against
all risk of hurting kind friends by his presence. He seems to have been
an exile altogether some two years,--such is one's vague notion; for
there is no chronology in Snorro or his Sagas, and one is reduced to
guessing and inferring. He had reigned over Norway, reckoning from the
first days of his landing there to those last of his leaving it across
the Dovrefjeld, about fifteen years, ten of them shiningly victorious.

The news from Norway were naturally agitating to King Olaf and, in the
fluctuation of events there, his purposes and prospects varied much.
He sometimes thought of pilgriming to Jerusalem, and a henceforth
exclusively religious life; but for most part his pious thoughts
themselves gravitated towards Norway, and a stroke for his old place and
task there, which he steadily considered to have been committed to him
by God. Norway, by the rumors, was evidently not at rest. Jarl Hakon,
under the high patronage of his uncle, had lasted there but a little
while. I know not that his government was especially unpopular, nor
whether he himself much remembered his broken oath. It appears, however,
he had left in England a beautiful bride; and considering farther that
in England only could bridal ornaments and other wedding outfit of a
sufficiently royal kind be found, he set sail thither, to fetch her and
them himself. One evening of wildish-looking weather he was seen
about the northeast corner of the Pentland Frith; the night rose to be
tempestuous; Hakon or any timber of his fleet was never seen more. Had
all gone down,--broken oaths, bridal hopes, and all else; mouse and
man,--into the roaring waters. There was no farther Opposition-line; the
like of which had lasted ever since old heathen Hakon Jarl, down to this
his grandson Hakon's _finis_ in the Pentland Frith. With this Hakon's
disappearance it now disappeared.

Indeed Knut himself, though of an empire suddenly so great, was but a
temporary phenomenon. Fate had decided that the grand and wise Knut was
to be short-lived; and to leave nothing as successors but an ineffectual
young Harald Harefoot, who soon perished, and a still stupider
fiercely-drinking Harda-Knut, who rushed down of apoplexy (here in
London City, as I guess), with the goblet at his mouth, drinking health
and happiness at a wedding-feast, also before long.

Hakon having vanished in this dark way, there ensued a pause, both on
Knut's part and on Norway's. Pause or interregnum of some months, till
it became certain, first, whether Hakon were actually dead, secondly,
till Norway, and especially till King Knut himself, could decide what to
do. Knut, to the deep disappointment, which had to keep itself silent,
of three or four chief Norway men, named none of these three or four
Jarl of Norway; but bethought him of a certain Svein, a bastard son of
his own,--who, and almost still more his English mother, much desired a
career in the world fitter for him, thought they indignantly, than
that of captain over Jomsburg, where alone the father had been able to
provide for him hitherto. Svein was sent to Norway as king or vice-king
for Father Knut; and along with him his fond and vehement mother.
Neither of whom gained any favor from the Norse people by the kind of
management they ultimately came to show.

Olaf on news of this change, and such uncertainty prevailing everywhere
in Norway as to the future course of things, whether Svein would
come, as was rumored of at last, and be able to maintain himself if he
did,--thought there might be something in it of a chance for himself
and his rights. And, after lengthened hesitation, much prayer, pious
invocation, and consideration, decided to go and try it. The final
grain that had turned the balance, it appears, was a half-waking morning
dream, or almost ocular vision he had of his glorious cousin Olaf
Tryggveson, who severely admonished, exhorted, and encouraged him; and
disappeared grandly, just in the instant of Olaf's awakening; so that
Olaf almost fancied he had seen the very figure of him, as it melted
into air. "Let us on, let us on!" thought Olaf always after that. He
left his son, not in Russia, but in Sweden with the Queen, who proved
very good and carefully helpful in wise ways to him:--in Russia Olaf had
now nothing more to do but give his grateful adieus, and get ready.

His march towards Sweden, and from that towards Norway and the passes
of the mountains, down Vaerdal, towards Stickelstad, and the crisis
that awaited, is beautifully depicted by Snorro. It has, all of it,
the description (and we see clearly, the fact itself had), a kind of
pathetic grandeur, simplicity, and rude nobleness; something Epic or
Homeric, without the metre or the singing of Homer, but with all the
sincerity, rugged truth to nature, and much more of piety, devoutness,
reverence for what is forever High in this Universe, than meets us
in those old Greek Ballad-mongers. Singularly visual all of it, too,
brought home in every particular to one's imagination, so that it stands
out almost as a thing one actually saw.

Olaf had about three thousand men with him; gathered mostly as he fared
along through Norway. Four hundred, raised by one Dag, a kinsman whom he
had found in Sweden and persuaded to come with him, marched usually in
a separate body; and were, or might have been, rather an important
element. Learning that the Bonders were all arming, especially in
Trondhjem country, Olaf streamed down towards them in the closest order
he could. By no means very close, subsistence even for three thousand
being difficult in such a country. His speech was almost always free
and cheerful, though his thoughts always naturally were of a high and
earnest, almost sacred tone; devout above all. Stickelstad, a small
poor hamlet still standing where the valley ends, was seen by Olaf, and
tacitly by the Bonders as well, to be the natural place for offering
battle. There Olaf issued out from the hills one morning: drew himself
up according to the best rules of Norse tactics, rules of little
complexity, but perspicuously true to the facts. I think he had a clear
open ground still rather raised above the plain in front; he could see
how the Bonder army had not yet quite arrived, but was pouring forward,
in spontaneous rows or groups, copiously by every path. This was thought
to be the biggest army that ever met in Norway; "certainly not much
fewer than a hundred times a hundred men," according to Snorro; great
Bonders several of them, small Bonders very many,--all of willing
mind, animated with a hot sense of intolerable injuries. "King Olaf had
punished great and small with equal rigor," says Snorro; "which appeared
to the chief people of the country too severe; and animosity rose to the
highest when they lost relatives by the King's just sentence, although
they were in reality guilty. He again would rather renounce his dignity
than omit righteous judgment. The accusation against him, of being
stingy with his money, was not just, for he was a most generous man
towards his friends. But that alone was the cause of the discontent
raised against him, that he appeared hard and severe in his
retributions. Besides, King Knut offered large sums of money, and the
great chiefs were corrupted by this, and by his offering them greater
dignities than they had possessed before." On these grounds, against the
intolerable man, great and small were now pouring along by every path.

Olaf perceived it would still be some time before the Bonder army was
in rank. His own Dag of Sweden, too, was not yet come up; he was to have
the right banner; King Olaf's own being the middle or grand one; some
other person the third or left banner. All which being perfectly ranked
and settled, according to the best rules, and waiting only the arrival
of Dag, Olaf bade his men sit down, and freshen themselves with a little
rest. There were religious services gone through: a matins-worship such
as there have been few; sternly earnest to the heart of it, and deep as
death and eternity, at least on Olaf's own part. For the rest Thormod
sang a stave of the fiercest Skaldic poetry that was in him; all the
army straightway sang it in chorus with fiery mind. The Bonder of the
nearest farm came up, to tell Olaf that he also wished to fight for him
"Thanks to thee; but don't," said Olaf; "stay at home rather, that the
wounded may have some shelter." To this Bonder, Olaf delivered all the
money he had, with solemn order to lay out the whole of it in masses
and prayers for the souls of such of his enemies as fell. "Such of thy
enemies, King?" "Yes, surely," said Olaf, "my friends will all either
conquer, or go whither I also am going."

At last the Bonder army too was got ranked; three commanders, one of
them with a kind of loose chief command, having settled to take charge
of it; and began to shake itself towards actual advance. Olaf, in
the mean while, had laid his head on the knees of Finn Arneson, his
trustiest man, and fallen fast asleep. Finn's brother, Kalf Arneson,
once a warm friend of Olaf, was chief of the three commanders on the
opposite side. Finn and he addressed angry speech to one another from
the opposite ranks, when they came near enough. Finn, seeing the enemy
fairly approach, stirred Olaf from his sleep. "Oh, why hast thou wakened
me from such a dream?" said Olaf, in a deeply solemn tone. "What dream
was it, then?" asked Finn. "I dreamt that there rose a ladder here
reaching up to very Heaven," said Olaf; "I had climbed and climbed,
and got to the very last step, and should have entered there hadst thou
given me another moment." "King, I doubt thou art _fey_; I do not quite
like that dream."

The actual fight began about one of the clock in a most bright last day
of July, and was very fierce and hot, especially on the part of Olaf's
men, who shook the others back a little, though fierce enough they too;
and had Dag been on the ground, which he wasn't yet, it was thought
victory might have been won. Soon after battle joined, the sky grew of
a ghastly brass or copper color, darker and darker, till thick night
involved all things; and did not clear away again till battle was near
ending. Dag, with his four hundred, arrived in the darkness, and made a
furious charge, what was afterwards, in the speech of the people, called
"Dag's storm." Which had nearly prevailed, but could not quite; victory
again inclining to the so vastly larger party. It is uncertain still how
the matter would have gone; for Olaf himself was now fighting with his
own hand, and doing deadly execution on his busiest enemies to right
and to left. But one of these chief rebels, Thorer Hund (thought to have
learnt magic from the Laplanders, whom he long traded with, and made
money by), mysteriously would not fall for Olaf's best strokes. Best
strokes brought only dust from the (enchanted) deer-skin coat of the
fellow, to Olaf's surprise,--when another of the rebel chiefs rushed
forward, struck Olaf with his battle-axe, a wild slashing wound, and
miserably broke his thigh, so that he staggered or was supported back to
the nearest stone; and there sat down, lamentably calling on God to
help him in this bad hour. Another rebel of note (the name of him long
memorable in Norway) slashed or stabbed Olaf a second time, as did then
a third. Upon which the noble Olaf sank dead; and forever quitted this
doghole of a world,--little worthy of such men as Olaf one sometimes
thinks. But that too is a mistake, and even an important one, should we
persist in it.

With Olaf's death the sky cleared again. Battle, now near done, ended
with complete victory to the rebels, and next to no pursuit or result,
except the death of Olaf everybody hastening home, as soon as the big
Duel had decided itself. Olaf's body was secretly carried, after dark,
to some out-house on the farm near the spot; whither a poor blind
beggar, creeping in for shelter that very evening, was miraculously
restored to sight. And, truly with a notable, almost miraculous, speed,
the feelings of all Norway for King Olaf changed themselves, and were
turned upside down, "within a year," or almost within a day. Superlative
example of _Extinctus amabitur idem._ Not "Olaf the Thick-set" any
longer, but "Olaf the Blessed" or Saint, now clearly in Heaven; such the
name and character of him from that time to this. Two churches dedicated
to him (out of four that once stood) stand in London at this moment.
And the miracles that have been done there, not to speak of Norway and
Christendom elsewhere, in his name, were numerous and great for long
centuries afterwards. Visibly a Saint Olaf ever since; and, indeed, in
_Bollandus_ or elsewhere, I have seldom met with better stuff to make a
Saint of, or a true World-Hero in all good senses.

Speaking of the London Olaf Churches, I should have added that from one
of these the thrice-famous Tooley Street gets its name,--where those
Three Tailors, addressing Parliament and the Universe, sublimely styled
themselves, "We, the People of England." Saint Olave Street, Saint Oley
Street, Stooley Street, Tooley Street; such are the metamorphoses of
human fame in the world!

The battle-day of Stickelstad, King Olaf's death-day, is generally
believed to have been Wednesday, July 31, 1033. But on investigation, it
turns out that there was no total eclipse of the sun visible in Norway
that year; though three years before, there was one; but on the 29th
instead of the 31st. So that the exact date still remains uncertain;
Dahlmann, the latest critic, inclining for 1030, and its indisputable
eclipse. [15]



CHAPTER XI. MAGNUS THE GOOD AND OTHERS.

St. Olaf is the highest of these Norway Kings, and is the last that much
attracts us. For this reason, if a reason were not superfluous, we might
here end our poor reminiscences of those dim Sovereigns. But we will,
nevertheless, for the sake of their connection with bits of English
History, still hastily mention the Dames of one or two who follow,
and who throw a momentary gleam of life and illumination on events and
epochs that have fallen so extinct among ourselves at present, though
once they were so momentous and memorable.

The new King Svein from Jomsburg, Knut's natural son, had no success in
Norway, nor seems to have deserved any. His English mother and he were
found to be grasping, oppressive persons; and awoke, almost from the
instant that Olaf was suppressed and crushed away from Norway into
Heaven, universal odium more and more in that country. Well-deservedly,
as still appears; for their taxings and extortions of malt, of herring,
of meal, smithwork and every article taxable in Norway, were extreme;
and their service to the country otherwise nearly imperceptible. In
brief their one basis there was the power of Knut the Great; and that,
like all earthly things, was liable to sudden collapse,--and it suffered
such in a notable degree. King Knut, hardly yet of middle age, and
the greatest King in the then world, died at Shaftesbury, in 1035, as
Dahlmann thinks [16],--leaving two legitimate sons and a busy, intriguing
widow (Norman Emma, widow of Ethelred the Unready), mother of the
younger of these two; neither of whom proved to have any talent or any
continuance. In spite of Emma's utmost efforts, Harald, the elder son of
Knut, not hers, got England for his kingdom; Emma and her Harda-Knut
had to be content with Denmark, and go thither, much against their will.
Harald in England,--light-going little figure like his father before
him,--got the name of Harefoot here; and might have done good work among
his now orderly and settled people; but he died almost within year and
day; and has left no trace among us, except that of "Harefoot," from his
swift mode of walking. Emma and her Harda-Knut now returned joyful
to England. But the violent, idle, and drunken Harda-Knut did no good
there; and, happily for England and him, soon suddenly ended, by stroke
of apoplexy at a marriage festival, as mentioned above. In Denmark he
had done still less good. And indeed,--under him, in a year or two, the
grand imperial edifice, laboriously built by Knut's valor and wisdom,
had already tumbled all to the ground, in a most unexpected and
remarkable way. As we are now to indicate with all brevity.



Svein's tyrannies in Norway had wrought such fruit that, within the four
years after Olaf's death, the chief men in Norway, the very slayers of
King Olaf, Kalf Arneson at the head of them, met secretly once or twice;
and unanimously agreed that Kalf Arneson must go to Sweden, or to Russia
itself; seek young Magnus, son of Olaf home: excellent Magnus, to be
king over all Norway and them, instead of this intolerable Svein. Which
was at once done,--Magnus brought home in a kind of triumph, all Norway
waiting for him. Intolerable Svein had already been rebelled against:
some years before this, a certain young Tryggve out of Ireland,
authentic son of Olaf Tryggveson, and of that fine Irish Princess who
chose him in his low habiliments and low estate, and took him over to
her own Green Island,--this royal young Tryggve Olafson had invaded the
usurper Svein, in a fierce, valiant, and determined manner; and though
with too small a party, showed excellent fight for some time; till
Svein, zealously bestirring himself, managed to get him beaten and
killed. But that was a couple of years ago; the party still too small,
not including one and all as now! Svein, without stroke of sword this
time, moved off towards Denmark; never showing face in Norway again. His
drunken brother, Harda-Knut, received him brother-like; even gave him
some territory to rule over and subsist upon. But he lived only a short
while; was gone before Harda-Knut himself; and we will mention him no
more.

Magnus was a fine bright young fellow, and proved a valiant, wise, and
successful King, known among his people as Magnus the Good. He was only
natural son of King Olaf but that made little difference in those times
and there. His strange-looking, unexpected Latin name he got in this
way: Alfhild, his mother, a slave through ill-luck of war, though nobly
born, was seen to be in a hopeful way; and it was known in the King's
house how intimately Olaf was connected with that occurrence, and
how much he loved this "King's serving-maid," as she was commonly
designated. Alfhild was brought to bed late at night; and all the world,
especially King Olaf was asleep; Olaf's strict rule, then and always,
being, Don't awaken me:--seemingly a man sensitive about his sleep. The
child was a boy, of rather weakly aspect; no important person present,
except Sigvat, the King's Icelandic Skald, who happened to be still
awake; and the Bishop of Norway, who, I suppose, had been sent for in
hurry. "What is to be done?" said the Bishop: "here is an infant in
pressing need of baptism; and we know not what the name is: go, Sigvat,
awaken the King, and ask." "I dare not for my life," answered Sigvat;
"King's orders are rigorous on that point." "But if the child die
unbaptized," said the Bishop, shuddering; too certain, he and everybody,
where the child would go in that case! "I will myself give him a name,"
said Sigvat, with a desperate concentration of all his faculties; "he
shall be namesake of the greatest of mankind,--imperial Carolus Magnus;
let us call the infant Magnus!" King Olaf, on the morrow, asked rather
sharply how Sigvat had dared take such a liberty; but excused Sigvat,
seeing what the perilous alternative was. And Magnus, by such accident,
this boy was called; and he, not another, is the prime origin and
introducer of that name Magnus, which occurs rather frequently, not
among the Norman Kings only, but by and by among the Danish and Swedish;
and, among the Scandinavian populations, appears to be rather frequent
to this day.

Magnus, a youth of great spirit, whose own, and standing at his
beck, all Norway now was, immediately smote home on Denmark; desirous
naturally of vengeance for what it had done to Norway, and the sacred
kindred of Magnus. Denmark, its great Knut gone, and nothing but a
drunken Harda-Knut, fugitive Svein and Co., there in his stead, was
become a weak dislocated Country. And Magnus plundered in it, burnt it,
beat it, as often as he pleased; Harda-Knut struggling what he could to
make resistance or reprisals, but never once getting any victory over
Magnus. Magnus, I perceive, was, like his Father, a skilful as well
as valiant fighter by sea and land; Magnus, with good battalions, and
probably backed by immediate alliance with Heaven and St. Olaf, as
was then the general belief or surmise about him, could not easily be
beaten. And the truth is, he never was, by Harda-Knut or any other.
Harda-Knut's last transaction with him was, To make a firm Peace and
even Family-treaty sanctioned by all the grandees of both countries, who
did indeed mainly themselves make it; their two Kings assenting: That
there should be perpetual Peace, and no thought of war more, between
Denmark and Norway; and that, if either of the Kings died childless
while the other was reigning, the other should succeed him in both
Kingdoms. A magnificent arrangement, such as has several times been
made in the world's history; but which in this instance, what is very
singular, took actual effect; drunken Harda-Knut dying so speedily, and
Magnus being the man he was. One would like to give the date of this
remarkable Treaty; but cannot with precision. Guess somewhere about
1040: [17] actual fruition of it came to Magnus, beyond question, in
1042, when Harda-Knut drank that wassail bowl at the wedding in Lambeth,
and fell down dead; which in the Saxon Chronicle is dated 3d June of
that year. Magnus at once went to Denmark on hearing this event; was
joyfully received by the headmen there, who indeed, with their fellows
in Norway, had been main contrivers of the Treaty; both Countries
longing for mutual peace, and the end of such incessant broils.

Magnus was triumphantly received as King in Denmark. The only
unfortunate thing was, that Svein Estrithson, the exile son of Ulf,
Knut's Brother-in-law, whom Knut, as we saw, had summarily killed twelve
years before, emerged from his exile in Sweden in a flattering form;
and proposed that Magnus should make him Jarl of Denmark, and general
administrator there, in his own stead. To which the sanguine Magnus, in
spite of advice to the contrary, insisted on acceding. "Too powerful a
Jarl," said Einar Tamberskelver--the same Einar whose bow was heard to
break in Olaf Tryggveson's last battle ("Norway breaking from thy hand,
King!"), who had now become Magnus's chief man, and had long been
among the highest chiefs in Norway; "too powerful a Jarl," said Einar
earnestly. But Magnus disregarded it; and a troublesome experience had
to teach him that it was true. In about a year, crafty Svein, bringing
ends to meet, got himself declared King of Denmark for his own behoof,
instead of Jarl for another's: and had to be beaten and driven out by
Magnus. Beaten every year; but almost always returned next year, for a
new beating,--almost, though not altogether; having at length got one
dreadful smashing-down and half-killing, which held him quiet for a
while,--so long as Magnus lived. Nay in the end, he made good his point,
as if by mere patience in being beaten; and did become King himself,
and progenitor of all the Kings that followed. King Svein Estrithson;
so called from Astrid or Estrith, his mother, the great Knut's sister,
daughter of Svein Forkbeard by that amazing Sigrid the Proud, who
_burnt_ those two ineligible suitors of hers both at once, and got a
switch on the face from Olaf Tryggveson, which proved the death of that
high man.

But all this fine fortune of the often beaten Estrithson was posterior
to Magnus's death; who never would have suffered it, had he been alive.
Magnus was a mighty fighter; a fiery man; very proud and positive,
among other qualities, and had such luck as was never seen before. Luck
invariably good, said everybody; never once was beaten,--which proves,
continued everybody, that his Father Olaf and the miraculous power of
Heaven were with him always. Magnus, I believe, did put down a great
deal of anarchy in those countries. One of his earliest enterprises
was to abolish Jomsburg, and trample out that nest of pirates. Which
he managed so completely that Jomsburg remained a mere reminiscence
thenceforth; and its place is not now known to any mortal.

One perverse thing did at last turn up in the course of Magnus: a new
Claimant for the Crown of Norway, and he a formidable person withal.
This was Harald, half-brother of the late Saint Olaf; uncle or
half-uncle, therefore, of Magnus himself. Indisputable son of the
Saint's mother by St. Olaf's stepfather, who was, himself descended
straight from Harald Haarfagr. This new Harald was already much heard of
in the world. As an ardent Boy of fifteen he had fought at King Olaf's
side at Stickelstad; would not be admonished by the Saint to go away.
Got smitten down there, not killed; was smuggled away that night from
the field by friendly help; got cured of his wounds, forwarded to
Russia, where he grew to man's estate, under bright auspices and
successes. Fell in love with the Russian Princess, but could not get
her to wife; went off thereupon to Constantinople as _Vaeringer_
(Life-Guardsman of the Greek Kaiser); became Chief Captain of the
Vaeringers, invincible champion of the poor Kaisers that then were,
and filled all the East with the shine and noise of his exploits. An
authentic _Waring_ or _Baring_, such the surname we now have derived
from these people; who were an important institution in those Greek
countries for several ages: Vaeringer Life-Guard, consisting of
Norsemen, with sometimes a few English among them. Harald had
innumerable adventures, nearly always successful, sing the Skalds;
gained a great deal of wealth, gold ornaments, and gold coin; had even
Queen Zoe (so they sing, though falsely) enamored of him at one time;
and was himself a Skald of eminence; some of whose verses, by no means
the worst of their kind, remain to this day.

This character of Waring much distinguishes Harald to me; the only
Vaeringer of whom I could ever get the least biography, true or
half-true. It seems the Greek History-books but indifferently correspond
with these Saga records; and scholars say there could have been no
considerable romance between Zoe and him, Zoe at that date being 60
years of age! Harald's own lays say nothing of any Zoe, but are still
full of longing for his Russian Princess far away.

At last, what with Zoes, what with Greek perversities and perfidies, and
troubles that could not fail, he determined on quitting Greece; packed
up his immensities of wealth in succinct shape, and actually returned
to Russia, where new honors and favors awaited him from old friends, and
especially, if I mistake not, the hand of that adorable Princess, crown
of all his wishes for the time being. Before long, however, he decided
farther to look after his Norway Royal heritages; and, for that purpose,
sailed in force to the Jarl or quasi-King of Denmark, the often-beaten
Svein, who was now in Sweden on his usual winter exile after beating.
Svein and he had evidently interests in common. Svein was charmed to see
him, so warlike, glorious and renowned a man, with masses of money about
him, too. Svein did by and by become treacherous; and even attempted,
one night, to assassinate Harald in his bed on board ship: but Harald,
vigilant of Svein, and a man of quick and sure insight, had providently
gone to sleep elsewhere, leaving a log instead of himself among the
blankets. In which log, next morning, treacherous Svein's battle-axe was
found deeply sticking: and could not be removed without difficulty! But
this was after Harald and King Magnus himself bad begun treating; with
the fairest prospects,--which this of the $vein battle-axe naturally
tended to forward, as it altogether ended the other copartnery.

Magnus, on first hearing of Vaeringer Harald and his intentions, made
instant equipment, and determination to fight his uttermost against
the same. But wise persons of influence round him, as did the like
sort round Vaeringer Harald, earnestly advised compromise and peaceable
agreement. Which, soon after that of Svein's nocturnal battle-axe,
was the course adopted; and, to the joy of all parties, did prove
a successful solution. Magnus agreed to part his kingdom with Uncle
Harald; uncle parting his treasures, or uniting them with Magnus's
poverty. Each was to be an independent king, but they were to govern in
common; Magnus rather presiding. He, to sit, for example, in the High
Seat alone; King Harald opposite him in a seat not quite so high, though
if a stranger King came on a visit, both the Norse Kings were to sit
in the High Seat. With various other punctilious regulations; which the
fiery Magnus was extremely strict with; rendering the mutual relation a
very dangerous one, had not both the Kings been honest men, and Harald
a much more prudent and tolerant one than Magnus. They, on the whole,
never had any weighty quarrel, thanks now and then rather to Harald
than to Magnus. Magnus too was very noble; and Harald, with his wide
experience and greater length of years, carefully held his heat of
temper well covered in.

Prior to Uncle Harald's coming, Magnus had distinguished himself as a
Lawgiver. His Code of Laws for the Trondhjem Province was considered
a pretty piece of legislation; and in subsequent times got the name of
_Gray-goose_ (Gragas); one of the wonderfulest names ever given to a
wise Book. Some say it came from the gray color of the parchment, some
give other incredible origins; the last guess I have heard is, that
the name merely denotes antiquity; the witty name in Norway for a man
growing old having been, in those times, that he was now "becoming a
gray-goose." Very fantastic indeed; certain, however, that Gray-goose is
the name of that venerable Law Book; nay, there is another, still more
famous, belonging to Iceland, and not far from a century younger, the
Iceland _Gray-goose._ The Norway one is perhaps of date about 1037, the
other of about 1118; peace be with them both! Or, if anybody is inclined
to such matters let him go to Dahlmann, for the amplest information and
such minuteness of detail as might almost enable him to be an Advocate,
with Silk Gown, in any Court depending on these Gray-geese.

Magnus did not live long. He had a dream one night of his Father Olaf's
coming to him in shining presence, and announcing, That a magnificent
fortune and world-great renown was now possible for him; but that
perhaps it was his duty to refuse it; in which case his earthly life
would be short. "Which way wilt thou do, then?" said the shining
presence. "Thou shalt decide for me, Father, thou, not I!" and told his
Uncle Harald on the morrow, adding that he thought he should now
soon die; which proved to be the fact. The magnificent fortune, so
questionable otherwise, has reference, no doubt, to the Conquest
of England; to which country Magnus, as rightful and actual King of
_Denmark_, as well as undisputed heir to drunken Harda-Knut, by treaty
long ago, had now some evident claim. The enterprise itself was reserved
to the patient, gay, and prudent Uncle Harald; and to him it did prove
fatal,--and merely paved the way for Another, luckier, not likelier!

Svein Estrithson, always beaten during Magnus's life, by and by got an
agreement from the prudent Harald to _be_ King of Denmark, then; and end
these wearisome and ineffectual brabbles; Harald having other work to
do. But in the autumn of 1066, Tosti, a younger son of our English
Earl Godwin, came to Svein's court with a most important announcement;
namely, that King Edward the Confessor, so called, was dead, and that
Harold, as the English write it, his eldest brother would give him,
Tosti, no sufficient share in the kingship. Which state of matters, if
Svein would go ahead with him to rectify it, would be greatly to the
advantage of Svein. Svein, taught by many beatings, was too wise for
this proposal; refused Tosti, who indignantly stepped over into
Norway, and proposed it to King Harald there. Svein really had acquired
considerable teaching, I should guess, from his much beating and hard
experience in the world; one finds him afterwards the esteemed friend
of the famous Historian Adam of Bremen, who reports various wise
humanities, and pleasant discoursings with Svein Estrithson.

As for Harald Hardrade, "Harald the Hard or Severe," as he was now
called, Tosti's proposal awakened in him all his old Vaeringer ambitious
and cupidities into blazing vehemence. He zealously consented; and at
once, with his whole strength, embarked in the adventure. Fitted out two
hundred ships, and the biggest army he could carry in them; and sailed
with Tosti towards the dangerous Promised Land. Got into the Tyne and
took booty; got into the Humber, thence into the Ouse; easily subdued
any opposition the official people or their populations could make;
victoriously scattered these, victoriously took the City of York in a
day; and even got himself homaged there, "King of Northumberland,"
as per covenant,--Tosti proving honorable,--Tosti and he going with
faithful strict copartnery, and all things looking prosperous and
glorious. Except only (an important exception!) that they learnt for
certain, English Harold was advancing with all his strength; and, in
a measurable space of hours, unless care were taken, would be in York
himself. Harald and Tosti hastened off to seize the post of Stamford
Bridge on Derwent River, six or seven miles east of York City, and
there bar this dangerous advent. Their own ships lay not far off in
Ouse River, in case of the worst. The battle that ensued the next day,
September 20, 1066, is forever memorable in English history.

Snorro gives vividly enough his view of it from the Icelandic side: A
ring of stalwart Norsemen, close ranked, with their steel tools in hand;
English Harold's Army, mostly cavalry, prancing and pricking all around;
trying to find or make some opening in that ring. For a long time trying
in vain, till at length, getting them enticed to burst out somewhere
in pursuit, they quickly turned round, and quickly made an end, of that
matter. Snorro represents English Harold, with a first party of these
horse coming up, and, with preliminary salutations, asking if Tosti were
there, and if Harald were; making generous proposals to Tosti; but,
in regard to Harald and what share of England was to be his, answering
Tosti with the words, "Seven feet of English earth, or more if he
require it, for a grave." Upon which Tosti, like an honorable man and
copartner, said, "No, never; let us fight you rather till we all die."
"Who is this that spoke to you?" inquired Harald, when the cavaliers had
withdrawn. "My brother Harold," answers Tosti; which looks rather like a
Saga, but may be historical after all. Snorro's history of the battle is
intelligible only after you have premised to it, what he never hints at,
that the scene was on the east side of the bridge and of the Derwent;
the great struggle for the bridge, one at last finds, was after the
fall of Harald; and to the English Chroniclers, said struggle, which was
abundantly severe, is all they know of the battle.

Enraged at that breaking loose of his steel ring of infantry, Norse
Harald blazed up into true Norse fury, all the old Vaeringer and
Berserkir rage awakening in him; sprang forth into the front of the
fight, and mauled and cut and smashed down, on both hands of him,
everything he met, irresistible by any horse or man, till an arrow cut
him through the windpipe, and laid him low forever. That was the end of
King Harald and of his workings in this world. The circumstance that
he was a Waring or Baring and had smitten to pieces so many Oriental
cohorts or crowds, and had made love-verses (kind of iron madrigals) to
his Russian Princess, and caught the fancy of questionable Greek queens,
and had amassed such heaps of money, while poor nephew Magnus had
only one gold ring (which had been his father's, and even his father's
_mother's_, as Uncle Harald noticed), and nothing more whatever of that
precious metal to combine with Harald's treasures:--all this is new to
me, naturally no hint of it in any English book; and lends some gleam of
romantic splendor to that dim business of Stamford Bridge, now fallen
so dull and torpid to most English minds, transcendently important as it
once was to all Englishmen. Adam of Bremen says, the English got as
much gold plunder from Harald's people as was a heavy burden for twelve
men; [18] a thing evidently impossible, which nobody need try to believe.
Young Olaf, Harald's son, age about sixteen, steering down the Ouse at
the top of his speed, escaped home to Norway with all his ships, and
subsequently reigned there with Magnus, his brother. Harald's body did
lie in English earth for about a year; but was then brought to Norway
for burial. He needed more than seven feet of grave, say some;
Laing, interpreting Snorro's measurements, makes Harald eight feet in
stature,--I do hope, with some error in excess!



CHAPTER XII. OLAF THE TRANQUIL, MAGNUS BAREFOOT, AND SIGURD THE
CRUSADER.

The new King Olaf, his brother Magnus having soon died, bore rule in
Norway for some five-and-twenty years. Rule soft and gentle, not like
his father's, and inclining rather to improvement in the arts and
elegancies than to anything severe or dangerously laborious. A
slim-built, witty-talking, popular and pretty man, with uncommonly
bright eyes, and hair like floss silk: they called him Olaf _Kyrre_ (the
Tranquil or Easygoing).

The ceremonials of the palace were much improved by him. Palace still
continued to be built of huge logs pyramidally sloping upwards, with
fireplace in the middle of the floor, and no egress for smoke or ingress
for light except right overhead, which, in bad weather, you could shut,
or all but shut, with a lid. Lid originally made of mere opaque board,
but changed latterly into a light frame, covered (_glazed_, so to speak)
with entrails of animals, clarified into something of pellucidity. All
this Olaf, I hope, further perfected, as he did the placing of the court
ladies, court officials, and the like; but I doubt if the luxury of a
glass window were ever known to him, or a cup to drink from that was
not made of metal or horn. In fact it is chiefly for his son's sake I
mention him here; and with the son, too, I have little real concern, but
only a kind of fantastic.

This son bears the name of Magnus _Barfod_ (Barefoot, or Bareleg); and
if you ask why so, the answer is: He was used to appear in the streets
of Nidaros (Trondhjem) now and then in complete Scotch Highland dress.
Authentic tartan plaid and philibeg, at that epoch,--to the wonder of
Trondhjem and us! The truth is, he had a mighty fancy for those Hebrides
and other Scotch possessions of his; and seeing England now quite
impossible, eagerly speculated on some conquest in Ireland as next
best. He did, in fact, go diligently voyaging and inspecting among
those Orkney and Hebridian Isles; putting everything straight there,
appointing stringent authorities, jarls,--nay, a king, "Kingdom of the
Suderoer" (Southern Isles, now called _Sodor_),--and, as first king,
Sigurd, his pretty little boy of nine years. All which done, and some
quarrel with Sweden fought out, he seriously applied himself to visiting
in a still more emphatic manner; namely, to invading, with his best
skill and strength, the considerable virtual or actual kingdom he had
in Ireland, intending fully to enlarge it to the utmost limits of the
Island if possible. He got prosperously into Dublin (guess A.D. 1102).
Considerable authority he already had, even among those poor Irish
Kings, or kinglets, in their glibs and yellow-saffron gowns; still more,
I suppose, among the numerous Norse Principalities there. "King Murdog,
King of Ireland," says the Chronicle of Man, "had obliged himself, every
Yule-day, to take a pair of shoes, hang them over his shoulder, as your
servant does on a journey, and walk across his court, at bidding and in
presence of Magnus Barefoot's messenger, by way of homage to the said
King." Murdog on this greater occasion did whatever homage could be
required of him; but that, though comfortable, was far from satisfying
the great King's ambitious mind. The great King left Murdog; left his
own Dublin; marched off westward on a general conquest of Ireland.
Marched easily victorious for a time; and got, some say, into the wilds
of Connaught, but there saw himself beset by ambuscades and wild Irish
countenances intent on mischief; and had, on the sudden, to draw up for
battle;--place, I regret to say, altogether undiscoverable to me; known
only that it was boggy in the extreme. Certain enough, too certain and
evident, Magnus Barefoot, searching eagerly, could find no firm footing
there; nor, fighting furiously up to the knees or deeper, any result but
honorable death! Date is confidently marked "24 August, 1103,"--as if
people knew the very day of the month. The natives did humanely give
King Magnus Christian burial. The remnants of his force, without further
molestation, found their ships on the Coast of Ulster; and sailed
home,--without conquest of Ireland; nay perhaps, leaving royal Murdog
disposed to be relieved of his procession with the pair of shoes.

Magnus Barefoot left three sons, all kings at once, reigning peaceably
together. But to us, at present, the only noteworthy one of them was
Sigurd; who, finding nothing special to do at home, left his brothers
to manage for him, and went off on a far Voyage, which has rendered him
distinguishable in the crowd. Voyage through the Straits of Gibraltar,
on to Jerusalem, thence to Constantinople; and so home through Russia,
shining with such renown as filled all Norway for the time being. A
King called Sigurd Jorsalafarer (Jerusalemer) or Sigurd the Crusader
henceforth. His voyage had been only partially of the Viking type;
in general it was of the Royal-Progress kind rather; Vikingism only
intervening in cases of incivility or the like. His reception in
the Courts of Portugal, Spain, Sicily, Italy, had been honorable and
sumptuous. The King of Jerusalem broke out into utmost splendor and
effusion at sight of such a pilgrim; and Constantinople did its
highest honors to such a Prince of Vaeringers. And the truth is, Sigurd
intrinsically was a wise, able, and prudent man; who, surviving both his
brothers, reigned a good while alone in a solid and successful way. He
shows features of an original, independent-thinking man; something
of ruggedly strong, sincere, and honest, with peculiarities that are
amiable and even pathetic in the character and temperament of him;
as certainly, the course of life he took was of his own choosing, and
peculiar enough. He happens furthermore to be, what he least of all
could have chosen or expected, the last of the Haarfagr Genealogy that
had any success, or much deserved any, in this world. The last of the
Haarfagrs, or as good as the last! So that, singular to say, it is in
reality, for one thing only that Sigurd, after all his crusadings and
wonderful adventures, is memorable to us here: the advent of an
Irish gentleman called "Gylle Krist" (Gil-christ, Servant of Christ),
who,--not over welcome, I should think, but (unconsciously) big with the
above result,--appeared in Norway, while King Sigurd was supreme. Let us
explain a little.

This Gylle Krist, the unconsciously fatal individual, who "spoke Norse
imperfectly," declared himself to be the natural son of whilom Magnus
Barefoot; born to him there while engaged in that unfortunate "Conquest
of Ireland." "Here is my mother come with me," said Gilchrist, "who
declares my real baptismal name to have been Harald, given me by that
great King; and who will carry the red-hot ploughshares or do any
reasonable ordeal in testimony of these facts. I am King Sigurd's
veritable half-brother: what will King Sigurd think it fair to do with
me?" Sigurd clearly seems to have believed the man to be speaking truth;
and indeed nobody to have doubted but he was. Sigurd said, "Honorable
sustenance shalt thou have from me here. But, under pain of extirpation,
swear that, neither in my time, nor in that of my young son Magnus,
wilt thou ever claim any share in this Government." Gylle swore; and
punctually kept his promise during Sigurd's reign. But during Magnus's,
he conspicuously broke it; and, in result, through many reigns, and
during three or four generations afterwards, produced unspeakable
contentions, massacrings, confusions in the country he had adopted.
There are reckoned, from the time of Sigurd's death (A.D. 1130), about a
hundred years of civil war: no king allowed to distinguish himself by a
solid reign of well-doing, or by any continuing reign at all,--sometimes
as many as four kings simultaneously fighting;--and in Norway, from sire
to son, nothing but sanguinary anarchy, disaster and bewilderment;
a Country sinking steadily as if towards absolute ruin. Of all which
frightful misery and discord Irish Gylle, styled afterwards King
Harald Gylle, was, by ill destiny and otherwise, the visible origin: an
illegitimate Irish Haarfagr who proved to be his own destruction, and
that of the Haarfagr kindred altogether!

Sigurd himself seems always to have rather favored Gylle, who was a
cheerful, shrewd, patient, witty, and effective fellow; and had at first
much quizzing to endure, from the younger kind, on account of his Irish
way of speaking Norse, and for other reasons. One evening, for example,
while the drink was going round, Gylle mentioned that the Irish had a
wonderful talent of swift running and that there were among them people
who could keep up with the swiftest horse. At which, especially from
young Magnus, there were peals of laughter; and a declaration from the
latter that Gylle and he would have it tried to-morrow morning! Gylle in
vain urged that he had not himself professed to be so swift a runner
as to keep up with the Prince's horses; but only that there were men in
Ireland who could. Magnus was positive; and, early next morning, Gylle
had to be on the ground; and the race, naturally under heavy bet,
actually went off. Gylle started parallel to Magnus's stirrup; ran like
a very roe, and was clearly ahead at the goal. "Unfair," said Magnus;
"thou must have had hold of my stirrup-leather, and helped thyself
along; we must try it again." Gylle ran behind the horse this second
time; then at the end, sprang forward; and again was fairly in ahead.
"Thou must have held by the tail," said Magnus; "not by fair running was
this possible; we must try a third time!" Gylle started ahead of Magnus
and his horse, this third time; kept ahead with increasing distance,
Magnus galloping his very best; and reached the goal more palpably
foremost than ever. So that Magnus had to pay his bet, and other
damage and humiliation. And got from his father, who heard of it soon
afterwards, scoffing rebuke as a silly fellow, who did not know the
worth of men, but only the clothes and rank of them, and well deserved
what he had got from Gylle. All the time King Sigurd lived, Gylle seems
to have had good recognition and protection from that famous man; and,
indeed, to have gained favor all round, by his quiet social demeanor and
the qualities he showed.



CHAPTER XIII. MAGNUS THE BLIND, HARALD GYLLE, AND MUTUAL EXTINCTION OF
THE HAARFAGRS.

On Sigurd the Crusader's death, Magnus naturally came to the throne;
Gylle keeping silence and a cheerful face for the time. But it was not
long till claim arose on Gylle's part, till war and fight arose between
Magnus and him, till the skilful, popular, ever-active and shifty Gylle
had entirely beaten Magnus; put out his eyes, mutilated the poor body
of him in a horrid and unnamable manner, and shut him up in a convent as
out of the game henceforth. There in his dark misery Magnus lived now
as a monk; called "Magnus the Blind" by those Norse populations; King
Harald Gylle reigning victoriously in his stead. But this also was only
for a time. There arose avenging kinsfolk of Magnus, who had no Irish
accent in their Norse, and were themselves eager enough to bear rule
in their native country. By one of these,--a terribly stronghanded,
fighting, violent, and regardless fellow, who also was a Bastard of
Magnus Barefoot's, and had been made a Priest, but liked it unbearably
ill, and had broken loose from it into the wildest courses at home and
abroad; so that his current name got to be "Slembi-diakn," Slim or Ill
Deacon, under which he is much noised of in Snorro and the Sagas: by
this Slim-Deacon, Gylle was put an end to (murdered by night, drunk in
his sleep); and poor blind Magnus was brought out, and again set to act
as King, or King's Cloak, in hopes Gylle's posterity would never rise to
victory more. But Gylle's posterity did, to victory and also to defeat,
and were the death of Magnus and of Slim-Deacon too, in a frightful way;
and all got their own death by and by in a ditto. In brief, these two
kindreds (reckoned to be authentic enough Haarfagr people, both kinds of
them) proved now to have become a veritable crop of dragon's teeth;
who mutually fought, plotted, struggled, as if it had been their life's
business; never ended fighting and seldom long intermitted it, till they
had exterminated one another, and did at last all rest in death. One
of these later Gylle temporary Kings I remember by the name of Harald
Herdebred, Harald of the Broad Shoulders. The very last of them I
think was Harald Mund (Harald of the _Wry-Mouth_), who gave rise to two
Impostors, pretending to be Sons of his, a good while after the poor
Wry-Mouth itself and all its troublesome belongings were quietly
underground. What Norway suffered during that sad century may be
imagined.



CHAPTER XIV. SVERRIR AND DESCENDANTS, TO HAKON THE OLD.

The end of it was, or rather the first abatement, and _beginnings_ of
the end, That, when all this had gone on ever worsening for some forty
years or so, one Sverrir (A.D. 1177), at the head of an armed mob of
poor people called _Birkebeins_, came upon the scene. A strange enough
figure in History, this Sverrir and his Birkebeins! At first a mere
mockery and dismal laughing-stock to the enlightened Norway public.
Nevertheless by unheard-of fighting, hungering, exertion, and endurance,
Sverrir, after ten years of such a death-wrestle against men and things,
got himself accepted as King; and by wonderful expenditure of ingenuity,
common cunning, unctuous Parliamentary Eloquence or almost Popular
Preaching, and (it must be owned) general human faculty and valor
(or value) in the over-clouded and distorted state, did victoriously
continue such. And founded a new Dynasty in Norway, which ended only
with Norway's separate existence, after near three hundred years.

This Sverrir called himself a Son of Harald Wry-Mouth; but was in
reality the son of a poor Comb-maker in some little town of Norway;
nothing heard of Sonship to Wry-Mouth till after good success otherwise.
His Birkebeins (that is to say, _Birchlegs;_ the poor rebellious
wretches having taken to the woods; and been obliged, besides their
intolerable scarcity of food, to thatch their bodies from the cold with
whatever covering could be got, and their legs especially with birch
bark; sad species of fleecy hosiery; whence their nickname),--his
Birkebeins I guess always to have been a kind of Norse _Jacquerie_:
desperate rising of thralls and indigent people, driven mad by their
unendurable sufferings and famishings,--theirs the _deepest_ stratum
of misery, and the densest and heaviest, in this the general misery of
Norway, which had lasted towards the third generation and looked as if
it would last forever:--whereupon they had risen proclaiming, in this
furious dumb manner, unintelligible except to Heaven, that the same
could not, nor would not, be endured any longer! And, by their Sverrir,
strange to say, they did attain a kind of permanent success; and, from
being a dismal laughing-stock in Norway, came to be important, and for
a time all-important there. Their opposition nicknames, "_Baglers_ (from
Bagall, _baculus_, bishop's staff; Bishop Nicholas being chief Leader),"
"_Gold-legs_," and the like obscure terms (for there was still a
considerable course of counter-fighting ahead, and especially of
counter-nicknaming), I take to have meant in Norse prefigurement seven
centuries ago, "bloated Aristocracy," "tyrannous-_Bourgeoisie_,"--till,
in the next century, these rents were closed again!

King Sverrir, not himself bred to comb-making, had, in his fifth year,
gone to an uncle, Bishop in the Faroe Islands; and got some considerable
education from him, with a view to Priesthood on the part of Sverrir.
But, not liking that career, Sverrir had fled and smuggled himself
over to the Birkebeins; who, noticing the learned tongue, and other
miraculous qualities of the man, proposed to make him Captain of them;
and even threatened to kill him if he would not accept,--which thus at
the sword's point, as Sverrir says, he was obliged to do. It was after
this that he thought of becoming son of Wry-Mouth and other higher
things.

His Birkebeins and he had certainly a talent of campaigning which has
hardly ever been equalled. They fought like devils against any odds
of number; and before battle they have been known to march six days
together without food, except, perhaps, the inner barks of trees, and in
such clothing and shoeing as mere birch bark:--at one time, somewhere in
the Dovrefjeld, there was serious counsel held among them whether
they should not all, as one man, leap down into the frozen gulfs and
precipices, or at once massacre one another wholly, and so finish. Of
their conduct in battle, fiercer than that of _Baresarks_, where was
there ever seen the parallel? In truth they are a dim strange object to
one, in that black time; wondrously bringing light into it withal; and
proved to be, under such unexpected circumstances, the beginning of
better days!

Of Sverrir's public speeches there still exist authentic specimens;
wonderful indeed, and much characteristic of such a Sverrir. A
comb-maker King, evidently meaning several good and solid things;
and effecting them too, athwart such an element of Norwegian
chaos-come-again. His descendants and successors were a comparatively
respectable kin. The last and greatest of them I shall mention is Hakon
VII., or Hakon the Old; whose fame is still lively among us, from the
Battle of Largs at least.



CHAPTER XV. HAKON THE OLD AT LARGS.

In the Norse annals our famous Battle of Largs makes small figure, or
almost none at all among Hakon's battles and feats. They do say indeed,
these Norse annalists, that the King of Scotland, Alexander III. (who
had such a fate among the crags about Kinghorn in time coming), was
very anxious to purchase from King Hakon his sovereignty of the Western
Isles, but that Hakon pointedly refused; and at length, being again
importuned and bothered on the business, decided on giving a refusal
that could not be mistaken. Decided, namely, to go with a big
expedition, and look thoroughly into that wing of his Dominions; where
no doubt much has fallen awry since Magnus Barefoot's grand visit
thither, and seems to be inviting the cupidity of bad neighbors! "All
this we will put right again," thinks Hakon, "and gird it up into a safe
and defensive posture." Hakon sailed accordingly, with a strong fleet;
adjusting and rectifying among his Hebrides as he went long, and landing
withal on the Scotch coast to plunder and punish as he thought fit.
The Scots say he had claimed of them Arran, Bute, and the Two Cumbraes
("given my ancestors by Donald Bain," said Hakon, to the amazement
of the Scots) "as part of the Sudoer" (Southern Isles):--so far from
selling that fine kingdom!--and that it was after taking both Arran and
Bute that he made his descent at Largs.

Of Largs there is no mention whatever in Norse books. But beyond any
doubt, such is the other evidence, Hakon did land there; land and fight,
not conquering, probably rather beaten; and very certainly "retiring to
his ships," as in either case he behooved to do! It is further certain
he was dreadfully maltreated by the weather on those wild coasts; and
altogether credible, as the Scotch records bear, that he was so at Largs
very specially. The Norse Records or Sagas say merely, he lost many
of his ships by the tempests, and many of his men by land fighting in
various parts,--tacitly including Largs, no doubt, which was the last
of these misfortunes to him. "In the battle here he lost 15,000 men, say
the Scots, we 5,000"! Divide these numbers by ten, and the excellently
brief and lucid Scottish summary by Buchanan may be taken as the
approximately true and exact. [19] Date of the battle is A.D. 1263.

To this day, on a little plain to the south of the village, now town,
of Largs, in Ayrshire, there are seen stone cairns and monumental heaps,
and, until within a century ago, one huge, solitary, upright stone;
still mutely testifying to a battle there,--altogether clearly, to this
battle of King Hakon's; who by the Norse records, too, was in these
neighborhoods at that same date, and evidently in an aggressive, high
kind of humor. For "while his ships and army were doubling the Mull
of Cantire, he had his own boat set on wheels, and therein, splendidly
enough, had himself drawn across the Promontory at a flatter part," no
doubt with horns sounding, banners waving. "All to the left of me is
mine and Norway's," exclaimed Hakon in his triumphant boat progress,
which such disasters soon followed.

Hakon gathered his wrecks together, and sorrowfully made for Orkney.
It is possible enough, as our Guide Books now say, he may have gone
by Iona, Mull, and the narrow seas inside of Skye; and that the
_Kyle-Akin_, favorably known to sea-bathers in that region, may actually
mean the Kyle (narrow strait) of Hakon, where Hakon may have dropped
anchor, and rested for a little while in smooth water and beautiful
environment, safe from equinoctial storms. But poor Hakon's heart was
now broken. He went to Orkney; died there in the winter; never beholding
Norway more.

He it was who got Iceland, which had been a Republic for four centuries,
united to his kingdom of Norway: a long and intricate operation,--much
presided over by our Snorro Sturleson, so often quoted here, who indeed
lost his life (by assassination from his sons-in-law) and out of great
wealth sank at once into poverty of zero,--one midnight in his own
cellar, in the course of that bad business. Hakon was a great Politician
in his time; and succeeded in many things before he lost Largs. Snorro's
death by murder had happened about twenty years before Hakon's by broken
heart. He is called Hakon the Old, though one finds his age was
but fifty-nine, probably a longish life for a Norway King. Snorro's
narrative ceases when Snorro himself was born; that is to say, at the
threshold of King Sverrir; of whose exploits and doubtful birth it is
guessed by some that Snorro willingly forbore to speak in the hearing of
such a Hakon.



CHAPTER XVI. EPILOGUE.

Haarfagr's kindred lasted some three centuries in Norway; Sverrir's
lasted into its third century there; how long after this, among the
neighboring kinships, I did not inquire. For, by regal affinities,
consanguinities, and unexpected chances and changes, the three
Scandinavian kingdoms fell all peaceably together under Queen Margaret,
of the Calmar Union (A.D. 1397); and Norway, incorporated now with
Denmark, needed no more kings.

The History of these Haarfagrs has awakened in me many thoughts: Of
Despotism and Democracy, arbitrary government by one and self-government
(which means no government, or anarchy) by all; of Dictatorship with
many faults, and Universal Suffrage with little possibility of
any virtue. For the contrast between Olaf Tryggveson, and a
Universal-Suffrage Parliament or an "Imperial" Copper Captain has, in
these nine centuries, grown to be very great. And the eternal Providence
that guides all this, and produces alike these entities with their
epochs, is not its course still through the great deep? Does not it
still speak to us, if we have ears? Here, clothed in stormy enough
passions and instincts, unconscious of any aim but their own
satisfaction, is the blessed beginning of Human Order, Regulation,
and real Government; there, clothed in a highly different, but again
suitable garniture of passions, instincts, and equally unconscious as
to real aim, is the accursed-looking ending (temporary ending) of Order,
Regulation, and Government;--very dismal to the sane onlooker for the
time being; not dismal to him otherwise, his hope, too, being steadfast!
But here, at any rate, in this poor Norse theatre, one looks with
interest on the first transformation, so mysterious and abstruse, of
human Chaos into something of articulate Cosmos; witnesses the wild
and strange birth-pangs of Human Society, and reflects that without
something similar (little as men expect such now), no Cosmos of human
society ever was got into existence, nor can ever again be.

The violences, fightings, crimes--ah yes, these seldom fail, and they
are very lamentable. But always, too, among those old populations, there
was one saving element; the now want of which, especially the unlamented
want, transcends all lamentation. Here is one of those strange,
piercing, winged-words of Ruskin, which has in it a terrible truth for
us in these epochs now come:--

"My friends, the follies of modern Liberalism, many and great though
they be, are practically summed in this denial or neglect of the quality
and intrinsic value of things. Its rectangular beatitudes, and spherical
benevolences,--theology of universal indulgence, and jurisprudence which
will hang no rogues, mean, one and all of them, in the root, incapacity
of discerning, or refusal to discern, worth and unworth in anything,
and least of all in man; whereas Nature and Heaven command you, at your
peril, to discern worth from unworth in everything, and most of all in
man. Your main problem is that ancient and trite one, 'Who is best man?'
and the Fates forgive much,--forgive the wildest, fiercest, cruelest
experiments,--if fairly made for the determination of that.

"Theft and blood-guiltiness are not pleasing in their sight; yet the
favoring powers of the spiritual and material world will confirm to you
your stolen goods, and their noblest voices applaud the lifting of Your
spear, and rehearse the sculpture of your shield, if only your robbing
and slaying have been in fair arbitrament of that question, 'Who is best
man?' But if you refuse such inquiry, and maintain every man for his
neighbor's match,--if you give vote to the simple and liberty to the
vile, the powers of those spiritual and material worlds in due time
present you inevitably with the same problem, soluble now only wrong
side upwards; and your robbing and slaying must be done then to find
out, 'Who is worst man?' Which, in so wide an order of merit, is,
indeed, not easy; but a complete Tammany Ring, and lowest circle in the
Inferno of Worst, you are sure to find, and to be governed by." [20]

All readers will admit that there was something naturally royal in these
Haarfagr Kings. A wildly great kind of kindred; counts in it two Heroes
of a high, or almost highest, type: the first two Olafs, Tryggveson and
the Saint. And the view of them, withal, as we chance to have it, I have
often thought, how essentially Homeric it was:--indeed what is "Homer"
himself but the _Rhapsody_ of five centuries of Greek Skalds and
wandering Ballad-singers, done (i.e. "stitched together") by somebody
more musical than Snorro was? Olaf Tryggveson and Olaf Saint please me
quite as well in their prosaic form; offering me the truth of them as
if seen in their real lineaments by some marvellous opening (through
the art of Snorro) across the black strata of the ages. Two high, almost
among the highest sons of Nature, seen as they veritably were; fairly
comparable or superior to god-like Achilleus, goddess-wounding Diomedes,
much more to the two Atreidai, Regulators of the Peoples.

I have also thought often what a Book might be made of Snorro, did there
but arise a man furnished with due literary insight, and indefatigable
diligence; who, faithfully acquainting himself with the topography,
the monumental relies and illustrative actualities of Norway, carefully
scanning the best testimonies as to place and time which that
country can still give him, carefully the best collateral records and
chronologies of other countries, and who, himself possessing the highest
faculty of a Poet, could, abridging, arranging, elucidating, reduce
Snorro to a polished Cosmic state, unweariedly purging away his much
chaotic matter! A modern "highest kind of Poet," capable of unlimited
slavish labor withal;--who, I fear, is not soon to be expected in this
world, or likely to find his task in the _Heimskringla_ if he did appear
here.




FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1: J. G. Dahlmann, _Geschichte von Dannemark_, 3 vols. 8vo.
Hamburg, 1840-1843.]

[Footnote 2: "Settlement," dated 912, by Munch, Henault, &c. The Saxon
Chronicle says (anno 876): "In this year Rolf overran Normandy with his
army, and he reigned fifty winters."]

[Footnote 3: Dahlmann, ii. 87.]

[Footnote 4: Dahlmann, ii. 93.]

[Footnote 5: _Laing's Snorro_, i. 344.]

[Footnote 6: G. Buchanani _Opera Omnia_, i. 103, 104 (Curante Ruddimano,
Edinburgi, 1715).]

[Footnote 7: His Long Serpent, judged by some to be of the size of a
frigate of forty-five guns (Laing).]

[Footnote 8: This sermon was printed by Hearne; and is given also by
Langebek in his excellent Collection, _Rerum Danicarum Scriptores Medii
AEri._ Hafniae. 1772-1834.]

[Footnote 9: Kennet, i. 67; Rapin, i. 119, 121 (from the _Saxon
Chronicle_ both).]

[Footnote 10: Knut born A.D. 988 according to Munch's calculation (ii.
126).]

[Footnote 11: Snorro, Laing's Translation, ii. p. 31 et seq., will
minutely specify.]

[Footnote 12: Snorro, ii. pp. 24, 25.]

[Footnote 13: Snorro, ii. pp. 156-161.]

[Footnote 14: Snorro, ii. pp. 252, 253.]

[Footnote 15: _Saxon Chronicle_ says expressly, under A.D. 1030: "In
this year King Olaf was slain in Norway by his own people, and was
afterwards sainted."]

[Footnote 16: _Saxon Chronicle_ says: "1035. In this year died King
Cnut.... He departed at Shaftesbury, November 12, and they conveyed him
thence to Winchester, and there buried him."]

[Footnote 17: Munch gives the date 1038 (ii. 840), Adam of Bremen 1040.]

[Footnote 18: Camden, Rapin, &c. quote.]

[Footnote 19: _Buchanani Hist._ i. 130.]

[Footnote 20: _Fors Clavigera_, Letter XIV. Pp. 8-10.]

========================================
