========================================

A FAIR PENITENT

By Wilkie Collins




About "A Fair Penitent"

This story first appeared in Charles Dickens' magazine, "Household
Words," volume 16, number 382, July 18, 1857. Published anonymously, as
all contributions to the magazine were, it was attributed definitely
to Wilkie Collins by Anne Lohrli in her analysis of the magazine's
financial accounts.




A FAIR PENITENT


Charles Pineau Duclos was a French writer of biographies and novels,
who lived and worked during the first half of the eighteenth century. He
prospered sufficiently well, as a literary man, to be made secretary to
the French Academy, and to be allowed to succeed Voltaire in the
office of historiographer of France. He has left behind him, in his
own country, the reputation of a lively writer of the second class, who
addressed the public of his day with fair success, and who, since his
death, has not troubled posterity to take any particular notice of him.

Among the papers left by Duclos, two manuscripts were found, which he
probably intended to turn to some literary account. The first was a
brief Memoir, written by himself, of a Frenchwoman, named Mademoiselle
Gautier, who began life as an actress and who ended it as a Carmelite
nun. The second manuscript was the lady's own account of the process
of her conversion, and of the circumstances which attended her moral
passage from the state of a sinner to the state of a saint. There are
certain national peculiarities in the character of Mademoiselle Gautier
and in the narrative of her conversion, which are perhaps interesting
enough to be reproduced with some chance of pleasing the present day.

It appears, from the account given of her by Duclos, that Mademoiselle
Gautier made her appearance on the stage of the Theatre Francois in
the year seventeen hundred and sixteen. She is described as a handsome
woman, with a fine figure, a fresh complexion, a lively disposition, and
a violent temper. Besides possessing capacity as an actress, she could
write very good verses, she was clever at painting in miniature, and,
most remarkable quality of all, she was possessed of prodigious muscular
strength. It is recorded of Mademoiselle, that she could roll up
a silver plate with her hands, and that she covered herself with
distinction in a trial of strength with no less a person than the famous
soldier, Marshal Saxe.

Nobody who is at all acquainted with the social history of the
eighteenth century in France, need be told that Mademoiselle Gautier had
a long list of lovers,--for the most part, persons of quality, marshals,
counts, and so forth. The only man, however, who really attached her to
him, was an actor at the Theatre Francois, a famous player in his day,
named Quinault Dufresne. Mademoiselle Gautier seems to have loved him
with all the ardour of her naturally passionate disposition. At first,
he returned her affection; but, as soon as she ventured to test the
sincerity of his attachment by speaking of marriage, he cooled towards
her immediately, and the connection between them was broken off. In all
her former love-affairs, she had been noted for the high tone which she
adopted towards her admirers, and for the despotic authority which she
exercised over them even in her gayest moments. But the severance of
her connection with Quinault Dufresne wounded her to her heart. She
had loved the man so dearly, had made so many sacrifices for him, had
counted so fondly on the devotion of her whole future life to him, that
the first discovery of his coldness towards her broke her spirit at once
and for ever. She fell into a condition of hopeless melancholy, looked
back with remorse and horror at her past life, and abandoned the stage
and the society in which she had lived, to end her days repentantly in
the character of a Carmelite nun.

So far, her history is the history of hundreds of other women before her
time and after it. The prominent interest of her life, for the student
of human nature, lies in the story of her conversion, as told by
herself. The greater part of the narrative--every page of which is more
or less characteristic of the Frenchwoman of the eighteenth century--may
be given, with certain suppressions and abridgments, in her own words.
The reader will observe, at the outset, one curious fact. Mademoiselle
Gautier does not so much as hint at the influence which the loss of
her lover had in disposing her mind to reflect on serious subjects.
She describes her conversion as if it had taken its rise in a sudden
inspiration from Heaven. Even the name of Quinault Dufresne is not once
mentioned from one end of her narrative to the other.


On the twenty-fifth of April, seventeen hundred and twenty-two
(writes Mademoiselle Gautier), while I was still leading a life of
pleasure--according to the pernicious ideas of pleasure which pass
current in the world--I happen to awake, contrary to my usual custom,
between eight and nine o'clock in the morning. I remember that it is my
birthday; I ring for my people; and my maid answers the bell, alarmed by
the idea that I am ill. I tell her to dress me that I may go to mass. I
go to the Church of the Cordeliers, followed by my footman, and taking
with me a little orphan whom I had adopted. The first part of the mass
is celebrated without attracting my attention; but, at the second part
the accusing voice of my conscience suddenly begins to speak. "What
brings you here?" it says. "Do you come to reward God for making you the
attractive person that you are, by mortally transgressing His laws
every day of your life?" I hear that question, and I am unspeakably
overwhelmed by it. I quit the chair on which I have hitherto been
leaning carelessly, and I prostrate myself in an agony of remorse on the
pavement of the church.

The mass over, I send home the footman and the orphan, remaining behind
myself, plunged in inconceivable perplexity. At last I rouse myself on
a sudden; I go to the sacristy; I demand a mass for my own proper
advantage every day; I determine to attend it regularly; and, after
three hours of agitation, I return home, resolved to enter on the path
that leads to justification.

Six months passed. Every morning I went to my mass: every evening I
spent in my customary dissipations.

Some of my friends indulged in considerable merriment at my expense when
they found out my constant attendance at mass. Accordingly, I disguised
myself as a boy, when I went to church, to escape observation. My
disguise was found out, and the jokes against me were redoubled. Upon
this, I began to think of the words of the Gospel, which declare the
impossibility of serving two masters. I determined to abandon the
service of Mammon.

The first vanity I gave up was the vanity of keeping a maid. By way of
further accustoming myself to the retreat from the world which I now
began to meditate, I declined all invitations to parties under the
pretext of indisposition. But the nearer the Easter time approached at
which I had settled in my own mind definitely to turn my back on worldly
temptations and pleasures, the more violent became my internal struggles
with myself. My health suffered under them to such an extent that I
was troubled with perpetual attacks of retching and sickness, which,
however, did not prevent me from writing my general confession,
addressed to the vicar of Saint Sulpice, the parish in which I lived.

Just Heaven! what did I not suffer some days afterwards, when I united
around me at dinner, for the last time, all the friends who had been
dearest to me in the days of my worldly life! What words can describe
the tumult of my heart when one of my guests said to me, "You are giving
us too good a dinner for a Wednesday in Passion Week;" and when another
answered, jestingly, "You forget that this is her farewell dinner to her
friends!" I felt ready to faint while they were talking, and rose
from table pretexting as an excuse, that I had a payment to make that
evening, which I could not in honour defer any longer. The company rose
with me, and saw me to the door. I got into my carriage, and the company
returned to table. My nerves were in such a state that I shrieked at the
first crack of the coachman's whip; and the company came running down
again to know what was the matter. One of my servants cleverly stopped
them from all hurrying out to the carriage together, by declaring that
the scream proceeded from my adopted orphan. Upon this they returned
quietly enough to their wine, and I drove off with my general confession
to the vicar of Saint Sulpice.

My interview with the vicar lasted three hours. His joy at discovering
that I was in a state of grace was extreme. My own emotions were quite
indescribable. Late at night I returned to my own house, and found my
guests all gone. I employed myself in writing farewell letters to
the manager and company of the theatre, and in making the necessary
arrangements for sending back my adopted orphan to his friends, with
twenty pistoles. Finally, I directed the servants to say, if anybody
enquired after me the next day, that I had gone out of town for some
time; and after that, at five o'clock in the morning, I left my home in
Paris never to return to it again.

By this time I had thoroughly recovered my tranquillity. I was as easy
in my mind at leaving my house as I am now when I quit my cell to sing
in the choir. Such already was the happy result of my perpetual masses,
my general confession, and my three hours' interview with the vicar of
Saint Sulpice.

Before taking leave of the world, I went to Versailles to say good-bye
to my worthy patrons, Cardinal Fleury and the Duke de Gesvres. From
them, I went to mass in the King's Chapel; and after that, I called on
a lady of Versailles whom I had mortally offended, for the purpose of
making my peace with her. She received me angrily enough. I told her I
had not come to justify myself, but to ask her pardon. If she granted
it, she would send me away happy. If she declined to be reconciled,
Providence would probably be satisfied with my submission, but certainly
not with her refusal. She felt the force of this argument; and we made
it up on the spot.

I left Versailles immediately afterwards, without taking anything to
eat; the act of humility which I had just performed being as good as a
meal to me.

Towards evening, I entered the house of the Community of Saint Perpetua
at Paris. I had ordered a little room to be furnished there for me,
until the inventory of my worldly effects was completed, and until
I could conclude my arrangements for entering a convent. On first
installing myself, I began to feel hungry at last, and begged the
Superior of the Community to give me for supper anything that remained
from the dinner of the house. They had nothing but a little stewed
carp, of which I eat with an excellent appetite. Marvellous to relate,
although I had been able to keep nothing on my stomach for the past
three months, although I had been dreadfully sick after a little rice
soup on the evening before, the stewed carp of the sisterhood of
Saint Perpetua, with some nuts afterwards for dessert, agreed with me
charmingly, and I slept all through the night afterwards as peacefully
as a child!

When the news of my retirement became public, it occasioned great talk
in Paris. Various people assigned various reasons for the strange course
that I had taken. Nobody, however, believed that I had quitted the world
in the prime of my life (I was then thirty-one years old), never to
return to it again. Meanwhile, my inventory was finished and my goods
were sold. One of my friends sent a letter, entreating me to reconsider
my determination. My mind was made up, and I wrote to say so. When my
goods had been all sold, I left Paris to go and live incognito as a
parlour-boarder in the Convent of the Ursuline nuns of Pondevaux. Here
I wished to try the mode of life for a little while before I assumed the
serious responsibility of taking the veil. I knew my own character--I
remembered my early horror of total seclusion, and my inveterate dislike
to the company of women only; and, moved by these considerations, I
resolved, now that I had taken the first important step, to proceed in
the future with caution.

The nuns of Pondevaux received me among them with great kindness. They
gave me a large room, which I partitioned off into three small ones.
I assisted at all the pious exercises of the place. Deceived by my
fashionable appearance and my plump figure, the good nuns treated me
as if I was a person of high distinction. This afflicted me, and I
undeceived them. When they knew who I really was, they only behaved
towards me with still greater kindness. I passed my time in reading and
praying, and led the quietest, sweetest life it is possible to conceive.

After ten months' sojourn at Pondevaux, I went to Lyons, and entered
(still as parlour-boarder only) the House of Anticaille, occupied by the
nuns of the Order of Saint Mary. Here, I enjoyed the advantage of having
for director of my conscience that holy man, Father Deveaux. He belonged
to the Order of the Jesuits; and he was good enough, when I first asked
him for advice, to suggest that I should get up at eleven o'clock at
night to say my prayers, and should remain absorbed in devotion until
midnight. In obedience to the directions of this saintly person, I kept
myself awake as well as I could till eleven o'clock. I then got on my
knees with great fervour, and I blush to confess it, immediately fell as
fast asleep as a dormouse. This went on for several nights, when Father
Deveaux finding that my midnight devotions were rather too much for me,
was so obliging as to prescribe another species of pious exercise, in
a letter which he wrote to me with his own hand. The holy father, after
deeply regretting my inability to keep awake, informed me that he had
a new act of penitence to suggest to me by the performance of which I
might still hope to expiate my sins. He then, in the plainest terms,
advised me to have recourse to the discipline of flagellation, every
Friday, using the cat-o'-nine-tails on my bare shoulders for the length
of time that it would take to repeat a Miserere. In conclusion, he
informed me that the nuns of Anticaille would probably lend me the
necessary instrument of flagellation; but, if they made any difficulty
about it, he was benevolently ready to furnish me with a new and special
cat-o'-nine-tails of his own making.

Never was woman more amazed or more angry than I, when I first read this
letter. "What!" cried I to myself, "does this man seriously recommend me
to lash my own shoulders? Just Heaven, what impertinence! And yet, is it
not my duty to put up with it? Does not this apparent insolence proceed
from the pen of a holy man? If he tells me to flog my wickedness out of
me, is it not my bounden duty to lay on the scourge with all my might
immediately? Sinner that I am! I am thinking remorsefully of my plump
shoulders and the dimples on my back, when I ought to be thinking of
nothing but the cat-o'-nine-tails and obedience to Father Deveaux?"

These reflections soon gave me the resolution which I had wanted at
first. I was ashamed to ask the nuns for an instrument of flagellation;
so I made one for myself of stout cord, pitilessly knotted at very short
intervals. This done, I shut myself up while the nuns were at prayer,
uncovered my shoulders, and rained such a shower of lashes on them,
in the first fervour of my newly-awakened zeal, that I fairly flogged
myself down on the ground, flat on my nose, before I had repeated more
of the Miserere than the first two or three lines.

I burst out crying, shedding tears of spite against myself when I ought
to have been shedding tears of devotional gratitude for the kindness of
Father Deveaux. All through the night I never closed my eyes, and in the
morning I found my poor shoulders (once so generally admired for their
whiteness) striped with all the colours of the rainbow. The sight threw
me into a passion, and I profanely said to myself while I was dressing,
"The next time I see Father Deveaux, I will give my tongue full swing,
and make the hair of that holy man stand on end with terror!" A few
hours afterwards, he came to the convent, and all my resolution melted
away at the sight of him. His imposing exterior had such an effect on
me that I could only humbly entreat him to excuse me from indicting a
second flagellation on myself. He smiled, benignantly, and granted my
request with a saintly amiability. "Give me the cat-o'-nine-tails," he
said, in conclusion, "and I will keep it for you till you ask me for it
again. You are sure to ask for it again, dear child--to ask for it on
your bended knees!"

Pious and prophetic man! Before many days had passed his words came
true. If he had persisted severely in ordering me to flog myself, I
might have opposed him for months together; but, as it was, who could
resist the amiable indulgence he showed towards my weakness? The
very next day after my interview, I began to feel ashamed of my own
cowardice; and the day after that I went down on my knees, exactly as
he had predicted, and said, "Father Deveaux, give me back my
cat-o'-nine-tails." From that time I cheerfully underwent the discipline
of flagellation, learning the regular method of practising it from the
sisterhood, and feeling, in a spiritual point of view, immensely the
better for it.

The nuns, finding that I cheerfully devoted myself to every act of
self-sacrifice prescribed by the rules of their convent, wondered very
much that I still hesitated about taking the veil. I begged them not to
mention the subject to me till my mind was quite made up about it. They
respected my wish, and said no more; but they lent me books to read
which assisted in strengthening my wavering resolution. Among these
books was the Life of Madame de Montmorenci, who, after the shocking
death of her husband, entered the Order of St. Mary. The great example
of this lady made me reflect seriously, and I communicated my thoughts,
as a matter of course, to Father Deveaux. He assured me that the one
last greatest sacrifice which remained for me to make was the sacrifice
of my liberty. I had long known that this was my duty, and I now felt,
for the first time, that I had courage and resolution enough boldly to
face the idea of taking the veil.

While I was in this happy frame of mind, I happened to meet with the
history of the famous Rance, founder, or rather reformer, of the Order
of La Trappe. I found a strange similarity between my own worldly errors
and those of this illustrious penitent. The discovery had such an effect
on me, that I spurned all idea of entering a convent where the rules
were comparatively easy, as was the case at Anticaille, and determined,
when I did take the veil, to enter an Order whose discipline was as
severe as the discipline of La Trappe itself. Father Deveaux informed me
that I should find exactly what I wanted among the Carmelite nuns;
and, by his advice, I immediately put myself in communication with
the Archbishop of Villeroi. I opened my heart to this worthy prelate,
convinced him of my sincerity, and gained from him a promise that he
would get me admitted among the Carmelite nuns of Lyons. One thing I
begged of him at parting, which was, that he would tell the whole truth
about my former life and about the profession that I had exercised in
the world. I was resolved to deceive nobody, and to enter no convent
under false pretences of any sort.

My wishes were scrupulously fulfilled; and the nuns were dreadfully
frightened when they heard that I had been an actress at Paris. But the
Archbishop promising to answer for me, and to take all their scruples
on his own conscience, they consented to receive me. I could not trust
myself to take formal leave of the nuns of Anticaille, who had been
so kind to me, and towards whom I felt so gratefully. So I wrote my
farewell to them after privately leaving their house, telling them
frankly the motives which animated me, and asking their pardon for
separating myself from them in secret.

On the fourteenth of October, seventeen hundred and twenty-four, I
entered the Carmelite convent at Lyons, eighteen months after my flight
from the world, and my abandonment of my profession--to adopt which, I
may say, in my own defence, that I was first led through sheer poverty.
At the age of seventeen years, and possessing (if I may credit report)
remarkable personal charms, I was left perfectly destitute through the
spendthrift habits of my father. I was easily persuaded to go on the
stage, and soon tempted, with my youth and inexperience, to lead an
irregular life. I do not wish to assert that dissipation necessarily
follows the choice of the actress's profession, for I have known many
estimable women on the stage. I, unhappily, was not one of the number. I
confess it to my shame, and, as the chief of sinners, I am only the more
grateful to the mercy of Heaven which accomplished my conversion.

When I entered the convent, I entreated the prioress to let me live in
perfect obscurity, without corresponding with my friends, or even with
my relations. She declined to grant this last request, thinking that
my zeal was leading me too far. On the other hand, she complied with
my wish to be employed at once, without the slightest preparatory
indulgence or consideration, on any menial labour which the discipline
of the convent might require from me. On the first day of my admission a
broom was put into my hands. I was appointed also to wash up the dishes,
to scour the saucepans, to draw water from a deep well, to carry each
sister's pitcher to its proper place, and to scrub the tables in the
refectory. From these occupations I got on in time to making rope
shoes for the sisterhood, and to taking care of the great clock of the
convent; this last employment requiring me to pull up three immensely
heavy weights regularly every day. Seven years of my life passed in this
hard work, and I can honestly say that I never murmured over it.

To return, however, to the period of my admission into the convent.

After three months of probation, I took the veil on the twentieth of
January, seventeen hundred and twenty-five. The Archbishop did me the
honour to preside at the ceremony; and, in spite of the rigour of the
season, all Lyons poured into the church to see me take the vows. I was
deeply affected; but I never faltered in my resolution. I pronounced the
oaths with a firm voice, and with a tranquillity which astonished all
the spectators,--a tranquillity which has never once failed me since
that time.

Such is the story of my conversion. Providence sent me into the
world with an excellent nature, with a true heart, with a remarkable
susceptibility to the influence of estimable sentiments. My parents
neglected my education, and left me in the world, destitute of
everything but youth, beauty, and a lively temperament. I tried hard to
be virtuous; I vowed, before I was out of my teens, and when I happened
to be struck down by a serious illness, to leave the stage, and to keep
my reputation unblemished, if anybody would only give me two hundred
livres a year to live upon. Nobody came forward to help me, and I fell.

Heaven pardon the rich people of Paris who might have preserved my
virtue at so small a cost! Heaven grant me courage to follow the better
path into which its mercy has led me, and to persevere in a life of
penitence and devotion to the end of my days!


So this singular confession ends. Besides the little vanities and
levities which appear here and there on its surface, there is surely a
strong under-current of sincerity and frankness which fit it to appeal
in some degree to the sympathy as well as the curiosity of the reader.
It is impossible to read the narrative without feeling that there must
have been something really genuine and hearty in Mademoiselle Gautier's
nature; and it is a gratifying proof of the honest integrity of her
purpose to know that she persevered to the last in the life of humility
and seclusion which her conscience had convinced her was the best life
that she could lead. Persons who knew her in the Carmelite convent,
report that she lived and died in it, preserving to the last, all the
better part of the youthful liveliness of her character. She always
received visitors with pleasure, always talked to them with surprising
cheerfulness, always assisted the poor, and always willingly wrote
letters to her former patrons in Paris to help the interests of her
needy friends. Towards the end of her life, she was afflicted with
blindness; but she was a trouble to no one in consequence of this
affliction, for she continued, in spite of it, to clean her own cell,
to make her own bed, and to cook her own food just as usual. One little
characteristic vanity--harmless enough, surely?--remained with her to
the last. She never forgot her own handsome face, which all Paris had
admired in the by-gone time; and she contrived to get a dispensation
from the Pope which allowed her to receive visitors in the convent
parlour without a veil.

========================================
========================================

THE LEGACY OF CAIN

By Wilkie Collins


To

MRS. HENRY POWELL BARTLEY:

Permit me to add your name to my name, in publishing this novel. The
pen which has written my books cannot be more agreeably employed than in
acknowledging what I owe to the pen which has skillfully and patiently
helped me, by copying my manuscripts for the printer.

WILKIE COLLINS.

Wimpole Street, 6th December, 1888.





THE LEGACY OF CAIN.




First Period: 1858-1859. EVENTS IN THE PRISON, RELATED BY THE GOVERNOR.



CHAPTER I. THE GOVERNOR EXPLAINS.

At the request of a person who has claims on me that I must not disown,
I consent to look back through a long interval of years and to describe
events which took place within the walls of an English prison during the
earlier period of my appointment as Governor.

Viewing my task by the light which later experience casts on it, I think
I shall act wisely by exercising some control over the freedom of my
pen.

I propose to pass over in silence the name of the town in which is
situated the prison once confided to my care. I shall observe a similar
discretion in alluding to individuals--some dead, some living, at the
present time.

Being obliged to write of a woman who deservedly suffered the extreme
penalty of the law, I think she will be sufficiently identified if I
call her The Prisoner. Of the four persons present on the evening before
her execution three may be distinguished one from the other by allusion
to their vocations in life. I here introduce them as The Chaplain, The
Minister, and The Doctor. The fourth was a young woman. She has no claim
on my consideration; and, when she is mentioned, her name may appear.
If these reserves excite suspicion, I declare beforehand that they
influence in no way the sense of responsibility which commands an honest
man to speak the truth.



CHAPTER II. THE MURDERESS ASKS QUESTIONS.

The first of the events which I must now relate was the conviction of
The Prisoner for the murder of her husband.

They had lived together in matrimony for little more than two years. The
husband, a gentleman by birth and education, had mortally offended his
relations in marrying a woman of an inferior rank of life. He was
fast declining into a state of poverty, through his own reckless
extravagance, at the time when he met with his death at his wife's hand.

Without attempting to excuse him, he deserved, to my mind, some tribute
of regret. It is not to be denied that he was profligate in his
habits and violent in his temper. But it is equally true that he was
affectionate in the domestic circle, and, when moved by wisely applied
remonstrance, sincerely penitent for sins committed under temptation
that overpowered him. If his wife had killed him in a fit of jealous
rage--under provocation, be it remembered, which the witnesses
proved--she might have been convicted of manslaughter, and might have
received a light sentence. But the evidence so undeniably revealed
deliberate and merciless premeditation, that the only defense attempted
by her counsel was madness, and the only alternative left to a righteous
jury was a verdict which condemned the woman to death. Those mischievous
members of the community, whose topsy-turvy sympathies feel for the
living criminal and forget the dead victim, attempted to save her by
means of high-flown petitions and contemptible correspondence in the
newspapers. But the Judge held firm; and the Home Secretary held firm.
They were entirely right; and the public were scandalously wrong.

Our Chaplain endeavored to offer the consolations of religion to the
condemned wretch. She refused to accept his ministrations in language
which filled him with grief and horror.

On the evening before the execution, the reverend gentleman laid on my
table his own written report of a conversation which had passed between
the Prisoner and himself.

"I see some hope, sir," he said, "of inclining the heart of this woman
to religious belief, before it is too late. Will you read my report, and
say if you agree with me?"

I read it, of course. It was called "A Memorandum," and was thus
written:

"At his last interview with the Prisoner, the Chaplain asked her if she
had ever entered a place of public worship. She replied that she had
occasionally attended the services at a Congregational Church in this
town; attracted by the reputation of the Minister as a preacher. 'He
entirely failed to make a Christian of me,' she said; 'but I was struck
by his eloquence. Besides, he interested me personally--he was a fine
man.'

"In the dreadful situation in which the woman was placed, such language
as this shocked the Chaplain; he appealed in vain to the Prisoner's
sense of propriety. 'You don't understand women,' she answered. 'The
greatest saint of my sex that ever lived likes to look at a preacher as
well as to hear him. If he is an agreeable man, he has all the greater
effect on her. This preacher's voice told me he was kind-hearted; and
I had only to look at his beautiful eyes to see that he was trustworthy
and true.'

"It was useless to repeat a protest which had already failed. Recklessly
and flippantly as she had described it, an impression had been produced
on her. It occurred to the Chaplain that he might at least make the
attempt to turn this result to her own religious advantage. He asked
whether she would receive the Minister, if the reverend gentleman came
to the prison. 'That will depend,' she said, 'on whether you answer some
questions which I want to put to you first.' The Chaplain consented;
provided always that he could reply with propriety to what she asked of
him. Her first question only related to himself.

"She said: 'The women who watch me tell me that you are a widower, and
have a family of children. Is that true?'

"The Chaplain answered that it was quite true.

"She alluded next to a report, current in the town, that the Minister
had resigned the pastorate. Being personally acquainted with him, the
Chaplain was able to inform her that his resignation had not yet been
accepted. On hearing this, she seemed to gather confidence. Her next
inquiries succeeded each other rapidly, as follows:

"'Is my handsome preacher married?'

"'Yes.'

"'Has he got any children?'

"'He has never had any children.'

"'How long has he been married?'

"'As well as I know, about seven or eight years.

"'What sort of woman is his wife?'

"'A lady universally respected.'

"'I don't care whether she is respected or not. Is she kind?'

"'Certainly!'

"'Is her husband well off?'

"'He has a sufficient income.'

"After that reply, the Prisoner's curiosity appeared to be satisfied.
She said, 'Bring your friend the preacher to me, if you like'--and there
it ended.

"What her object could have been in putting these questions, it seems to
be impossible to guess. Having accurately reported all that took place,
the Chaplain declares, with heartfelt regret, that he can exert no
religious influence over this obdurate woman. He leaves it to the
Governor to decide whether the Minister of the Congregational Church may
not succeed, where the Chaplain of the Jail has failed. Herein is the
one last hope of saving the soul of the Prisoner, now under sentence of
death!"

In those serious words the Memorandum ended. Although not personally
acquainted with the Minister I had heard of him, on all sides, as an
excellent man. In the emergency that confronted us he had, as it seemed
to me, his own sacred right to enter the prison; assuming that he
was willing to accept, what I myself felt to be, a very serious
responsibility. The first necessity was to discover whether we might
hope to obtain his services. With my full approval the Chaplain left me,
to state the circumstances to his reverend colleague.



CHAPTER III. THE CHILD APPEARS.

During my friend's absence, my attention was claimed by a sad
incident--not unforeseen.

It is, I suppose, generally known that near relatives are admitted to
take their leave of criminals condemned to death. In the case of the
Prisoner now waiting for execution, no person applied to the authorities
for permission to see her. I myself inquired if she had any relations
living, and if she would like to see them. She answered: "None that
I care to see, or that care to see me--except the nearest relation of
all."

In those last words the miserable creature alluded to her only child, a
little girl (an infant, I should say), who had passed her first year's
birthday by a few months. The farewell interview was to take place on
the mother's last evening on earth; and the child was now brought into
my rooms, in charge of her nurse.

I had seldom seen a brighter or prettier little girl. She was just able
to walk alone, and to enjoy the first delight of moving from one place
to another. Quite of her own accord she came to me, attracted I daresay
by the glitter of my watch-chain. Helping her to climb on my knee, I
showed the wonders of the watch, and held it to her ear. At that past
time, death had taken my good wife from me; my two boys were away at
Harrow School; my domestic life was the life of a lonely man. Whether
I was reminded of the bygone days when my sons were infants on my knee,
listening to the ticking of my watch--or whether the friendless position
of the poor little creature, who had lost one parent and was soon to
lose the other by a violent death, moved me in depths of pity not easily
reached in my later experience--I am not able to say. This only I know:
my heart ached for the child while she was laughing and listening; and
something fell from me on the watch which I don't deny might have been
a tear. A few of the toys, mostly broken now, which my two children
used to play with are still in my possession; kept, like my poor wife's
favorite jewels, for old remembrance' sake. These I took from their
repository when the attraction of my watch showed signs of failing. The
child pounced on them with her chubby hands, and screamed with pleasure.
And the hangman was waiting for her mother--and, more horrid still, the
mother deserved it!

My duty required me to let the Prisoner know that her little daughter
had arrived. Did that heart of iron melt at last? It might have been so,
or it might not; the message sent back kept her secret. All that it said
to me was: "Let the child wait till I send for her."

The Minister had consented to help us. On his arrival at the prison, I
received him privately in my study.

I had only to look at his face--pitiably pale and agitated--to see
that he was a sensitive man, not always able to control his nerves on
occasions which tried his moral courage. A kind, I might almost say a
noble face, and a voice unaffectedly persuasive, at once prepossessed
me in his favor. The few words of welcome that I spoke were intended
to compose him. They failed to produce the impression on which I had
counted.

"My experience," he said, "has included many melancholy duties, and has
tried my composure in terrible scenes; but I have never yet found myself
in the presence of an unrepentant criminal, sentenced to death--and
that criminal a woman and a mother. I own, sir, that I am shaken by the
prospect before me."

I suggested that he should wait a while, in the hope that time and quiet
might help him. He thanked me, and refused.

"If I have any knowledge of myself," he said, "terrors of anticipation
lose their hold when I am face to face with a serious call on me. The
longer I remain here, the less worthy I shall appear of the trust that
has been placed in me--the trust which, please God, I mean to deserve."

My own observation of human nature told me that this was wisely said. I
led the way at once to the cell.

CHAPTER IV. THE MINISTER SAYS YES.

The Prisoner was seated on her bed, quietly talking with the woman
appointed to watch her. When she rose to receive us, I saw the Minister
start. The face that confronted him would, in my opinion, have taken any
man by surprise, if he had first happened to see it within the walls of
a prison.

Visitors to the picture-galleries of Italy, growing weary of Holy
Families in endless succession, observe that the idea of the Madonna,
among the rank and file of Italian Painters, is limited to one
changeless and familiar type. I can hardly hope to be believed when I
say that the personal appearance of the murderess recalled that type.
She presented the delicate light hair, the quiet eyes, the finely-shaped
lower features and the correctly oval form of face, repeated in hundreds
on hundreds of the conventional works of Art to which I have ventured to
allude. To those who doubt me, I can only declare that what I have
here written is undisguised and absolute truth. Let me add that daily
observation of all classes of criminals, extending over many years, has
considerably diminished my faith in physiognomy as a safe guide to the
discovery of character. Nervous trepidation looks like guilt. Guilt,
firmly sustained by insensibility, looks like innocence. One of the
vilest wretches ever placed under my charge won the sympathies (while he
was waiting for his trial) of every person who saw him, including even
the persons employed in the prison. Only the other day, ladies and
gentlemen coming to visit me passed a body of men at work on the road.
Judges of physiognomy among them were horrified at the criminal atrocity
betrayed in every face that they noticed. They condoled with me on the
near neighborhood of so many convicts to my official place of residence.
I looked out of the window and saw a group of honest laborers (whose
only crime was poverty) employed by the parish!

Having instructed the female warder to leave the room--but to take care
that she waited within call--I looked again at the Minister.

Confronted by the serious responsibility that he had undertaken, he
justified what he had said to me. Still pale, still distressed, he was
now nevertheless master of himself. I turned to the door to leave him
alone with the Prisoner. She called me back.

"Before this gentleman tries to convert me," she said, "I want you to
wait here and be a witness."

Finding that we were both willing to comply with this request, she
addressed herself directly to the Minister. "Suppose I promise to listen
to your exhortations," she began, "what do you promise to do for me in
return?"

The voice in which she spoke to him was steady and clear; a marked
contrast to the tremulous earnestness with which he answered her.

"I promise to urge you to repentance and the confession of your crime. I
promise to implore the divine blessing on me in the effort to save your
poor guilty soul."

She looked at him, and listened to him, as if he was speaking to her in
an unknown tongue, and went on with what she had to say as quietly as
ever.

"When I am hanged to-morrow, suppose I die without confessing, without
repenting--are you one of those who believe I shall be doomed to eternal
punishment in another life?"

"I believe in the mercy of God."

"Answer my question, if you please. Is an impenitent sinner eternally
punished? Do you believe that?"

"My Bible leaves me no other alternative."

She paused for a while, evidently considering with special attention
what she was about to say next.

"As a religious man," she resumed, "would you be willing to make some
sacrifice, rather than let a fellow-creature go--after a disgraceful
death--to everlasting torment?"

"I know of no sacrifice in my power," he said, fervently, "to which I
would not rather submit than let you die in the present dreadful state
of your mind."

The Prisoner turned to me. "Is the person who watches me waiting
outside?"

"Yes."

"Will you be so kind as to call her in? I have a message for her."

It was plain that she had been leading the way to the delivery of
that message, whatever it might be, in all that she had said up to the
present time. So far my poor powers of penetration helped me, and no
further.

The warder appeared, and received her message. "Tell the woman who has
come here with my little girl that I want to see the child."

Taken completely by surprise, I signed to the attendant to wait for
further instructions.

In a moment more I had sufficiently recovered myself to see the
impropriety of permitting any obstacle to interpose between the Minister
and his errand of mercy. I gently reminded the Prisoner that she would
have a later opportunity of seeing her child. "Your first duty," I told
her, "is to hear and to take to heart what the clergyman has to say to
you."

For the second time I attempted to leave the cell. For the second time
this impenetrable woman called me back.

"Take the parson away with you," she said. "I refuse to listen to him."

The patient Minister yielded, and appealed to me to follow his example.
I reluctantly sanctioned the delivery of the message.

After a brief interval the child was brought to us, tired and sleepy.
For a while the nurse roused her by setting her on her feet. She
happened to notice the Minister first. Her bright eyes rested on him,
gravely wondering. He kissed her, and, after a momentary hesitation,
gave her to her mother. The horror of the situation overpowered him:
he turned his face away from us. I understood what he felt; he almost
overthrew my own self-command.

The Prisoner spoke to the nurse in no friendly tone: "You can go."

The nurse turned to me, ostentatiously ignoring the words that had been
addressed to her. "Am I to go, sir, or to stay?" I suggested that she
should return to the waiting-room. She returned at once in silence. The
Prisoner looked after her as she went out, with such an expression of
hatred in her eyes that the Minister noticed it.

"What has that person done to offend you?" he asked.

"She is the last person in the whole world whom I should have chosen
to take care of my child, if the power of choosing had been mine. But
I have been in prison, without a living creature to represent me or to
take my part. No more of that; my troubles will be over in a few hours
more. I want you to look at my little girl, whose troubles are all to
come. Do you call her pretty? Do you feel interested in her?"

The sorrow and pity in his face answered for him.

Quietly sleeping, the poor baby rested on her mother's bosom. Was the
heart of the murderess softened by the divine influence of maternal
love? The hands that held the child trembled a little. For the first
time it seemed to cost her an effort to compose herself, before she
could speak to the Minister again.

"When I die to-morrow," she said, "I leave my child helpless and
friendless--disgraced by her mother's shameful death. The workhouse
may take her--or a charitable asylum may take her." She paused; a first
tinge of color rose on her pale face; she broke into an outburst of
rage. "Think of _my_ daughter being brought up by charity! She may
suffer poverty, she may be treated with contempt, she may be employed by
brutal people in menial work. I can't endure it; it maddens me. If she
is not saved from that wretched fate, I shall die despairing, I shall
die cursing--"

The Minister sternly stopped her before she could say the next word.
To my astonishment she appeared to be humbled, to be even ashamed: she
asked his pardon: "Forgive me; I won't forget myself again. They tell
me you have no children of your own. Is that a sorrow to you and your
wife?"

Her altered tone touched him. He answered sadly and kindly: "It is the
one sorrow of our lives."

The purpose which she had been keeping in view from the moment when
the Minister entered her cell was no mystery now. Ought I to have
interfered? Let me confess a weakness, unworthy perhaps of my office. I
was so sorry for the child--I hesitated.

My silence encouraged the mother. She advanced to the Minister with the
sleeping infant in her arms.

"I daresay you have sometimes thought of adopting a child?" she said.
"Perhaps you can guess now what I had in my mind, when I asked if you
would consent to a sacrifice? Will you take this wretched innocent
little creature home with you?" She lost her self-possession once more.
"A motherless creature to-morrow," she burst out. "Think of that."

God knows how I still shrunk from it! But there was no alternative now;
I was bound to remember my duty to the excellent man, whose critical
position at that moment was, in some degree at least, due to my
hesitation in asserting my authority. Could I allow the Prisoner to
presume on his compassionate nature, and to hurry him into a decision
which, in his calmer moments, he might find reason to regret? I spoke
to _him_. Does the man live who--having to say what I had to say--could
have spoken to the doomed mother?

"I am sorry to have allowed this to go on," I said. "In justice to
yourself, sir, don't answer!"

She turned on me with a look of fury.

"He shall answer," she cried.

I saw, or thought I saw, signs of yielding in his face. "Take time," I
persisted--"take time to consider before you decide."

She stepped up to me.

"Take time?" she repeated. "Are you inhuman enough to talk of time, in
my presence?"

She laid the sleeping child on her bed, and fell on her knees before the
Minister: "I promise to hear your exhortations--I promise to do all
a woman can to believe and repent. Oh, I know myself! My heart, once
hardened, is a heart that no human creature can touch. The one way to
my better nature--if I have a better nature--is through that poor babe.
Save her from the workhouse! Don't let them make a pauper of her!" She
sank prostrate at his feet, and beat her hands in frenzy on the floor.
"You want to save my guilty soul," she reminded him furiously. "There's
but one way of doing it. Save my child!"

He raised her. Her fierce tearless eyes questioned his face in a mute
expectation dreadful to see. Suddenly, a foretaste of death--the death
that was so near now!--struck her with a shivering fit: her head dropped
on the Minister's shoulder. Other men might have shrunk from the contact
of it. That true Christian let it rest.

Under the maddening sting of suspense, her sinking energies rallied for
an instant. In a whisper, she was just able to put the supreme question
to him.

"Yes? or No?"

He answered: "Yes."

A faint breath of relief, just audible in the silence, told me that she
had heard him. It was her last effort. He laid her, insensible, on the
bed, by the side of her sleeping child. "Look at them," was all he said
to me; "how could I refuse?"



CHAPTER V. MISS CHANCE ASSERTS HERSELF.

The services of our medical officer were required, in order to hasten
the recovery of the Prisoner's senses.

When the Doctor and I left the cell together, she was composed, and
ready (in the performance of her promise) to listen to the exhortations
of the Minister. The sleeping child was left undisturbed, by the
mother's desire. If the Minister felt tempted to regret what he had
done, there was the artless influence which would check him! As we
stepped into the corridor, I gave the female warder her instructions to
remain on the watch, and to return to her post when she saw the Minister
come out.

In the meantime, my companion had walked on a little way.

Possessed of ability and experience within the limits of his profession,
he was in other respects a man with a crotchety mind; bold to the verge
of recklessness in the expression of his opinion; and possessed of a
command of language that carried everything before it. Let me add that
he was just and merciful in his intercourse with others, and I shall
have summed him up fairly enough. When I joined him he seemed to be
absorbed in reflection.

"Thinking of the Prisoner?" I said.

"Thinking of what is going on, at this moment, in the condemned cell,"
he answered, "and wondering if any good will come of it."

I was not without hope of a good result, and I said so.

The Doctor disagreed with me. "I don't believe in that woman's
penitence," he remarked; "and I look upon the parson as a poor weak
creature. What is to become of the child?"

There was no reason for concealing from one of my colleagues the
benevolent decision, on the part of the good Minister, of which I had
been a witness. The Doctor listened to me with the first appearance of
downright astonishment that I had ever observed in his face. When I had
done, he made an extraordinary reply:

"Governor, I retract what I said of the parson just now. He is one of
the boldest men that ever stepped into a pulpit."

Was the doctor in earnest? Strongly in earnest; there could be no doubt
of it. Before I could ask him what he meant, he was called away to a
patient on the other side of the prison. When we parted at the door of
my room, I made it a request that my medical friend would return to me
and explain what he had just said.

"Considering that you are the governor of a prison," he replied, "you
are a singularly rash man. If I come back, how do you know I shall not
bore you?"

"My rashness runs the risk of that," I rejoined.

"Tell me something, before I allow you to run your risk," he said.
"Are you one of those people who think that the tempers of children are
formed by the accidental influences which happen to be about them? Or do
you agree with me that the tempers of children are inherited from their
parents?"

The Doctor (as I concluded) was still strongly impressed by the
Minister's resolution to adopt a child whose wicked mother had committed
the most atrocious of all crimes. Was some serious foreboding in secret
possession of his mind? My curiosity to hear him was now increased
tenfold. I replied without hesitation:

"I agree with you."

He looked at me with his sense of humor twinkling in his eyes. "Do you
know I rather expected that answer?" he said, slyly. "All right. I'll
come back."

Left by myself, I took up the day's newspaper.

My attention wandered; my thoughts were in the cell with the Minister
and the Prisoner. How would it end? Sometimes, I was inclined to doubt
with the Doctor. Sometimes, I took refuge in my own more hopeful view.
These idle reflections were agreeably interrupted by the appearance of
my friend, the Chaplain.

"You are always welcome," I said; "and doubly welcome just now. I am
feeling a little worried and anxious."

"And you are naturally," the Chaplain added, "not at all disposed to
receive a stranger?"

"Is the stranger a friend of yours?" I asked.

"Oh, no! Having occasion, just now, to go into the waiting-room, I found
a young woman there, who asked me if she could see you. She thinks you
have forgotten her, and she is tired of waiting. I merely undertook, of
course, to mention what she had said to me."

The nurse having been in this way recalled to my memory, I felt some
little interest in seeing her, after what had passed in the cell. In
plainer words, I was desirous of judging for myself whether she deserved
the hostile feeling which the Prisoner had shown toward her. I thanked
the Chaplain before he left me, and gave the servant the necessary
instructions. When she entered the room, I looked at the woman
attentively for the first time.

Youth and a fine complexion, a well-made figure and a natural grace of
movement--these were her personal attractions, so far as I could
see. Her defects were, to my mind, equally noticeable. Under a heavy
forehead, her piercing eyes looked out at persons and things with an
expression which was not to my taste. Her large mouth--another defect,
in my opinion--would have been recommended to mercy, in the estimation
of many men, by her magnificent teeth; white, well-shaped, cruelly
regular. Believers in physiognomy might perhaps have seen the betrayal
of an obstinate nature in the lengthy firmness of her chin. While I am
trying to describe her, let me not forget her dress. A woman's dress
is the mirror in which we may see the reflection of a woman's nature.
Bearing in mind the melancholy and impressive circumstances under which
she had brought the child to the prison, the gayety of color in her gown
and her bonnet implied either a total want of feeling, or a total want
of tact. As to her position in life, let me confess that I felt, after
a closer examination, at a loss to determine it. She was certainly not
a lady. The Prisoner had spoken of her as if she was a domestic servant
who had forfeited her right to consideration and respect. And she had
entered the prison, as a nurse might have entered it, in charge of a
child. I did what we all do when we are not clever enough to find the
answer to a riddle--I gave it up.

"What can I do for you?" I asked.

"Perhaps you can tell me," she answered, "how much longer I am to be
kept waiting in this prison."

"The decision," I reminded her, "doesn't depend on me."

"Then who does it depend on?"

The Minister had undoubtedly acquired the sole right of deciding. It
was for him to say whether this woman should, or should not, remain
in attendance on the child whom he had adopted. In the meanwhile, the
feeling of distrust which was gaining on my mind warned me to remember
the value of reserve in holding intercourse with a stranger.

She seemed to be irritated by my silence. "If the decision doesn't rest
with you," she asked, "why did you tell me to stay in the waiting-room?"

"You brought the little girl into the prison," I said; "was it not
natural to suppose that your mistress might want you--"

"Stop, sir!"

I had evidently given offense; I stopped directly.

"No person on the face of the earth," she declared, loftily, "has ever
had the right to call herself my mistress. Of my own free will, sir, I
took charge of the child."

"Because you are fond of her?" I suggested.

"I hate her."

It was unwise on my part--I protested. "Hate a baby little more than a
year old!" I said.

"_Her_ baby!"

She said it with the air of a woman who had produced an unanswerable
reason. "I am accountable to nobody," she went on. "If I consented
to trouble myself with the child, it was in remembrance of my
friendship--notice, if you please, that I say friendship--with the
unhappy father."

Putting together what I had just heard, and what I had seen in the cell,
I drew the right conclusion at last. The woman, whose position in life
had been thus far an impenetrable mystery to me, now stood revealed
as one, among other objects of the Prisoner's jealousy, during her
disastrous married life. A serious doubt occurred to me as to the
authority under which the husband's mistress might be acting, after the
husband's death. I instantly put it to the test.

"Do I understand you to assert any claim to the child?" I asked.

"Claim?" she repeated. "I know no more of the child than you do. I
heard for the first time that such a creature was in existence, when
her murdered father sent for me in his dying moments. At his entreaty I
promised to take care of her, while her vile mother was out of the house
and in the hands of the law. My promise has been performed. If I am
expected (having brought her to the prison) to take her away again,
understand this: I am under no obligation (even if I could afford it)
to burden myself with that child; I shall hand her over to the workhouse
authorities."

I forgot myself once more--I lost my temper.

"Leave the room," I said. "Your unworthy hands will not touch the poor
baby again. She is provided for."

"I don't believe you!" the wretch burst out. "Who has taken the child?"

A quiet voice answered: "_I_ have taken her."

We both looked round and saw the Minister standing in the open doorway,
with the child in his arms. The ordeal that he had gone through in the
condemned cell was visible in his face; he looked miserably haggard and
broken. I was eager to know if his merciful interest in the Prisoner had
purified her guilty soul--but at the same time I was afraid, after what
he had but too plainly suffered, to ask him to enter into details.

"Only one word," I said. "Are your anxieties at rest?"

"God's mercy has helped me," he answered. "I have not spoken in vain.
She believes; she repents; she has confessed the crime."

After handing the written and signed confession to me, he approached
the venomous creature, still lingering in the room to hear what passed
between us. Before I could stop him, he spoke to her, under a natural
impression that he was addressing the Prisoner's servant.

"I am afraid you will be disappointed," he said, "when I tell you that
your services will no longer be required. I have reasons for placing the
child under the care of a nurse of my own choosing."

She listened with an evil smile.

"I know who furnished you with your reasons," she answered. "Apologies
are quite needless, so far as I am concerned. If you had proposed to me
to look after the new member of your family there, I should have felt it
my duty to myself to have refused. I am not a nurse--I am an independent
single lady. I see by your dress that you are a clergyman. Allow me to
present myself as a mark of respect to your cloth. I am Miss Elizabeth
Chance. May I ask the favor of your name?"

Too weary and too preoccupied to notice the insolence of her manner, the
Minister mentioned his name. "I am anxious," he said, "to know if the
child has been baptized. Perhaps you can enlighten me?"

Still insolent, Miss Elizabeth Chance shook her head carelessly. "I
never heard--and, to tell you the truth, I never cared to hear--whether
she was christened or not. Call her by what name you like, I can tell
you this--you will find your adopted daughter a heavy handful."

The Minister turned to me. "What does she mean?"

"I will try to tell you," Miss Chance interposed. "Being a clergyman,
you know who Deborah was? Very well. I am Deborah now; and _I_
prophesy." She pointed to the child. "Remember what I say, reverend sir!
You will find the tigress-cub take after its mother."

With those parting words, she favored us with a low curtsey, and left
the room.



CHAPTER VI. THE DOCTOR DOUBTS.

The Minister looked at me in an absent manner; his attention seemed to
have been wandering. "What was it Miss Chance said?" he asked.

Before I could speak, a friend's voice at the door interrupted us. The
Doctor, returning to me as he had promised, answered the Minister's
question in these words:

"I must have passed the person you mean, sir, as I was coming in here;
and I heard her say: 'You will find the tigress-cub take after its
mother.' If she had known how to put her meaning into good English, Miss
Chance--that is the name you mentioned, I think--might have told you
that the vices of the parents are inherited by the children. And the
one particular parent she had in her mind," the Doctor continued, gently
patting the child's cheek, "was no doubt the mother of this unfortunate
little creature--who may, or may not, live to show you that she comes of
a bad stock and inherits a wicked nature."

I was on the point of protesting against my friend's interpretation,
when the Minister stopped me.

"Let me thank you, sir, for your explanation," he said to the Doctor.
"As soon as my mind is free, I will reflect on what you have said.
Forgive me, Mr. Governor," he went on, "if I leave you, now that I have
placed the Prisoner's confession in your hands. It has been an effort to
me to say the little I have said, since I first entered this room. I can
think of nothing but that unhappy criminal, and the death that she must
die to-morrow."

"Does she wish you to be present?" I asked.

"She positively forbids it. 'After what you have done for me,' she
said, 'the least I can do in return is to prevent your being needlessly
distressed.' She took leave of me; she kissed the little girl for the
last time--oh, don't ask me to tell you about it! I shall break down
if I try. Come, my darling!" He kissed the child tenderly, and took her
away with him.

"That man is a strange compound of strength and weakness," the Doctor
remarked. "Did you notice his face, just now? Nine men out of ten,
suffering as he suffered, would have failed to control themselves. Such
resolution as his _may_ conquer the difficulties that are in store for
him yet."

It was a trial of my temper to hear my clever colleague justifying, in
this way, the ignorant prediction of an insolent woman.

"There are exceptions to all rules," I insisted. "And why are the
virtues of the parents not just as likely to descend to the children as
the vices? There was a fund of good, I can tell you, in that poor baby's
father--though I don't deny that he was a profligate man. And even the
horrible mother--as you heard just now--has virtue enough left in her
to feel grateful to the man who has taken care of her child. These are
facts; you can't dispute them."

The Doctor took out his pipe. "Do you mind my smoking?" he asked.
"Tobacco helps me to arrange my ideas."

I gave him the means of arranging his ideas; that is to say, I gave
him the match-box. He blew some preliminary clouds of smoke and then he
answered me:

"For twenty years past, my friend, I have been studying the question
of hereditary transmission of qualities; and I have found vices and
diseases descending more frequently to children than virtue and health.
I don't stop to ask why: there is no end to that sort of curiosity. What
I have observed is what I tell you; no more and no less. You will say
this is a horribly discouraging result of experience, for it tends to
show that children come into the world at a disadvantage on the day of
their birth. Of course they do. Children are born deformed; children are
born deaf, dumb, or blind; children are born with the seeds in them of
deadly diseases. Who can account for the cruelties of creation? Why are
we endowed with life--only to end in death? And does it ever strike you,
when you are cutting your mutton at dinner, and your cat is catching its
mouse, and your spider is suffocating its fly, that we are all, big
and little together, born to one certain inheritance--the privilege of
eating each other?"

"Very sad," I admitted. "But it will all be set right in another world."

"Are you quite sure of that?" the Doctor asked.

"Quite sure, thank God! And it would be better for you if you felt about
it as I do."

"We won't dispute, my dear Governor. I don't scoff at comforting hopes;
I don't deny the existence of occasional compensations. But I do see,
nevertheless, that Evil has got the upper hand among us, on this curious
little planet. Judging by my observation and experience, that ill-fated
baby's chance of inheriting the virtues of her parents is not to be
compared with her chances of inheriting their vices; especially if she
happens to take after her mother. _There_ the virtue is not conspicuous,
and the vice is one enormous fact. When I think of the growth of that
poisonous hereditary taint, which may come with time--when I think of
passions let loose and temptations lying in ambush--I see the smooth
surface of the Minister's domestic life with dangers lurking under it
which make me shake in my shoes. God! what a life I should lead, if I
happened to be in his place, some years hence. Suppose I said or did
something (in the just exercise of my parental authority) which offended
my adopted daughter. What figure would rise from the dead in my memory,
when the girl bounced out of the room in a rage? The image of her mother
would be the image I should see. I should remember what her mother did
when _she_ was provoked; I should lock my bedroom door, in my own house,
at night. I should come down to breakfast with suspicions in my cup of
tea, if I discovered that my adopted daughter had poured it out. Oh,
yes; it's quite true that I might be doing the girl a cruel injustice
all the time; but how am I to be sure of that? I am only sure that her
mother was hanged for one of the most merciless murders committed in our
time. Pass the match-box. My pipe's out, and my confession of faith has
come to an end."

It was useless to dispute with a man who possessed his command of
language. At the same time, there was a bright side to the poor
Minister's prospects which the Doctor had failed to see. It was barely
possible that I might succeed in putting my positive friend in the
wrong. I tried the experiment, at any rate.

"You seem to have forgotten," I reminded him, "that the child will have
every advantage that education can offer to her, and will be accustomed
from her earliest years to restraining and purifying influences, in a
clergyman's household."

Now that he was enjoying the fumes of tobacco, the Doctor was as placid
and sweet-tempered as a man could be.

"Quite true," he said.

"Do you doubt the influence of religion?" I asked sternly.

He answered, sweetly: "Not at all"

"Or the influence of kindness?"

"Oh, dear, no!"

"Or the force of example?"

"I wouldn't deny it for the world."

I had not expected this extraordinary docility. The Doctor had got the
upper hand of me again--a state of things that I might have found it
hard to endure, but for a call of duty which put an end to our sitting.
One of the female warders appeared with a message from the condemned
cell. The Prisoner wished to see the Governor and the Medical Officer.

"Is she ill?" the Doctor inquired.

"No, sir."

"Hysterical? or agitated, perhaps?"

"As easy and composed, sir, as a person can be."

We set forth together for the condemned cell.

CHAPTER VII. THE MURDERESS CONSULTS THE AUTHORITIES.

There was a considerate side to my friend's character, which showed
itself when the warder had left us.

He was especially anxious to be careful of what he said to a woman in
the Prisoner's terrible situation; especially in the event of her having
been really subjected to the influence of religious belief. On the
Minister's own authority, I declared that there was every reason to
adopt this conclusion; and in support of what I had said I showed him
the confession. It only contained a few lines, acknowledging that she
had committed the murder and that she deserved her sentence. "From the
planning of the crime to the commission of the crime, I was in my
right senses throughout. I knew what I was doing." With that remarkable
disavowal of the defense set up by her advocate, the confession ended.

My colleague read the paper, and handed it back to me without making any
remark. I asked if he suspected the Prisoner of feigning conversion to
please the Minister.

"She shall not discover it," he answered, gravely, "if I do."

It would not be true to say that the Doctor's obstinacy had shaken
my belief in the good result of the Minister's interference. I may,
however, acknowledge that I felt some misgivings, which were not
dispelled when I found myself in the presence of the Prisoner.

I had expected to see her employed in reading the Bible. The good book
was closed and was not even placed within her reach. The occupation to
which she was devoting herself astonished and repelled me.

Some carelessness on the part of the attendant had left on the table the
writing materials that had been needed for her confession. She was using
them now--when death on the scaffold was literally within a few hours
of her--to sketch a portrait of the female warder, who was on the watch!
The Doctor and I looked at each other; and now the sincerity of her
repentance was something that I began to question, too.

She laid down the pen, and proceeded quietly to explain herself.

"Even the little time that is left to me proves to be a weary time
to get through," she said. "I am making a last use of the talent for
drawing and catching a likeness, which has been one of my gifts since I
was a girl. You look as if you didn't approve of such employment as this
for a woman who is going to be hanged. Well, sir, I have no doubt you
are right." She paused, and tore up the portrait. "If I have misbehaved
myself," she resumed, "I make amends. To find you in an indulgent frame
of mind is of importance to me just now. I have a favor to ask of you.
May the warder leave the cell for a few minutes?"

Giving the woman permission to withdraw for a while, I waited with some
anxiety to hear what the Prisoner wanted of me.

"I have something to say to you," she proceeded, "on the subject of
executions. The face of a person who is going to be hanged is hidden, as
I have been told, by a white cap drawn over it. Is that true?"

How another man might have felt, in my place, I cannot, of course,
say. To my mind, such a question--on _her_ lips--was too shocking to be
answered in words. I bowed.

"And the body is buried," she went on, "in the prison?"

I could remain silent no longer. "Is there no human feeling left in
you?" I burst out. "What do these horrid questions mean?"

"Don't be angry with me, sir; you shall hear directly. I want to know
first if I am to be buried in the prison?"

I replied as before, by a bow.

"Now," she said, "I may tell you what I mean. In the autumn of last
year I was taken to see some waxworks. Portraits of criminals were
among them. There was one portrait--" She hesitated; her infernal
self-possession failed her at last. The color left her face; she was no
longer able to look at me firmly. "There was one portrait," she resumed,
"that had been taken after the execution. The face was so hideous; it
was swollen to such a size in its frightful deformity--oh, sir, don't
let me be seen in that state, even by the strangers who bury me! Use
your influence--forbid them to take the cap off my face when I am
dead--order them to bury me in it, and I swear to you I'll meet death
tomorrow as coolly as the boldest man that ever mounted the scaffold!"
Before I could stop her, she seized me by the hand, and wrung it with
a furious power that left the mark of her grasp on me, in a bruise, for
days afterward. "Will you do it?" she cried. "You're an honorable man;
you will keep your word. Give me your promise!"

I gave her my promise.

The relief to her tortured spirit expressed itself horribly in a burst
of frantic laughter. "I can't help it," she gasped; "I'm so happy."

My enemies said of me, when I got my appointment, that I was too
excitable a man to be governor of a prison. Perhaps they were not
altogether wrong. Anyhow, the quick-witted Doctor saw some change in me,
which I was not aware of myself. He took my arm and led me out of the
cell. "Leave her to me," he whispered. "The fine edge of my nerves was
worn off long ago in the hospital."

When we met again, I asked what had passed between the Prisoner and
himself.

"I gave her time to recover," he told me; "and, except that she looked a
little paler than usual, there was no trace left of the frenzy that you
remember. 'I ought to apologize for troubling you,' she said; 'but it is
perhaps natural that I should think, now and then, of what is to happen
to me to-morrow morning. As a medical man, you will be able to enlighten
me. Is death by hanging a painful death?' She had put it so politely
that I felt bound to answer her. 'If the neck happens to be broken,' I
said, 'hanging is a sudden death; fright and pain (if there is any pain)
are both over in an instant. As to the other form of death which is also
possible (I mean death by suffocation), I must own as an honest man that
I know no more about it than you do.' After considering a little, she
made a sensible remark, and followed it by an embarrassing request. 'A
great deal,' she said, 'must depend on the executioner. I am not afraid
of death, Doctor. Why should I be? My anxiety about my little girl is
set at rest; I have nothing left to live for. But I don't like pain.
Would you mind telling the executioner to be careful? Or would it be
better if I spoke to him myself?' I said I thought it would come with
a better grace from herself. She understood me directly; and we dropped
the subject. Are you surprised at her coolness, after your experience of
her?"

I confessed that I was surprised.

"Think a little," the Doctor said. "The one sensitive place in that
woman's nature is the place occupied by her self-esteem."

I objected to this that she had shown fondness for her child.

My friend disposed of the objection with his customary readiness.

"The maternal instinct," he said. "A cat is fond of her kittens; a cow
is fond of her calf. No, sir, the one cause of that outbreak of passion
which so shocked you--a genuine outbreak, beyond all doubt--is to be
found in the vanity of a fine feminine creature, overpowered by a horror
of looking hideous, even after her death. Do you know I rather like that
woman?"

"Is it possible that you are in earnest?" I asked.

"I know as well as you do," he answered, "that this is neither a time
nor a place for jesting. The fact is, the Prisoner carries out an idea
of mine. It is my positive conviction that the worst murders--I mean
murders deliberately planned--are committed by persons absolutely
deficient in that part of the moral organization which _feels_. The
night before they are hanged they sleep. On their last morning they
eat a breakfast. Incapable of realizing the horror of murder, they are
incapable of realizing the horror of death. Do you remember the last
murderer who was hanged here--a gentleman's coachman who killed his
wife? He had but two anxieties while he was waiting for execution. One
was to get his allowance of beer doubled, and the other was to be hanged
in his coachman's livery. No! no! these wretches are all alike; they are
human creatures born with the temperaments of tigers. Take my word for
it, we need feel no anxiety about to-morrow. The Prisoner will face the
crowd round the scaffold with composure; and the people will say, 'She
died game.'"



CHAPTER VIII. THE MINISTER SAYS GOOD-BY.

The Capital Punishment of the Prisoner is in no respect connected with
my purpose in writing the present narrative. Neither do I desire
to darken these pages by describing in detail an act of righteous
retribution which must present, by the nature of it, a scene of horror.
For these reasons I ask to be excused, if I limit what I must needs say
of the execution within the compass of a few words--and pass on.

The one self-possessed person among us was the miserable woman who
suffered the penalty of death.

Not very discreetly, as I think, the Chaplain asked her if she had truly
repented. She answered: "I have confessed the crime, sir. What more do
you want?" To my mind--still hesitating between the view that believes
with the Minister, and the view that doubts with the Doctor--this reply
leaves a way open to hope of her salvation. Her last words to me, as she
mounted the steps of the scaffold, were: "Remember your promise." It was
easy for me to be true to my word. At that bygone time, no difficulties
were placed in my way by such precautions as are now observed in the
conduct of executions within the walls of the prison. From the time of
her death to the time of her burial, no living creature saw her face.
She rests, veiled in her prison grave.

Let me now turn to living interests, and to scenes removed from the
thunder-clouds of crime.

.......

On the next day I received a visit from the Minister.

His first words entreated me not to allude to the terrible event of
the previous day. "I cannot escape thinking of it," he said, "but I may
avoid speaking of it." This seemed to me to be the misplaced confidence
of a weak man in the refuge of silence. By way of changing the subject,
I spoke of the child. There would be serious difficulties to contend
with (as I ventured to suggest), if he remained in the town, and allowed
his new responsibilities to become the subject of public talk.

His reply to this agreeably surprised me. There were no difficulties to
be feared.

The state of his wife's health had obliged him (acting under medical
advice) to try the influence of her native air. An interval of
some months might elapse before the good effect of the change had
sufficiently declared itself; and a return to the peculiar climate
of the town might bring on a relapse. There had consequently been no
alternative to but resign his charge. Only on that day the resignation
had been accepted--with expressions of regret sincerely reciprocated
by himself. He proposed to leave the town immediately; and one of the
objects of his visit was to bid me good-by.

"The next place I live in," he said, "will be more than a hundred miles
away. At that distance I may hope to keep events concealed which must
be known only to ourselves. So far as I can see, there are no risks of
discovery lurking in this place. My servants (only two in number) have
both been born here, and have both told my wife that they have no wish
to go away. As to the person who introduced herself to me by the name of
Miss Chance, she was traced to the railway station yesterday afternoon,
and took her ticket for London."

I congratulated the Minister on the good fortune which had befriended
him, so far.

"You will understand how carefully I have provided against being
deceived," he continued, "when I tell you what my plans are. The persons
among whom my future lot is cast--and the child herself, of course--must
never suspect that the new member of my family is other than my own
daughter. This is deceit, I admit; but it is deceit that injures no one.
I hope you see the necessity for it, as I do."

There could be no doubt of the necessity.

If the child was described as adopted, there would be curiosity about
the circumstances, and inquiries relating to the parents. Prevaricating
replies lead to suspicion, and suspicion to discovery. But for the wise
course which the Minister had decided on taking, the poor child's life
might have been darkened by the horror of the mother's crime, and the
infamy of the mother's death.

Having quieted my friend's needless scruples by this perfectly sincere
expression of opinion, I ventured to approach the central figure in his
domestic circle, by means of a question relating to his wife. How had
that lady received the unfortunate little creature, for whose appearance
on the home-scene she must have been entirely unprepared?

The Minister's manner showed some embarrassment; he prefaced what he had
to tell me with praises of his wife, equally creditable no doubt to both
of them. The beauty of the child, the pretty ways of the child, he said,
fascinated the admirable woman at first sight. It was not to be denied
that she had felt, and had expressed, misgivings, on being informed
of the circumstances under which the Minister's act of mercy had been
performed. But her mind was too well balanced to incline to this
state of feeling, when her husband had addressed her in defense of
his conduct. She then understood that the true merit of a good action
consisted in patiently facing the sacrifices involved. Her interest in
the new daughter being, in this way, ennobled by a sense of Christian
duty, there had been no further difference of opinion between the
married pair.

I listened to this plausible explanation with interest, but, at the
same time, with doubts of the lasting nature of the lady's submission to
circumstances; suggested, perhaps, by the constraint in the Minister's
manner. It was well for both of us when we changed the subject. He
reminded me of the discouraging view which the Doctor had taken of the
prospect before him.

"I will not attempt to decide whether your friend is right or wrong,"
he said. "Trusting, as I do, in the mercy of God, I look hopefully to
a future time when all that is brightest and best in the nature of
my adopted child will be developed under my fostering care. If evil
tendencies show themselves, my reliance will be confidently placed on
pious example, on religious instruction, and, above all, on intercession
by prayer. Repeat to your friend," he concluded, "what you have just
heard me say. Let him ask himself if he could confront the uncertain
future with my cheerful submission and my steadfast hope."

He intrusted me with that message, and gave me his hand. So we parted.

I agreed with him, I admired him; but my faith seemed to want sustaining
power, as compared with his faith. On his own showing (as it appeared
to me), there would be two forces in a state of conflict in the child's
nature as she grew up--inherited evil against inculcated good. Try as I
might, I failed to feel the Minister's comforting conviction as to which
of the two would win.



CHAPTER IX. THE GOVERNOR RECEIVES A VISIT.

A few days after the good man had left us, I met with a serious
accident, caused by a false step on the stone stairs of the prison.

The long illness which followed this misfortune, and my removal
afterward (in the interests of my recovery) to a milder climate than the
climate of England, obliged me to confide the duties of governor of the
prison to a representative. I was absent from my post for rather more
than a year. During this interval no news reached me from my reverend
friend.

Having returned to the duties of my office, I thought of writing to the
Minister. While the proposed letter was still in contemplation, I was
informed that a lady wished to see me. She sent in her card. My visitor
proved to be the Minister's wife.

I observed her with no ordinary attention when she entered the room.

Her dress was simple; her scanty light hair, so far as I could see it
under her bonnet, was dressed with taste. The paleness of her lips, and
the faded color in her face, suggested that she was certainly not in
good health. Two peculiarities struck me in her personal appearance.
I never remembered having seen any other person with such a singularly
narrow and slanting forehead as this lady presented; and I was
impressed, not at all agreeably, by the flashing shifting expression in
her eyes. On the other hand, let me own that I was powerfully attracted
and interested by the beauty of her voice. Its fine variety of compass,
and its musical resonance of tone, fell with such enchantment on the
ear, that I should have liked to put a book of poetry into her hand, and
to have heard her read it in summer-time, accompanied by the music of a
rocky stream.

The object of her visit--so far as she explained it at the
outset--appeared to be to offer her congratulations on my recovery,
and to tell me that her husband had assumed the charge of a church in a
large town not far from her birthplace.

Even those commonplace words were made interesting by her delicious
voice. But however sensitive to sweet sounds a man may be, there are
limits to his capacity for deceiving himself--especially when he happens
to be enlightened by experience of humanity within the walls of a
prison. I had, it may be remembered, already doubted the lady's good
temper, judging from her husband's over-wrought description of her
virtues. Her eyes looked at me furtively; and her manner, gracefully
self-possessed as it was, suggested that she had something of a
delicate, or disagreeable, nature to say to me, and that she was at a
loss how to approach the subject so as to produce the right impression
on my mind at the outset. There was a momentary silence between us. For
the sake of saying something, I asked how she and the Minister liked
their new place of residence.

"Our new place of residence," she answered, "has been made interesting
by a very unexpected event--an event (how shall I describe it?) which
has increased our happiness and enlarged our family circle."

There she stopped: expecting me, as I fancied, to guess what she
meant. A woman, and that woman a mother, might have fulfilled her
anticipations. A man, and that man not listening attentively, was simply
puzzled.

"Pray excuse my stupidity," I said; "I don't quite understand you."

The lady's temper looked at me out of the lady's shifting eyes, and
hid itself again in a moment. She set herself right in my estimation
by taking the whole blame of our little misunderstanding on her own
innocent shoulders.

"I ought to have spoken more plainly," she said. "Let me try what I can
do now. After many years of disappointment in my married life, it has
pleased Providence to bestow on me the happiness--the inexpressible
happiness--of being a mother. My baby is a sweet little girl; and my one
regret is that I cannot nurse her myself."

My languid interest in the Minister's wife was not stimulated by the
announcement of this domestic event.

I felt no wish to see the "sweet little girl"; I was not even reminded
of another example of long-deferred maternity, which had occurred
within the limits of my own family circle. All my sympathies attached
themselves to the sad little figure of the adopted child. I remembered
the poor baby on my knee, enchanted by the ticking of my watch--I
thought of her, peacefully and prettily asleep under the horrid shelter
of the condemned cell--and it is hardly too much to say that my heart
was heavy, when I compared her prospects with the prospects of her
baby-rival. Kind as he was, conscientious as he was, could the Minister
be expected to admit to an equal share in his love the child endeared
to him as a father, and the child who merely reminded him of an act of
mercy? As for his wife, it seemed the merest waste of time to put
her state of feeling (placed between the two children) to the test of
inquiry. I tried the useless experiment, nevertheless.

"It is pleasant to think," I began, "that your other daughter--"

She interrupted me, with the utmost gentleness: "Do you mean the child
that my husband was foolish enough to adopt?"

"Say rather fortunate enough to adopt," I persisted. "As your own
little girl grows up, she will want a playfellow. And she will find a
playfellow in that other child, whom the good Minister has taken for his
own."

"No, my dear sir--not if I can prevent it."

The contrast between the cruelty of her intention, and the musical
beauty of the voice which politely expressed it in those words, really
startled me. I was at a loss how to answer her, at the very time when I
ought to have been most ready to speak.

"You must surely understand," she went on, "that we don't want another
person's child, now we have a little darling of our own?"

"Does your husband agree with you in that view?" I asked.

"Oh dear, no! He said what you said just now, and (oddly enough) almost
in the same words. But I don't at all despair of persuading him to
change his mind--and you can help me."

She made that audacious assertion with such an appearance of feeling
perfectly sure of me, that my politeness gave way under the strain laid
on it. "What do you mean?" I asked sharply.

Not in the least impressed by my change of manner, she took from the
pocket of her dress a printed paper. "You will find what I mean there,"
she replied--and put the paper into my hand.

It was an appeal to the charitable public, occasioned by the enlargement
of an orphan-asylum, with which I had been connected for many years.
What she meant was plain enough now. I said nothing: I only looked at
her.

Pleased to find that I was clever enough to guess what she meant, on
this occasion, the Minister's wife informed me that the circumstances
were all in our favor. She still persisted in taking me into
partnership--the circumstances were in _our_ favor.

"In two years more," she explained, "the child of that detestable
creature who was hanged--do you know, I cannot even look at the little
wretch without thinking of the gallows?--will be old enough (with your
interest to help us) to be received into the asylum. What a relief
it will be to get rid of that child! And how hard I shall work at
canvassing for subscribers' votes! Your name will be a tower of
strength when I use it as a reference. Pardon me--you are not looking so
pleasantly as usual. Do you see some obstacles in our way?"

"I see two obstacles."

"What can they possibly be?"

For the second time, my politeness gave way under the strain laid on it.
"You know perfectly well," I said, "what one of the obstacles is."

"Am I to understand that you contemplate any serious resistance on the
part of my husband?"

"Certainly!"

She was unaffectedly amused by my simplicity.

"Are you a single man?" she asked.

"I am a widower."

"Then your experience ought to tell you that I know every weak point in
the Minister's character. I can tell him, on your authority, that the
hateful child will be placed in competent and kindly hands--and I have
my own sweet baby to plead for me. With these advantages in my favor, do
you actually suppose I can fail to make _my_ way of thinking _his_ way
of thinking? You must have forgotten your own married life! Suppose
we go on to the second of your two obstacles. I hope it will be better
worth considering than the first."

"The second obstacle will not disappoint you," I answered; "I am the
obstacle, this time."

"You refuse to help me?"

"Positively."

"Perhaps reflection may alter your resolution?"

"Reflection will do nothing of the kind."

"You are rude, sir!"

"In speaking to you, madam, I have no alternative but to speak plainly."

She rose. Her shifting eyes, for once, looked at me steadily.

"What sort of enemy have I made of you?" she asked. "A passive enemy who
is content with refusing to help me? Or an active enemy who will write
to my husband?"

"It depends entirely," I told her, "on what your husband does. If he
questions me about you, I shall tell him the truth."

"And if not?"

"In that case, I shall hope to forget that you ever favored me with a
visit."

In making this reply I was guiltless of any malicious intention. What
evil interpretation she placed on my words it is impossible for me to
say; I can only declare that some intolerable sense of injury hurried
her into an outbreak of rage. Her voice, strained for the first time,
lost its tuneful beauty of tone.

"Come and see us in two years' time," she burst out--"and discover the
orphan of the gallows in our house if you can! If your Asylum won't
take her, some other Charity will. Ha, Mr. Governor, I deserve my
disappointment! I ought to have remembered that you are only a jailer
after all. And what is a jailer? Proverbially a brute. Do you hear that?
A brute!"

Her strength suddenly failed her. She dropped back into the chair from
which she had risen, with a faint cry of pain. A ghastly pallor stole
over her face. There was wine on the sideboard; I filled a glass.
She refused to take it. At that time in the day, the Doctor's duties
required his attendance in the prison. I instantly sent for him. After
a moment's look at her, he took the wine out of my hand, and held the
glass to her lips.

"Drink it," he said. She still refused. "Drink it," he reiterated, "or
you will die."

That frightened her; she drank the wine. The Doctor waited for a while
with his fingers on her pulse. "She will do now," he said.

"Can I go?" she asked.

"Go wherever you please, madam--so long as you don't go upstairs in a
hurry."

She smiled: "I understand you, sir--and thank you for your advice."

I asked the Doctor, when we were alone, what made him tell her not to go
upstairs in a hurry.

"What I felt," he answered, "when I had my fingers on her pulse. You
heard her say that she understood me."

"Yes; but I don't know what she meant."

"She meant, probably, that her own doctor had warned her as I did."

"Something seriously wrong with her health?"

"Yes."

"What is it?"

"Heart."



CHAPTER X. MISS CHANCE REAPPEARS.

A week had passed, since the Minister's wife had left me, when I
received a letter from the Minister himself.

After surprising me, as he innocently supposed, by announcing the birth
of his child, he mentioned some circumstances connected with that event,
which I now heard for the first time.

"Within an easy journey of the populous scene of my present labors," he
wrote, "there is a secluded country village called Low Lanes. The rector
of the place is my wife's brother. Before the birth of our infant, he
had asked his sister to stay for a while at his house; and the doctor
thought she might safely be allowed to accept the invitation. Through
some error in the customary calculations, as I suppose, the child
was born unexpectedly at the rectory; and the ceremony of baptism was
performed at the church, under circumstances which I am not able to
relate within the limits of a letter: Let me only say that I allude to
this incident without any sectarian bitterness of feeling--for I am
no enemy to the Church of England. You have no idea what treasures of
virtue and treasures of beauty maternity has revealed in my wife's sweet
nature. Other mothers, in her proud position, might find their love
cooling toward the poor child whom we have adopted. But my household is
irradiated by the presence of an angel, who gives an equal share in her
affections to the two little ones alike."

In this semi-hysterical style of writing, the poor man unconsciously
told me how cunningly and how cruelly his wife was deceiving him.

I longed to exhibit that wicked woman in her true character--but what
could I do? She must have been so favored by circumstances as to be able
to account for her absence from home, without exciting the slightest
suspicion of the journey which she had really taken, if I declared in my
reply to the Minister's letter that I had received her in my rooms,
and if I repeated the conversation that had taken place, what would
the result be? She would find an easy refuge in positive denial of
the truth--and, in that case, which of us would her infatuated husband
believe?

The one part of the letter which I read with some satisfaction was the
end of it.

I was here informed that the Minister's plans for concealing the
parentage of his adopted daughter had proved to be entirely successful.
The members of the new domestic household believed the two children to
be infant-sisters. Neither was there any danger of the adopted child
being identified (as the oldest child of the two) by consultation of the
registers.

Before he left our town, the Minister had seen for himself that no
baptismal name had been added, after the birth of the daughter of the
murderess had been registered, and that no entry of baptism existed in
the registers kept in places of worship. He drew the inference--in
all probability a true inference, considering the characters of the
parents--that the child had never been baptized; and he performed the
ceremony privately, abstaining, for obvious reasons, from adding her
Christian name to the imperfect register of her birth. "I am not aware,"
he wrote, "whether I have, or have not, committed an offense against the
Law. In any case, I may hope to have made atonement by obedience to the
Gospel."

Six weeks passed, and I heard from my reverend friend once more.

His second letter presented a marked contrast to the first. It was
written in sorrow and anxiety, to inform me of an alarming change
for the worse in his wife's health. I showed the letter to my medical
colleague. After reading it he predicted the event that might be
expected, in two words:--Sudden death.

On the next occasion when I heard from the Minister, the Doctor's grim
reply proved to be a prophecy fulfilled.

When we address expressions of condolence to bereaved friends, the
principles of popular hypocrisy sanction indiscriminate lying as a
duty which we owe to the dead--no matter what their lives may have
been--because they are dead. Within my own little sphere, I have always
been silent, when I could not offer to afflicted persons expressions of
sympathy which I honestly felt. To have condoled with the Minister on
the loss that he had sustained by the death of a woman, self-betrayed to
me as shamelessly deceitful, and pitilessly determined to reach her own
cruel ends, would have been to degrade myself by telling a deliberate
lie. I expressed in my answer all that an honest man naturally feels,
when he is writing to a friend in distress; carefully abstaining from
any allusion to the memory of his wife, or to the place which her
death had left vacant in his household. My letter, I am sorry to say,
disappointed and offended him. He wrote to me no more, until years had
passed, and time had exerted its influence in producing a more indulgent
frame of mind. These letters of a later date have been preserved, and
will probably be used, at the right time, for purposes of explanation
with which I may be connected in the future.

.......

The correspondent whom I had now lost was succeeded by a gentleman
entirely unknown to me.

Those reasons which induced me to conceal the names of persons, while I
was relating events in the prison, do not apply to correspondence with a
stranger writing from another place. I may, therefore, mention that Mr.
Dunboyne, of Fairmount, on the west coast of Ireland, was the writer of
the letter now addressed to me. He proved, to my surprise, to be one of
the relations whom the Prisoner under sentence of death had not cared to
see, when I offered her the opportunity of saying farewell. Mr. Dunboyne
was a brother-in-law of the murderess. He had married her sister.

His wife, he informed me, had died in childbirth, leaving him but one
consolation--a boy, who already recalled all that was brightest and best
in his lost mother. The father was naturally anxious that the son should
never become acquainted with the disgrace that had befallen the family.

The letter then proceeded in these terms:

"I heard yesterday, for the first time, by means of an old
newspaper-cutting sent to me by a friend, that the miserable woman who
suffered the ignominy of public execution has left an infant child. Can
you tell me what has become of the orphan? If this little girl is, as I
fear, not well provided for, I only do what my wife would have done if
she had lived, by offering to make the child's welfare my especial care.
I am willing to place her in an establishment well known to me, in which
she will be kindly treated, well educated, and fitted to earn her own
living honorably in later life.

"If you feel some surprise at finding that my good intentions toward
this ill-fated niece of mine do not go to the length of receiving her as
a member of my own family, I beg to submit some considerations which may
perhaps weigh with you as they have weighed with me.

"In the first place, there is at least a possibility--however carefully
I might try to conceal it--that the child's parentage would sooner
or later be discovered. In the second place (and assuming that the
parentage had been successfully concealed), if this girl and my boy
grew up together, there is another possibility to be reckoned with:
they might become attached to each other. Does the father live who would
allow his son ignorantly to marry the daughter of a convicted murderess?
I should have no alternative but to part them cruelly by revealing the
truth." The letter ended with some complimentary expressions addressed
to myself. And the question was: how ought I to answer it?

My correspondent had strongly impressed me in his favor; I could not
doubt that he was an honorable man. But the interest of the Minister
in keeping his own benevolent action secure from the risk of
discovery--increased as that interest was by the filial relations of the
two children toward him, now publicly established--had, as I could not
doubt, the paramount claim on me. The absolutely safe course to take
was to admit no one, friend or stranger, to our confidence. I replied,
expressing sincere admiration of Mr. Dunboyne's motives, and merely
informing him that the child was already provided for.

After that, I heard no more of the Irish gentleman.

It is perhaps hardly necessary to add that I kept the Minister in
ignorance of my correspondence with Mr. Dunboyne. I was too well
acquainted with my friend's sensitive and self-tormenting nature to let
him know that a relative of the murderess was living, and was aware that
she had left a child.

A last event remains to be related, before I close these pages.

During the year of which I am now writing, our Chaplain added one more
to the many examples that I have seen of his generous readiness to serve
his friends. He had arranged to devote his annual leave of absence to a
tour among the English Lakes, when he received a letter from a clergyman
resident in London, whom he had known from the time when they had
been school-fellows. This old friend wrote under circumstances of the
severest domestic distress, which made it absolutely necessary that he
should leave London for a while. Having failed to find a representative
who could relieve him of his clerical duties, he applied to the Chaplain
to recommend a clergyman who might be in a position to help him. My
excellent colleague gave up his holiday-plans without hesitation, and
went to London himself.

On his return, I asked if he had seen anything of some acquaintances
of his and of mine, who were then visitors to the metropolis. He smiled
significantly when he answered me.

"I have a card to deliver from an acquaintance whom you have not
mentioned," he said; "and I rather think it will astonish you."

It simply puzzled me. When he gave me the card, this is what I found
printed on it:

"MRS. TENBRUGGEN (OF SOUTH BEVELAND)."

"Well?" said the Chaplain.

"Well," I answered; "I never even heard of Mrs. Tenbruggen, of South
Beveland. Who is she?"

"I married the lady to a foreign gentleman, only last week, at my
friend's church," the Chaplain replied. "Perhaps you may remember her
maiden name?"

He mentioned the name of the dangerous creature who had first presented
herself to me, in charge of the Prisoner's child--otherwise Miss
Elizabeth Chance. The reappearance of this woman on the scene--although
she was only represented by her card--caused me a feeling of vague
uneasiness, so contemptibly superstitious in its nature that I now
remember it with shame. I asked a stupid question:

"How did it happen?"

"In the ordinary course of such things," my friend said. "They were
married by license, in their parish church. The bridegroom was a
fine tall man, with a bold eye and a dashing manner. The bride and
I recognized each other directly. When Miss Chance had become Mrs.
Tenbruggen, she took me aside, and gave me her card. 'Ask the Governor
to accept it,' she said, 'in remembrance of the time when he took me for
a nursemaid. Tell him I am married to a Dutch gentleman of high
family. If he ever comes to Holland, we shall be glad to see him in our
residence at South Beveland.' There is her message to you, repeated word
for word."

"I am glad she is going to live out of England."

"Why? Surely you have no reason to fear her?"

"None whatever."

"You are thinking, perhaps, of somebody else?"

I was thinking of the Minister; but it seemed to be safest not to say
so. ----

My pen is laid aside, and my many pages of writing have been sent
to their destination. What I undertook to do, is now done. To take a
metaphor from the stage--the curtain falls here on the Governor and the
Prison.




Second Period: 1875. THE GIRLS AND THE JOURNALS.



CHAPTER XI. HELENA'S DIARY.

We both said good-night, and went up to our room with a new object in
view. By our father's advice we had resolved on keeping diaries, for the
first time in our lives, and had pledged ourselves to begin before we
went to bed.

Slowly and silently and lazily, my sister sauntered to her end of the
room and seated herself at her writing-table. On the desk lay a nicely
bound book, full of blank pages. The word "Journal" was printed on it in
gold letters, and there was fitted to the covers a bright brass lock and
key. A second journal, exactly similar in every respect to the first,
was placed on the writing-table at my end of the room. I opened my book.
The sight of the blank leaves irritated me; they were so smooth, so
spotless, so entirely ready to do _their_ duty. I took too deep a dip
of ink, and began the first entry in my diary by making a blot. This was
discouraging. I got up, and looked out of window.

"Helena!"

My sister's voice could hardly have addressed me in a more weary tone,
if her pen had been at work all night, relating domestic events. "Well!"
I said. "What is it?"

"Have you done already?" she asked.

I showed her the blot. My sister Eunice (the strangest as well as the
dearest of girls) always blurts out what she has in her mind at the
time. She fixed her eyes gravely on my spoiled page, and said: "That
comforts me." I crossed the room, and looked at her book. She had not
even summoned energy enough to make a blot. "What will papa think of
us," she said, "if we don't begin to-night?"

"Why not begin," I suggested, "by writing down what he said, when he
gave us our journals? Those wise words of advice will be in their proper
place on the first page of the new books."

Not at all a demonstrative girl naturally; not ready with her tears, not
liberal with her caresses, not fluent in her talk, Eunice was affected
by my proposal in a manner wonderful to see. She suddenly developed into
an excitable person--I declare she kissed me. "Oh," she burst out, "how
clever you are! The very thing to write about; I'll do it directly."

She really did it directly; without once stopping to consider, without
once waiting to ask my advice. Line after line, I heard her noisy pen
hurrying to the bottom of a first page, and getting three-parts of the
way toward the end of a second page, before she closed her diary. I
reminded her that she had not turned the key, in the lock which was
intended to keep her writing private.

"It's not worth while," she answered. "Anybody who cares to do it may
read what I write. Good-night."

The singular change which I had noticed in her began to disappear, when
she set about her preparations for bed. I noticed the old easy indolent
movements again, and that regular and deliberate method of brushing
her hair, which I can never contemplate without feeling a stupefying
influence that has helped me to many a delicious night's sleep. She said
her prayers in her favorite corner of the room, and laid her head on
the pillow with the luxurious little sigh which announces that she
is falling asleep. This reappearance of her usual habits was really a
relief to me. Eunice in a state of excitement is Eunice exhibiting an
unnatural spectacle.

The next thing I did was to take the liberty which she had already
sanctioned--I mean the liberty of reading what she had written. Here it
is, copied exactly:

"I am not half so fond of anybody as I am of papa. He is always kind, he
is always right. I love him, I love him, I love him.

"But this is not how I meant to begin. I must tell how he talked to us;
I wish he was here to tell it himself.

"He said to me: 'You are getting lazier than ever, Eunice.' He said to
Helena: 'You are feeling the influence of Eunice's example.' He said to
both of us: 'You are too ready, my dear children, to sit with your hands
on your laps, looking at nothing and thinking of nothing; I want to try
a new way of employing your leisure time.'

"He opened a parcel on the table. He made each of us a present of a
beautiful book, called 'Journal.' He said: 'When you have nothing to do,
my dears, in the evening, employ yourselves in keeping a diary of the
events of the day. It will be a useful record in many ways, and a good
moral discipline for young girls.' Helena said: 'Oh, thank you!' I said
the same, but not so cheerfully.

"The truth is, I feel out of spirits now if I think of papa; I am not
easy in my mind about him. When he is very much interested, there is a
quivering in his face which I don't remember in past times. He seems to
have got older and thinner, all on a sudden. He shouts (which he never
used to do) when he threatens sinners at sermon-time. Being in dreadful
earnest about our souls, he is of course obliged to speak of the devil;
but he never used to hit the harmless pulpit cushion with his fist as he
does now. Nobody seems to have seen these things but me; and now I have
noticed them what ought I to do? I don't know; I am certain of nothing,
except what I have put in at the top of page one: I love him, I love
him, I love him."

.......

There this very curious entry ended. It was easy enough to discover the
influence which had made my slow-minded sister so ready with her memory
and her pen--so ready, in short, to do anything and everything, provided
her heart was in it, and her father was in it.

But Eunice is wrong, let me tell her, in what she says of myself.

I, too, have seen the sad change in my father; but I happen to know
that he dislikes having it spoken of at home, and I have kept my painful
discoveries to myself. Unhappily, the best medical advice is beyond our
reach. The one really competent doctor in this place is known to be an
infidel. But for that shocking obstacle I might have persuaded my father
to see him. As for the other two doctors whom he has consulted, at
different times, one talked about suppressed gout, and the other told
him to take a year's holiday and enjoy himself on the Continent.

The clock has just struck twelve. I have been writing and copying till
my eyes are heavy, and I want to follow Eunice's example and sleep
as soundly as she does. We have made a strange beginning of this
journalizing experiment. I wonder how long it will go on, and what will
come of it.


SECOND DAY.

I begin to be afraid that I am as stupid--no; that is not a nice word to
use--let me say as simple as dear Eunice. A diary means a record of the
events of the day; and not one of the events of yesterday appears in my
sister's journal or in mine. Well, it is easy to set that mistake right.
Our lives are so dull (but I would not say so in my father's hearing
for the world) that the record of one day will be much the same as
the record of another. After family prayers and breakfast I suffer my
customary persecution at the hands of the cook. That is to say, I am
obliged, being the housekeeper, to order what we have to eat. Oh, how I
hate inventing dinners! and how I admire the enviable slowness of
mind and laziness of body which have saved Eunice from undertaking the
worries of housekeeping in her turn! She can go and work in her garden,
while I am racking my invention to discover variety in dishes without
overstepping the limits of economy. I suppose I may confess it privately
to myself--how sorry I am not to have been born a man!

My next employment leads me to my father's study, to write under his
dictation. I don't complain of this; it flatters my pride to feel that I
am helping so great a man. At the same time, I do notice that here again
Eunice's little defects have relieved her of another responsibility.
She can neither keep dictated words in her memory, nor has she ever been
able to learn how to put in her stops.

After the dictation, I have an hour's time left for practicing music.
My sister comes in from the garden, with her pencil and paint-box, and
practices drawing. Then we go out for a walk--a delightful walk, if my
father goes too. He has something always new to tell us, suggested by
what we pass on the way. Then, dinner-time comes--not always a pleasant
part of the day to me. Sometimes I hear paternal complaints (always
gentle complaints) of my housekeeping; sometimes my sister (I won't say
the greedy sister) tells me I have not given her enough to eat. Poor
father! Dear Eunice!

Dinner having reached its end, we stroll in the garden when the weather
is fine. When it rains, we make flannel petticoats for poor old women.
What a horrid thing old age is to look at! To be ugly, to be helpless,
to be miserably unfit for all the pleasures of life--I hope I shall not
live to be an old woman. What would my father say if he saw this? For
his sake, to say nothing of my own feelings, I shall do well if I make
it a custom to use the lock of my journal. Our next occupation is to
join the Scripture class for girls, and to help the teacher. This is a
good discipline for Eunice's temper, and--oh, I don't deny it!--for my
temper, too. I may long to box the ears of the whole class, but it is
my duty to keep a smiling face and to be a model of patience. From the
Scripture class we sometimes go to my father's lecture. At other times,
we may amuse ourselves as well as we can till the tea is ready. After
tea, we read books which instruct us, poetry and novels being forbidden.
When we are tired of the books we talk. When supper is over, we have
prayers again, and we go to bed. There is our day. Oh, dear me! there is
our day.

.......

And how has Eunice succeeded in her second attempt at keeping a diary?
Here is what she has written. It has one merit that nobody can deny--it
is soon read:

"I hope papa will excuse me; I have nothing to write about to-day."

Over and over again I have tried to point out to my sister the absurdity
of calling her father by the infantile nickname of papa. I have reminded
her that she is (in years, at least) no longer a child. "Why don't you
call him father, as I do?" I asked only the other day.

She made an absurd reply: "I used to call him papa when I was a little
girl."

"That," I reminded her, "doesn't justify you in calling him papa now."

And she actually answered: "Yes it does." What a strange state of mind!
And what a charming girl, in spite of her mind!


THIRD DAY.

The morning post has brought with it a promise of some little variety in
our lives--or, to speak more correctly, in the life of my sister.

Our new and nice friends, the Staveleys, have written to invite Eunice
to pay them a visit at their house in London. I don't complain at being
left at home. It would be unfilial, indeed, if we both of us forsook our
father; and last year it was my turn to receive the first invitation,
and to enjoy the change of scene. The Staveleys are excellent
people--strictly pious members of the Methodist Connection--and
exceedingly kind to my sister and me. But it was just as well for my
moral welfare that I ended my visit to our friends when I did. With my
fondness for music, I felt the temptation of the Evil One trying me,
when I saw placards in the street announcing that the Italian Opera was
open. I had no wish to be a witness of the shameful and sinful dancing
which goes on (I am told) at the opera; but I did feel my principles
shaken when I thought of the wonderful singers and the entrancing music.
And this, when I knew what an atmosphere of wickedness people breathe
who enter a theater! I reflect with horror on what _might_ have happened
if I had remained a little longer in London.

Helping Eunice to pack up, I put her journal into the box. "You
will find something to write about now," I told her. "While I record
everything that happens at home, you will keep your diary of all that
you do in London, and when you come back we will show each other what we
have written." My sister is a dear creature. "I don't feel sure of being
able to do it," she answered; "but I promise to try." Good Eunice!



CHAPTER XII. EUNICE'S DIARY.

The air of London feels very heavy. There is a nasty smell of smoke
in London. There are too many people in London. They seem to be mostly
people in a hurry. The head of a country girl, when she goes into the
streets, turns giddy--I suppose through not being used to the noise.

I do hope that it is London that has put me out of temper. Otherwise, it
must be I myself who am ill-tempered. I have not yet been one whole day
in the Staveleys' house, and they have offended me already. I don't
want Helena to hear of this from other people, and then to ask me why I
concealed it from her. We are to read each other's journals when we are
both at home again. Let her see what I have to say for myself here.

There are seven Staveleys in all: Mr. and Mrs. (two); three young
Masters (five); two young Misses (seven). An eldest miss and the second
young Master are the only ones at home at the present time.

Mr., Mrs., and Miss kissed me when I arrived. Young Master only shook
hands. He looked as if he would have liked to kiss me too. Why shouldn't
he? It wouldn't have mattered. I don't myself like kissing. What is the
use of it? Where is the pleasure of it?

Mrs. was so glad to see me; she took hold of me by both hands. She said:
"My dear child, you are improving. You were wretchedly thin when I saw
you last. Now you are almost as well-developed as your sister. I think
you are prettier than your sister." Mr. didn't agree to that. He and
his wife began to dispute about me before my face. I do call that an
aggravating thing to endure.

Mr. said: "She hasn't got her sister's pretty gray eyes."

Mrs. said; "She has got pretty brown eyes, which are just as good."

Mr. said: "You can't compare her complexion with Helena's."

Mrs. said: "I like Eunice's pale complexion. So delicate."

Young Miss struck in: "I admire Helena's hair--light brown."

Young Master took his turn: "I prefer Eunice's hair--dark brown."

Mr. opened his great big mouth, and asked a question: "Which of you two
sisters is the oldest? I forget."

Mrs. answered for me: "Helena is the oldest; she told us so when she was
here last."

I really could _not_ stand that. "You must be mistaken," I burst out.

"Certainly not, my dear."

"Then Helena was mistaken." I was unwilling to say of my sister that she
had been deceiving them, though it did seem only too likely.

Mr. and Mrs. looked at each other. Mrs. said: "You seem to be very
positive, Eunice. Surely, Helena ought to know."

I said: "Helena knows a good deal; but she doesn't know which of us is
the oldest of the two."

Mr. put in another question: "Do _you_ know?"

"No more than Helena does."

Mrs. said: "Don't you keep birthdays?"

I said: "Yes; we keep both our birthdays on the same day."

"On what day?"

"The first day of the New Year."

Mr. tried again: "You can't possibly be twins?"

"I don't know."

"Perhaps Helena knows?"

"Not she!"

Mrs. took the next question out of her husband's mouth: "Come, come, my
dear! you must know how old you are."

"Yes; I do know that. I'm eighteen."

"And how old is Helena?"

"Helena's eighteen."

Mrs. turned round to Mr.: "Do you hear that?"

Mr. said: "I shall write to her father, and ask what it means."

I said: "Papa will only tell you what he told us--years ago."

"What did your father say?"

"He said he had added our two ages together, and he meant to divide
the product between us. It's so long since, I don't remember what the
product was then. But I'll tell you what the product is now. Our two
ages come to thirty-six. Half thirty-six is eighteen. I get one half,
and Helena gets the other. When we ask what it means, and when friends
ask what it means, papa has got the same answer for everybody, 'I have
my reasons.' That's all he says--and that's all I say."

I had no intention of making Mr. angry, but he did get angry. He left
off speaking to me by my Christian name; he called me by my surname. He
said: "Let me tell you, Miss Gracedieu, it is not becoming in a young
lady to mystify her elders."

I had heard that it was respectful in a young lady to call an old
gentleman, Sir, and to say, If you please. I took care to be respectful
now. "If you please, sir, write to papa. You will find that I have
spoken the truth."

A woman opened the door, and said to Mrs. Staveley: "Dinner, ma'am."
That stopped this nasty exhibition of our tempers. We had a very good
dinner.

.......

The next day I wrote to Helena, asking her what she had really said to
the Staveleys about her age and mine, and telling her what I had said.
I found it too great a trial of my patience to wait till she could see
what I had written about the dispute in my journal. The days, since
then, have passed, and I have been too lazy and stupid to keep my diary.

To-day it is different. My head is like a dark room with the light let
into it. I remember things; I think I can go on again.

We have religious exercises in this house, morning and evening, just as
we do at home. (Not to be compared with papa's religious exercises.) Two
days ago his answer came to Mr. Staveley's letter. He did just what I
had expected--said I had spoken truly, and disappointed the family by
asking to be excused if he refrained from entering into explanations.
Mr. said: "Very odd;" and Mrs. agreed with him. Young Miss is not quite
as friendly now as she was at first. And young Master was impudent
enough to ask me if "I had got religion." To conclude the list of
my worries, I received an angry answer from Helena. "Nobody but a
simpleton," she wrote, "would have contradicted me as you did. Who but
you could have failed to see that papa's strange objection to let it be
known which of us is the elder makes us ridiculous before other people?
My presence of mind prevented that. You ought to have been grateful, and
held your tongue." Perhaps Helena is right--but I don't feel it so.

On Sunday we went to chapel twice. We also had a sermon read at home,
and a cold dinner. In the evening, a hot dispute on religion between Mr.
Staveley and his son. I don't blame them. After being pious all day long
on Sunday, I have myself felt my piety give way toward evening.

There is something pleasant in prospect for to-morrow. All London is
going just now to the exhibition of pictures. We are going with all
London.

.......

I don't know what is the matter with me tonight. I have positively been
to bed, without going to sleep! After tossing and twisting and trying
all sorts of positions, I am so angry with myself that I have got up
again. Rather than do nothing, I have opened my ink-bottle, and I mean
to go on with my journal. Now I think of it, it seems likely that the
exhibition of works of art may have upset me.

I found a dreadfully large number of pictures, matched by a dreadfully
large number of people to look at them. It is not possible for me to
write about what I saw: there was too much of it. Besides, the show
disappointed me. I would rather write about a disagreement (oh, dear,
another dispute!) I had with Mrs. Staveley. The cause of it was a famous
artist; not himself, but his works. He exhibited four pictures--what
they call figure subjects. Mrs. Staveley had a pencil. At every one of
the great man's four pictures, she made a big mark of admiration on her
catalogue. At the fourth one, she spoke to me: "Perfectly beautiful,
Eunice, isn't it?"

I said I didn't know. She said: "You strange girl, what do you mean by
that?"

It would have been rude not to have given the best answer I could find.
I said: "I never saw the flesh of any person's face like the flesh in
the faces which that man paints. He reminds me of wax-work. Why does he
paint the same waxy flesh in all four of his pictures? I don't see the
same colored flesh in all the faces about us." Mrs. Staveley held up her
hand, by way of stopping me. She said: "Don't speak so loud, Eunice; you
are only exposing your own ignorance."

A voice behind us joined in. The voice said: "Excuse me, Mrs. Staveley,
if I expose _my_ ignorance. I entirely agree with the young lady."

I felt grateful to the person who took my part, just when I was at a
loss what to say for myself, and I looked round. The person was a young
gentleman.

He wore a beautiful blue frock-coat, buttoned up. I like a frock-coat
to be buttoned up. He had light-colored trousers and gray gloves and a
pretty cane. I like light-colored trousers and gray gloves and a pretty
cane. What color his eyes were is more than I can say; I only know they
made me hot when they looked at me. Not that I mind being made hot; it
is surely better than being made cold. He and Mrs. Staveley shook hands.

They seemed to be old friends. I wished I had been an old friend--not
for any bad reason, I hope. I only wanted to shake hands, too. What Mrs.
Staveley said to him escaped me, somehow. I think the picture escaped
me also; I don't remember noticing anything except the young gentleman,
especially when he took off his hat to me. He looked at me twice before
he went away. I got hot again. I said to Mrs. Staveley: "Who is he?"

She laughed at me. I said again: "Who is he?" She said: "He is young Mr.
Dunboyne." I said: "Does he live in London?" She laughed again. I said
again: "Does he live in London?" She said: "He is here for a holiday; he
lives with his father at Fairmount, in Ireland."

Young Mr. Dunboyne--here for a holiday--lives with his father at
Fairmount, in Ireland. I have said that to myself fifty times over. And
here it is, saying itself for the fifty-first time in my Journal. I must
indeed be a simpleton, as Helena says. I had better go to bed again.



CHAPTER XIII. EUNICE'S DIARY.

Not long before I left home, I heard one of our two servants telling the
other about a person who had been "bewitched." Are you bewitched when
you don't understand your own self? That has been my curious case,
since I returned from the picture show. This morning I took my drawing
materials out of my box, and tried to make a portrait of young Mr.
Dunboyne from recollection. I succeeded pretty well with his frock-coat
and cane; but, try as I might, his face was beyond me. I have never
drawn anything so badly since I was a little girl; I almost felt ready
to cry. What a fool I am!

This morning I received a letter from papa--it was in reply to a letter
that I had written to him--so kind, so beautifully expressed, so like
himself, that I felt inclined to send him a confession of the strange
state of feeling that has come over me, and to ask him to comfort and
advise me. On second thoughts, I was afraid to do it. Afraid of papa! I
am further away from understanding myself than ever.

Mr. Dunboyne paid us a visit in the afternoon. Fortunately, before we
went out.

I thought I would have a good look at him; so as to know his face better
than I had known it yet. Another disappointment was in store for me.
Without intending it, I am sure, he did what no other young man has ever
done--he made me feel confused. Instead of looking at him, I sat with
my head down, and listened to his talk. His voice--this is high
praise--reminded me of papa's voice. It seemed to persuade me as papa
persuades his congregation. I felt quite at ease again. When he went
away, we shook hands. He gave my hand a little squeeze. I gave him back
the squeeze--without knowing why. When he was gone, I wished I had not
done it--without knowing why, either.

I heard his Christian name for the first time to-day. Mrs. Staveley
said to me: "We are going to have a dinner-party. Shall I ask Philip
Dunboyne?" I said to Mrs. Staveley: "Oh, do!"

She is an old woman; her eyes are dim. At times, she can look
mischievous. She looked at me mischievously now. I wished I had not been
so eager to have Mr. Dunboyne asked to dinner.

A fear has come to me that I may have degraded myself. My spirits are
depressed. This, as papa tells us in his sermons, is a miserable world.
I am sorry I accepted the Staveleys' invitation. I am sorry I went to
see the pictures. When that young man comes to dinner, I shall say I
have got a headache, and shall stop upstairs by myself. I don't think I
like his Christian name. I hate London. I hate everybody.

What I wrote up above, yesterday, is nonsense. I think his Christian
name is perfect. I like London. I love everybody.

He came to dinner to-day. I sat next to him. How beautiful a dress-coat
is, and a white cravat! We talked. He wanted to know what my Christian
name was. I was so pleased when I found he was one of the few people who
like it. His hair curls naturally. In color, it is something between my
hair and Helena's. He wears his beard. How manly! It curls naturally,
like his hair; it smells deliciously of some perfume which is new to me.
He has white hands; his nails look as if he polished them; I should like
to polish my nails if I knew how. Whatever I said, he agreed with me; I
felt satisfied with my own conversation, for the first time in my life.
Helena won't find me a simpleton when I go home. What exquisite things
dinner-parties are!


My sister told me (when we said good-by) to be particular in writing
down my true opinion of the Staveleys. Helena wishes to compare what she
thinks of them with what I think of them.

My opinion of Mr. Staveley is--I don't like him. My opinion of Miss
Staveley is--I can't endure her. As for Master Staveley, my clever
sister will understand that _he_ is beneath notice. But, oh, what a
wonderful woman Mrs. Staveley is! We went out together, after luncheon
today, for a walk in Kensington Gardens. Never have I heard any
conversation to compare with Mrs. Staveley's. Helena shall enjoy it
here, at second hand. I am quite changed in two things. First: I think
more of myself than I ever did before. Second: writing is no longer a
difficulty to me. I could fill a hundred journals, without once stopping
to think.

Mrs. Staveley began nicely; "I suppose, Eunice, you have often been told
that you have a good figure, and that you walk well?"

I said: "Helena thinks my figure is better than my face. But do I really
walk well? Nobody ever told me that."

She answered: "Philip Dunboyne thinks so. He said to me, 'I resist the
temptation because I might be wanting in respect if I gave way to
it. But I should like to follow her when she goes out--merely for the
pleasure of seeing her walk.'"

I stood stockstill. I said nothing. When you are as proud as a peacock
(which never happened to me before), I find you can't move and can't
talk. You can only enjoy yourself.

Kind Mrs. Staveley had more things to tell me. She said: "I am
interested in Philip. I lived near Fairmount in the time before I
was married; and in those days he was a child. I want him to marry a
charming girl, and be happy."

What made me think directly of Miss Staveley? What made me mad to know
if she was the charming girl? I was bold enough to ask the question.
Mrs. Staveley turned to me with that mischievous look which I have
noticed already. I felt as if I had been running at the top of my speed,
and had not got my breath again, yet.

But this good motherly friend set me at my ease. She explained herself:
"Philip is not much liked, poor fellow, in our house. My husband
considers him to be weak and vain and fickle. And my daughter agrees
with her father. There are times when she is barely civil to Philip. He
is too good-natured to complain, but _I_ see it. Tell me, my dear, do
you like Philip?"

"Of course I do!" Out it came in those words, before I could stop it.
Was there something unbecoming to a young lady in saying what I had just
said? Mrs. Staveley seemed to be more amused than angry with me. She
took my arm kindly, and led me along with her. "My dear, you are as
clear as crystal, and as true as steel. You are a favorite of mine
already."

What a delightful woman! as I said just now. I asked if she really liked
me as well as she liked my sister.

She said: "Better."

I didn't expect that, and didn't want it. Helena is my superior. She is
prettier than I am, cleverer than I am, better worth liking than I am.
Mrs. Staveley shifted the talk back to Philip. I ought to have said Mr.
Philip. No, I won't; I shall call him Philip. If I had a heart of stone,
I should feel interested in him, after what Mrs. Staveley has told me.

Such a sad story, in some respects. Mother dead; no brothers or sisters.
Only the father left; he lives a dismal life on a lonely stormy coast.
Not a severe old gentleman, for all that. His reasons for taking to
retirement are reasons (so Mrs. Staveley says) which nobody knows. He
buries himself among his books, in an immense library; and he appears
to like it. His son has not been brought up like other young men,
at school and college. He is a great scholar, educated at home by his
father. To hear this account of his learning depressed me. It seemed to
put such a distance between us. I asked Mrs. Staveley if he thought me
ignorant. As long as I live I shall remember the reply: "He thinks you
charming."

Any other girl would have been satisfied with this. I am the miserable
creature who is always making mistakes. My stupid curiosity spoiled
the charm of Mrs. Staveley's conversation. And yet it seemed to be a
harmless question; I only said I should like to know what profession
Philip belonged to.

Mrs. Staveley answered: "No profession."

I foolishly put a wrong meaning on this. I said: "Is he idle?"

Mrs. Staveley laughed. "My dear, he is an only son--and his father is a
rich man."

That stopped me--at last.

We have enough to live on in comfort at home--no more. Papa has told us
himself that he is not (and can never hope to be) a rich man. This is
not the worst of it. Last year, he refused to marry a young couple, both
belonging to our congregation. This was very unlike his usual kind self.
Helena and I asked him for his reasons. They were reasons that did not
take long to give. The young gentleman's father was a rich man. He had
forbidden his son to marry a sweet girl--because she had no fortune.

I have no fortune. And Philip's father is a rich man.

The best thing I can do is to wipe my pen, and shut up my Journal, and
go home by the next train.

.......

I have a great mind to burn my Journal. It tells me that I had better
not think of Philip any more.

On second thoughts, I won't destroy my Journal; I will only put it away.
If I live to be an old woman, it may amuse me to open my book again, and
see how foolish the poor wretch was when she was young.

What is this aching pain in my heart?

I don't remember it at any other time in my life. Is it trouble? How can
I tell?--I have had so little trouble. It must be many years since I was
wretched enough to cry. I don't even understand why I am crying now. My
last sorrow, so far as I can remember, was the toothache. Other
girls' mothers comfort them when they are wretched. If my mother had
lived--it's useless to think about that. We lost her, while I and my
sister were too young to understand our misfortune.

I wish I had never seen Philip.

This seems an ungrateful wish. Seeing him at the picture-show was a new
enjoyment. Sitting next to him at dinner was a happiness that I don't
recollect feeling, even when Papa has been most sweet and kind to me.
I ought to be ashamed of myself to confess this. Shall I write to my
sister? But how should she know what is the matter with me, when I don't
know it myself? Besides, Helena is angry; she wrote unkindly to me when
she answered my last letter.

There is a dreadful loneliness in this great house at night. I had
better say my prayers, and try to sleep. If it doesn't make me feel
happier, it will prevent me spoiling my Journal by dropping tears on it.

.......

What an evening of evenings this has been! Last night it was crying that
kept me awake. To-night I can't sleep for joy.

Philip called on us again to-day. He brought with him tickets for the
performance of an Oratorio. Sacred music is not forbidden music among
our people. Mrs. Staveley and Miss Staveley went to the concert with us.
Philip and I sat next to each other.

My sister is a musician--I am nothing. That sounds bitter; but I don't
mean it so. All I mean is, that I like simple little songs, which I
can sing to myself by remembering the tune. There, my musical enjoyment
ends. When voices and instruments burst out together by hundreds, I feel
bewildered. I also get attacked by fidgets. This last misfortune is sure
to overtake me when choruses are being performed. The unfortunate people
employed are made to keep singing the same words, over and over and over
again, till I find it a perfect misery to listen to them. The choruses
were unendurable in the performance to-night. This is one of them: "Here
we are all alone in the wilderness--alone in the wilderness--in the
wilderness alone, alone, alone--here we are in the wilderness--alone in
the wilderness--all all alone in the wilderness," and soon, till I felt
inclined to call for the learned person who writes Oratorios, and beg
him to give the poor music a more generous allowance of words.

Whenever I looked at Philip, I found him looking at me. Perhaps he saw
from the first that the music was wearying music to my ignorant ears.
With his usual delicacy he said nothing for some time. But when he
caught me yawning (though I did my best to hide it, for it looked like
being ungrateful for the tickets), then he could restrain himself no
longer. He whispered in my ear:

"You are getting tired of this. And so am I."

"I am trying to like it," I whispered back.

"Don't try," he answered. "Let's talk."

He meant, of course, talk in whispers. We were a good deal
annoyed--especially when the characters were all alone in the
wilderness--by bursts of singing and playing which interrupted us at the
most interesting moments. Philip persevered with a manly firmness. What
could I do but follow his example--at a distance?

He said: "Is it really true that your visit to Mrs. Staveley is coming
to an end?"

I answered: "It comes to an end the day after to-morrow."

"Are you sorry to be leaving your friends in London?"

What I might have said if he had made that inquiry a day earlier, when I
was the most miserable creature living, I would rather not try to guess.
Being quite happy as things were, I could honestly tell him I was sorry.

"You can't possibly be as sorry as I am, Eunice. May I call you by your
pretty name?"

"Yes, if you please."

"Eunice!"

"Yes."

"You will leave a blank in my life when you go away--"

There another chorus stopped him, just as I was eager for more. It was
such a delightfully new sensation to hear a young gentleman telling me
that I had left a blank in his life. The next change in the Oratorio
brought up a young lady, singing alone. Some people behind us grumbled
at the smallness of her voice. We thought her voice perfect. It seemed
to lend itself so nicely to our whispers.

He said: "Will you help me to think of you while you are away? I want
to imagine what your life is at home. Do you live in a town or in the
country?"

I told him the name of our town. When we give a person information, I
have always heard that we ought to make it complete. So I mentioned our
address in the town. But I was troubled by a doubt. Perhaps he preferred
the country. Being anxious about this, I said: "Would you rather have
heard that I live in the country?"

"Live where you may, Eunice, the place will be a favorite place of mine.
Besides, your town is famous. It has a public attraction which brings
visitors to it."

I made another of those mistakes which no sensible girl, in my position,
would have committed. I asked if he alluded to our new market-place.

He set me right in the sweetest manner: "I alluded to a building
hundreds of years older than your market-place--your beautiful
cathedral."

Fancy my not having thought of the cathedral! This is what comes of
being a Congregationalist. If I had belonged to the Church of England,
I should have forgotten the market-place, and remembered the cathedral.
Not that I want to belong to the Church of England. Papa's chapel is
good enough for me.

The song sung by the lady with the small voice was so pretty that the
audience encored it. Didn't Philip and I help them! With the sweetest
smiles the lady sang it all over again. The people behind us left the
concert.

He said: "Do you know, I take the greatest interest in cathedrals. I
propose to enjoy the privilege and pleasure of seeing _your_ cathedral
early next week."

I had only to look at him to see that I was the cathedral. It was no
surprise to hear next that he thought of "paying his respects to Mr.
Gracedieu." He begged me to tell him what sort of reception he might
hope to meet with when he called at our house. I got so excited in doing
justice to papa that I quite forgot to whisper when the next question
came. Philip wanted to know if Mr. Gracedieu disliked strangers. When
I answered, "Oh dear, no!" I said it out loud, so that the people heard
me. Cruel, cruel people! They all turned round and stared. One hideous
old woman actually said, "Silence!" Miss Staveley looked disgusted. Even
kind Mrs. Staveley lifted her eyebrows in astonishment.

Philip, dear Philip, protected and composed me.

He held my hand devotedly till the end of the performance. When he put
us into the carriage, I was last. He whispered in my ear: "Expect me
next week." Miss Staveley might be as ill-natured as she pleased, on the
way home. It didn't matter what she said. The Eunice of yesterday might
have been mortified and offended. The Eunice of to-day was indifferent
to the sharpest things that could be said to her.

.......

All through yesterday's delightful evening, I never once thought of
Philip's father. When I woke this morning, I remembered that old Mr.
Dunboyne was a rich man. I could eat no breakfast for thinking of the
poor girl who was not allowed to marry her young gentleman, because she
had no money.

Mrs. Staveley waited to speak to me till the rest of them had left us
together. I had expected her to notice that I looked dull and dismal.
No! her cleverness got at my secret in quite another way.

She said: "How do you feel after the concert? You must be hard to please
indeed if you were not satisfied with the accompaniments last night."

"The accompaniments of the Oratorio?"

"No, my dear. The accompaniments of Philip."

I suppose I ought to have laughed. In my miserable state of mind, it was
not to be done. I said: "I hope Mr. Dunboyne's father will not hear how
kind he was to me."

Mrs. Staveley asked why.

My bitterness overflowed at my tongue. I said: "Because papa is a poor
man."

"And Philip's papa is a rich man," says Mrs. Staveley, putting my
own thought into words for me. "Where do you get these ideas, Eunice?
Surely, you are not allowed to read novels?"

"Oh no!"

"And you have certainly never seen a play?"

"Never."

"Clear your head, child, of the nonsense that has got into it--I can't
think how. Rich Mr. Dunboyne has taught his heir to despise the base act
of marrying for money. He knows that Philip will meet young ladies at my
house; and he has written to me on the subject of his son's choice of a
wife. 'Let Philip find good principles, good temper, and good looks; and
I promise beforehand to find the money.' There is what he says. Are you
satisfied with Philip's father, now?"

I jumped up in a state of ecstasy. Just as I had thrown my arms round
Mrs. Staveley's neck, the servant came in with a letter, and handed it
to me.

Helena had written again, on this last day of my visit. Her letter was
full of instructions for buying things that she wants, before I leave
London. I read on quietly enough until I came to the postscript. The
effect of it on me may be told in two words: I screamed. Mrs. Staveley
was naturally alarmed. "Bad news?" she asked. Being quite unable to
offer an opinion, I read the postscript out loud, and left her to judge
for herself.

This was Helena's news from home:

"I must prepare you for a surprise, before your return. You will find a
strange lady established at home. Don't suppose there is any prospect
of her bidding us good-by, if we only wait long enough. She is already
(with father's full approval) as much a member of the family as we
are. You shall form your own unbiased opinion of her, Eunice. For the
present, I say no more."

I asked Mrs. Staveley what she thought of my news from home. She said:
"Your father approves of the lady, my dear. I suppose it's good news."

But Mrs. Staveley did not look as if she believed in the good news, for
all that.



CHAPTER XIV. HELENA'S DIARY.

To-day I went as usual to the Scripture-class for girls. It was harder
work than ever, teaching without Eunice to help me. Indeed, I felt
lonely all day without my sister. When I got home, I rather hoped that
some friend might have come to see us, and have been asked to stay to
tea. The housemaid opened the door to me. I asked Maria if anybody had
called.

"Yes, miss; a lady, to see the master."

"A stranger?"

"Never saw her before, miss, in all my life." I put no more questions.
Many ladies visit my father. They call it consulting the Minister.
He advises them in their troubles, and guides them in their religious
difficulties, and so on. They come and go in a sort of secrecy. So far
as I know, they are mostly old maids, and they waste the Minister's
time.

When my father came in to tea, I began to feel some curiosity about the
lady who had called on him. Visitors of that sort, in general, never
appear to dwell on his mind after they have gone away; he sees too many
of them, and is too well accustomed to what they have to say. On
this particular evening, however, I perceived appearances that set me
thinking; he looked worried and anxious.

"Has anything happened, father, to vex you?" I said.

"Yes."

"Is the lady concerned in it?"

"What lady, my dear?"

"The lady who called on you while I was out."

"Who told you she had called on me?"

"I asked Maria--"

"That will do, Helena, for the present."

He drank his tea and went back to his study, instead of staying a while,
and talking pleasantly as usual. My respect submitted to his want of
confidence in me; but my curiosity was in a state of revolt. I sent for
Maria, and proceeded to make my own discoveries, with this result:

No other person had called at the house. Nothing had happened, except
the visit of the mysterious lady. "She looked between young and old.
And, oh dear me, she was certainly not pretty. Not dressed nicely, to my
mind; but they do say dress is a matter of taste."

Try as I might, I could get no more than that out of our stupid young
housemaid.

Later in the evening, the cook had occasion to consult me about supper.
This was a person possessing the advantages of age and experience. I
asked if she had seen the lady. The cook's reply promised something new:
"I can't say I saw the lady; but I heard her."

"Do you mean that you heard her speaking?"

"No, miss--crying."

"Where was she crying?"

"In the master's study."

"How did you come to hear her?"

"Am I to understand, miss, that you suspect me of listening?"

Is a lie told by a look as bad as a lie told by words? I looked shocked
at the bare idea of suspecting a respectable person of listening. The
cook's sense of honor was satisfied; she readily explained herself: "I
was passing the door, miss, on my way upstairs."

Here my discoveries came to an end. It was certainly possible that an
afflicted member of my father's congregation might have called on him
to be comforted. But he sees plenty of afflicted ladies, without looking
worried and anxious after they leave him. Still suspecting something
out of the ordinary course of events, I waited hopefully for our next
meeting at supper-time. Nothing came of it. My father left me by myself
again, when the meal was over. He is always courteous to his daughters;
and he made an apology: "Excuse me, Helena, I want to think."

.......

I went to bed in a vile humor, and slept badly; wondering, in the long
wakeful hours, what new rebuff I should meet with on the next day.

At breakfast this morning I was agreeably surprised. No signs of anxiety
showed themselves in my father's face. Instead of retiring to his study
when we rose from the table, he proposed taking a turn in the garden:
"You are looking pale, Helena, and you will be the better for a little
fresh air. Besides, I have something to say to you."

Excitement, I am sure, is good for young women. I saw in his face, I
heard in his last words, that the mystery of the lady was at last to be
revealed. The sensation of languor and fatigue which follows a disturbed
night left me directly.

My father gave me his arm, and we walked slowly up and down the lawn.

"When that lady called on me yesterday," he began, "you wanted to know
who she was, and you were surprised and disappointed when I refused to
gratify your curiosity. My silence was not a selfish silence, Helena. I
was thinking of you and your sister; and I was at a loss how to act for
the best. You shall hear why my children were in my mind, presently.
I must tell you first that I have arrived at a decision; I hope and
believe on reasonable grounds. Ask me any questions you please; my
silence will be no longer an obstacle in your way."

This was so very encouraging that I said at once: "I should like to know
who the lady is."

"The lady is related to me," he answered. "We are cousins."

Here was a disclosure that I had not anticipated. In the little that I
have seen of the world, I have observed that cousins--when they happen
to be brought together under interesting circumstances--can remember
their relationship, and forget their relationship, just as it suits
them. "Is your cousin a married lady?" I ventured to inquire.

"No."

Short as it was, that reply might perhaps mean more than appeared on
the surface. The cook had heard the lady crying. What sort of tender
agitation was answerable for those tears? Was it possible, barely
possible, that Eunice and I might go to bed, one night, a widower's
daughters, and wake up the next day to discover a stepmother?

"Have I or my sister ever seen the lady?" I asked.

"Never. She has been living abroad; and I have not seen her myself since
we were both young people."

My excellent innocent father! Not the faintest idea of what I had been
thinking of was in his mind. Little did he suspect how welcome was the
relief that he had afforded to his daughter's wicked doubts of him. But
he had not said a word yet about his cousin's personal appearance. There
might be remains of good looks which the housemaid was too stupid to
discover.

"After the long interval that has passed since you met," I said, "I
suppose she has become an old woman?"

"No, my dear. Let us say, a middle-aged woman."

"Perhaps she is still an attractive person?"

He smiled. "I am afraid, Helena, that would never have been a very
accurate description of her."

I now knew all that I wanted to know about this alarming person,
excepting one last morsel of information which my father had strangely
forgotten.

"We have been talking about the lady for some time," I said; "and you
have not yet told me her name."

Father looked a little embarrassed "It's not a very pretty name," he
answered. "My cousin, my unfortunate cousin, is--Miss Jillgall."

I burst out with such a loud "Oh!" that he laughed. I caught the
infection, and laughed louder still. Bless Miss Jillgall! The interview
promised to become an easy one for both of us, thanks to her name. I was
in good spirits, and I made no attempt to restrain them. "The next time
Miss Jillgall honors you with a visit," I said, "you must give me an
opportunity of being presented to her."

He made a strange reply: "You may find your opportunity, Helena, sooner
than you anticipate."

Did this mean that she was going to call again in a day or two? I am
afraid I spoke flippantly. I said: "Oh, father, another lady fascinated
by the popular preacher?"

The garden chairs were near us. He signed to me gravely to be seated by
his side, and said to himself: "This is my fault."

"What is your fault?" I asked.

"I have left you in ignorance, my dear, of my cousin's sad story. It
is soon told; and, if it checks your merriment, it will make amends by
deserving your sympathy. I was indebted to her father, when I was a boy,
for acts of kindness which I can never forget. He was twice married. The
death of his first wife left him with one child--once my playfellow; now
the lady whose visit has excited your curiosity. His second wife was a
Belgian. She persuaded him to sell his business in London, and to invest
the money in a partnership with a brother of hers, established as a
sugar-refiner at Antwerp. The little daughter accompanied her father to
Belgium. Are you attending to me, Helena?"

I was waiting for the interesting part of the story, and was wondering
when he would get to it.

"As time went on," he resumed, "the new partner found that the value
of the business at Antwerp had been greatly overrated. After a long
struggle with adverse circumstances, he decided on withdrawing from
the partnership before the whole of his capital was lost in a failing
commercial speculation. The end of it was that he retired, with his
daughter, to a small town in East Flanders; the wreck of his property
having left him with an income of no more than two hundred pounds a
year."

I showed my father that I was attending to him now, by inquiring what
had become of the Belgian wife. Those nervous quiverings, which Eunice
has mentioned in her diary, began to appear in his face.

"It is too shameful a story," he said, "to be told to a young girl. The
marriage was dissolved by law; and the wife was the person to blame. I
am sure, Helena, you don't wish to hear any more of _this_ part of the
story."

I did wish. But I saw that he expected me to say No--so I said it.

"The father and daughter," he went on, "never so much as thought of
returning to their own country. They were too poor to live comfortably
in England. In Belgium their income was sufficient for their wants. On
the father's death, the daughter remained in the town. She had friends
there, and friends nowhere else; and she might have lived abroad to the
end of her days, but for a calamity to which we are all liable. A
long and serious illness completely prostrated her. Skilled medical
attendance, costing large sums of money for the doctors' traveling
expenses, was imperatively required. Experienced nurses, summoned from a
distant hospital, were in attendance night and day. Luxuries, far beyond
the reach of her little income, were absolutely required to support her
wasted strength at the time of her tedious recovery. In one word, her
resources were sadly diminished, when the poor creature had paid her
debts, and had regained her hold on life. At that time, she unhappily
met with the man who has ruined her."

It was getting interesting at last. "Ruined her?" I repeated. "Do you
mean that he robbed her?"

"That, Helena, is exactly what I mean--and many and many a helpless
woman has been robbed in the same way. The man of whom I am now speaking
was a lawyer in large practice. He bore an excellent character, and
was highly respected for his exemplary life. My cousin (not at all a
discreet person, I am bound to admit) was induced to consult him on her
pecuniary affairs. He expressed the most generous sympathy--offered to
employ her little capital in his business--and pledged himself to pay
her double the interest for her money, which she had been in the habit
of receiving from the sound investment chosen by her father."

"And of course he got the money, and never paid the interest?" Eager to
hear the end, I interrupted the story in those inconsiderate words. My
father's answer quietly reproved me.

"He paid the interest regularly as long as he lived."

"And what happened when he died?"

"He died a bankrupt; the secret profligacy of his life was at last
exposed. Nothing, actually nothing, was left for his creditors. The
unfortunate creature, whose ugly name has amused you, must get help
somewhere, or must go to the workhouse."

If I had been in a state of mind to attend to trifles, this would have
explained the reason why the cook had heard Miss Jillgall crying. But
the prospect before me--the unendurable prospect of having a strange
woman in the house--had showed itself too plainly to be mistaken.
I could think of nothing else. With infinite difficulty I assumed a
momentary appearance of composure, and suggested that Miss Jillgall's
foreign friends might have done something to help her.

My father defended her foreign friends. "My dear, they were poor people,
and did all they could afford to do. But for their kindness, my cousin
might not have been able to return to England."

"And to cast herself on your mercy," I added, "in the character of a
helpless woman."

"No, Helena! Not to cast herself on my mercy--but to find my house open
to her, as her father's house was open to me in the bygone time. I
am her only surviving relative; and, while I live, she shall not be a
helpless woman."

I began to wish that I had not spoken out so plainly. My father's sweet
temper--I do so sincerely wish I had inherited it!--made the kindest
allowances for me.

"I understand the momentary bitterness of feeling that has escaped you,"
he said; "I may almost say that I expected it. My only hesitation in
this matter has been caused by my sense of what I owe to my children. It
was putting your endurance, and your sister's endurance, to a trial to
expect you to receive a stranger (and that stranger not a young girl
like yourselves) as one of the household, living with you in the closest
intimacy of family life. The consideration which has decided me does
justice, I hope, to you and Eunice, as well as to myself. I think that
some allowance is due from my daughters to the father who has always
made loving allowance for _them_. Am I wrong in believing that my good
children have not forgotten this, and have only waited for the occasion
to feel the pleasure of rewarding me?"

It was beautifully put. There was but one thing to be done--I kissed
him. And there was but one thing to be said. I asked at what time we
might expect to receive Miss Jillgall. "She is staying, Helena, at a
small hotel in the town. I have already sent to say that we are waiting
to see her. Perhaps you will look at the spare bedroom?"

"It shall be got ready, father, directly."

I ran into the house; I rushed upstairs into the room that is Eunice's
and mine; I locked the door, and then I gave way to my rage, before it
stifled me. I stamped on the floor, I clinched my fists, I cast myself
on the bed, I reviled that hateful woman by every hard word that I could
throw at her. Oh, the luxury of it! the luxury of it!

Cold water and my hairbrush soon made me fit to be seen again.

As for the spare room, it looked a great deal too comfortable for an
incubus from foreign parts. The one improvement that I could have
made, if a friend of mine had been expected, was suggested by the
window-curtains. I was looking at a torn place in one of them, and
determined to leave it unrepaired, when I felt an arm slipped round
my waist from behind. A voice, so close that it tickled my neck, said:
"Dear girl, what friends we shall be!" I turned round, and confronted
Miss Jillgall.

CHAPTER XV. HELENA'S DIARY.

If I am not a good girl, where is a good girl to be found? This is in
Eunice's style. It sometimes amuses me to mimic my simple sister.

I have just torn three pages out of my diary, in deference to the
expression of my father's wishes. He took the first opportunity which
his cousin permitted him to enjoy of speaking to me privately; and his
object was to caution me against hastily relying on first impressions of
anybody--especially of Miss Jillgall. "Wait for a day or two," he said;
"and then form your estimate of the new member of our household."

The stormy state of my temper had passed away, and had left my
atmosphere calm again. I could feel that I had received good advice; but
unluckily it reached me too late.

I had formed my estimate of Miss Jillgall, and had put it in writing for
my own satisfaction, at least an hour before my father found himself
at liberty to speak to me. I don't agree with him in distrusting first
impressions; and I had proposed to put my opinion to the test, by
referring to what I had written about his cousin at a later time.
However, after what he had said to me, I felt bound in filial duty
to take the pages out of my book, and to let two days pass before I
presumed to enjoy the luxury of hating Miss Jillgall. On one thing I
am determined: Eunice shall not form a hasty opinion, either. She shall
undergo the same severe discipline of self-restraint to which her sister
is obliged to submit. Let us be just, as somebody says, before we are
generous. No more for to-day.

.......

I open my diary again--after the prescribed interval has elapsed. The
first impression produced on me by the new member of our household
remains entirely unchanged.

Have I already made the remark that, when one removes a page from
a book, it does not necessarily follow that one destroys the page
afterward? or did I leave this to be inferred? In either case, my course
of proceeding was the same. I ordered some paste to be made. Then I
unlocked a drawer, and found my poor ill-used leaves, and put them back
in my Journal. An act of justice is surely not the less praiseworthy
because it is an act of justice done to one's self.

My father has often told me that he revises his writings on religious
subjects. I may harmlessly imitate that good example, by revising my
restored entry. It is now a sufficiently remarkable performance to be
distinguished by a title. Let me call it:

Impressions of Miss Jillgall. My first impression was a strong one--it
was produced by the state of this lady's breath. In other words, I was
obliged to let her kiss me. It is a duty to be considerate toward human
infirmity. I will only say that I thought I should have fainted.

My second impression draws a portrait, and produces a striking likeness.

Figure, little and lean--hair of a dirty drab color which we see in
string--small light gray eyes, sly and restless, and deeply sunk in
the head--prominent cheekbones, and a florid complexion--an
inquisitive nose, turning up at the end--a large mouth and a servile
smile--raw-looking hands, decorated with black mittens--a misfitting
white jacket and a limp skirt--manners familiar--temper cleverly
hidden--voice too irritating to be mentioned. Whose portrait is this? It
is the portrait of Miss Jillgall, taken in words.

Her true character is not easy to discover; I suspect that it will
only show itself little by little. That she is a born meddler in other
people's affairs, I think I can see already. I also found out that she
trusted to flattery as the easiest means of making herself agreeable.
She tried her first experiment on myself.

"You charming girl," she began, "your bright face encourages me to ask
a favor. Pray make me useful! The one aspiration of my life is to be
useful. Unless you employ me in that way, I have no right to intrude
myself into your family circle. Yes, yes, I know that your father
has opened his house and his heart to me. But I dare not found any
claim--your name is Helena, isn't it? Dear Helena, I dare not found any
claim on what I owe to your father's kindness."

"Why not?" I inquired.

"Because your father is not a man--"

I was rude enough to interrupt her: "What is he, then?"

"An angel," Miss Jillgall answered, solemnly. "A destitute earthly
creature like me must not look up as high as your father. I might be
dazzled."

This was rather more than I could endure patiently. "Let us try," I
suggested, "if we can't understand each other, at starting."

Miss Jillgall's little eyes twinkled in their bony caverns. "The very
thing I was going to propose!" she burst out.

"Very well," I went on; "then, let me tell you plainly that flattery is
not relished in this house."

"Flattery?" She put her hand to her head as she repeated the word, and
looked quite bewildered. "Dear Helena, I have lived all my life in East
Flanders, and my own language is occasionally strange to me. Can you
tell me what flattery is in Flemish?"

"I don't understand Flemish."

"How very provoking! You don't understand Flemish, and I don't
understand Flattery. I should so like to know what it means. Ah, I see
books in this lovely room. Is there a dictionary among them?" She darted
to the bookcase, and discovered a dictionary. "Now I shall understand
Flattery," she remarked--"and then we shall understand each other.
Oh, let me find it for myself!" She ran her raw red finger along the
alphabetical headings at the top of each page. "'FAD.' That won't do.
'FIE.' Further on still. 'FLE.' Too far the other way. 'FLA.' Here we
are! 'Flattery: False praise. Commendation bestowed for the purpose of
gaining favor and influence.' Oh, Helena, how cruel of you!" She dropped
the book, and sank into a chair--the picture, if such a thing can be, of
a broken-hearted old maid.

I should most assuredly have taken the opportunity of leaving her to her
own devices, if I had been free to act as I pleased. But my interests
as a daughter forbade me to make an enemy of my father's cousin, on the
first day when she had entered the house. I made an apology, very neatly
expressed.

She jumped up--let me do her justice; Miss Jillgall is as nimble as a
monkey--and (Faugh!) she kissed me for the second time. If I had been a
man, I am afraid I should have called for that deadly poison (we are all
temperance people in this house) known by the name of Brandy.

"If you will make me love you," Miss Jillgall explained, "you must
expect to be kissed. Dear girl, let us go back to my poor little
petition. Oh, do make me useful! There are so many things I can do: you
will find me a treasure in the house. I write a good hand; I understand
polishing furniture; I can dress hair (look at my own hair); I play and
sing a little when people want to be amused; I can mix a salad and knit
stockings--who is this?" The cook came in, at the moment, to consult
me; I introduced her. "And, oh," cried Miss Jillgall, in ecstasy, "I can
cook! Do, please, let me see the kitchen."

The cook's face turned red. She had come to me to make a confession;
and she had not (as she afterward said) bargained for the presence of
a stranger. For the first time in her life she took the liberty
of whispering to me: "I must ask you, miss, to let me send up the
cauliflower plain boiled; I don't understand the directions in the book
for doing it in the foreign way."

Miss Jillgall's ears--perhaps because they are so large--possess a
quickness of hearing quite unparalleled in my experience. Not one word
of the cook's whispered confession had escaped her.

"Here," she declared, "is an opportunity of making myself useful! What
is the cook's name? Hannah? Take me downstairs, Hannah, and I'll show
you how to do the cauliflower in the foreign way. She seems to hesitate.
Is it possible that she doesn't believe me? Listen, Hannah, and judge
for yourself if I am deceiving you. Have you boiled the cauliflower?
Very well; this is what you must do next. Take four ounces of grated
cheese, two ounces of best butter, the yolks of four eggs, a little bit
of glaze, lemon-juice, nutmeg--dear, dear, how black she looks. What
have I said to offend her?"

The cook passed over the lady who had presumed to instruct her, as if no
such person had been present, and addressed herself to me: "If I am
to be interfered with in my own kitchen, miss, I will ask you to suit
yourself at a month's notice."

Miss Jillgall wrung her hands in despair.

"I meant so kindly," she said; "and I seem to have made mischief.
With the best intentions, Helena, I have set you and your servant at
variance. I really didn't know you had such a temper, Hannah," she
declared, following the cook to the door. "I'm sure there's nothing I
am not ready to do to make it up with you. Perhaps you have not got the
cheese downstairs? I'm ready to go out and buy it for you. I could
show you how to keep eggs sweet and fresh for weeks together. Your gown
doesn't fit very well; I shall be glad to improve it, if you will leave
it out for me after you have gone to bed. There!" cried Miss Jillgall,
as the cook majestically left the room, without even looking at her,
"I have done my best to make it up, and you see how my advances are
received. What more could I have done? I really ask you, dear, as a
friend, what more _could_ I have done?"

I had it on the tip of my tongue to say: "The cook doesn't ask you to
buy cheese for her, or to teach her how to keep eggs, or to improve the
fit of her gown; all she wants is to have her kitchen to herself." But
here again it was necessary to remember that this odious person was my
father's guest.

"Pray don't distress yourself," I began; "I am sure you are not to
blame, Miss Jillgall--"

"Oh, don't!"

"Don't--what?"

"Don't call me Miss Jillgall. I call you Helena. Call me Selina."

I had really not supposed it possible that she could be more unendurable
than ever. When she mentioned her Christian name, she succeeded
nevertheless in producing that result. In the whole list of women's
names, is there any one to be found so absolutely sickening as "Selina"?
I forced myself to pronounce it; I made another neatly-expressed
apology; I said English servants were so very peculiar. Selina was more
than satisfied; she was quite delighted.

"Is that it, indeed? An explanation was all I wanted. How good of you!
And now tell me--is there no chance, in the house or out of the house,
of my making myself useful? Oh, what's that? Do I see a chance? I do! I
do!"

Miss Jillgall's eyes are more than mortal. At one time, they are
microscopes. At another time, they are telescopes. She discovered (right
across the room) the torn place in the window-curtain. In an instant,
she snatched a dirty little leather case out of her pocket, threaded her
needle and began darning the curtain. She sang over her work. "My heart
is light, my will is free--" I can repeat no more of it. When I heard
her singing voice, I became reckless of consequences, and ran out of the
room with my hands over my ears.



CHAPTER XVI. HELENA'S DIARY.

When I reached the foot of the stairs, my father called me into his
study.

I found him at his writing-table, with such a heap of torn-up paper in
his waste-basket that it overflowed on to the floor. He explained to me
that he had been destroying a large accumulation of old letters, and
had ended (when his employment began to grow wearisome) in examining his
correspondence rather carelessly. The result was that he had torn up a
letter, and a copy of the reply, which ought to have been set aside as
worthy of preservation. After collecting the fragments, he had heaped
them on the table. If I could contrive to put them together again on
fair sheets of paper, and fasten them in their right places with gum, I
should be doing him a service, at a time when he was too busy to set his
mistake right for himself.

Here was the best excuse that I could desire for keeping out of Miss
Jillgall's way. I cheerfully set to work on the restoration of the
letters, while my father went on with his writing.

Having put the fragments together--excepting a few gaps caused by
morsels that had been lost--I was unwilling to fasten them down with
gum, until I could feel sure of not having made any mistakes; especially
in regard to some of the lost words which I had been obliged to restore
by guess-work. So I copied the letters, and submitted them, in the first
place, to my father's approval. He praised me in the prettiest
manner for the care that I had taken. But, when he began, after some
hesitation, to read my copy, I noticed a change. The smile left his
face, and the nervous quiverings showed themselves again.

"Quite right, my child," he said, in low sad tones.

On returning to my side of the table, I expected to see him resume his
writing. He crossed the room to the window and stood (with his back to
me) looking out.

When I had first discovered the sense of the letters, they failed
to interest me. A tiresome woman, presuming on the kindness of a
good-natured man to beg a favor which she had no right to ask, and
receiving a refusal which she had richly deserved, was no remarkable
event in my experience as my father's secretary and copyist. But the
change in his face, while he read the correspondence, altered my opinion
of the letters. There was more in them evidently than I had discovered.
I kept my manuscript copy--here it is:


From Miss Elizabeth Chance to the Rev. Abel Gracedieu.

(Date of year, 1859. Date of month, missing.)


"DEAR SIR--You have, I hope, not quite forgotten the interesting
conversation that we had last year in the Governor's rooms. I am afraid
I spoke a little flippantly at the time; but I am sure you will believe
me when I say that this was out of no want of respect to yourself. My
pecuniary position being far from prosperous, I am endeavoring to
obtain the vacant situation of housekeeper in a public institution the
prospectus of which I inclose. You will see it is a rule of the place
that a candidate must be a single woman (which I am), and must be
recommended by a clergyman. You are the only reverend gentleman whom it
is my good fortune to know, and the thing is of course a mere formality.
Pray excuse this application, and oblige me by acting as my reference.

"Sincerely yours,

"ELIZABETH CHANCE."


"P. S.--Please address: Miss E. Chance, Poste Restante, St.
Martin's-le-Grand, London."


"From the Rev. Abel Gracedieu to Miss Chance.

(Copy.)


"MADAM--The brief conversation to which your letter alludes, took place
at an accidental meeting between us. I then saw you for the first time,
and I have not seen you since. It is impossible for me to assert the
claim of a perfect stranger, like yourself, to fill a situation of
trust. I must beg to decline acting as your reference.

"Your obedient servant,

"ABEL GRACEDIEU."

.......

My father was still at the window.

In that idle position he could hardly complain of me for interrupting
him, if I ventured to talk about the letters which I had put together.
If my curiosity displeased him, he had only to say so, and there would
be an end to any allusions of mine to the subject. My first idea was to
join him at the window. On reflection, and still perceiving that he kept
his back turned on me, I thought it might be more prudent to remain at
the table.

"This Miss Chance seems to be an impudent person?" I said.

"Yes."

"Was she a young woman, when you met with her?"

"Yes."

"What sort of a woman to look at? Ugly?"

"No."

Here were three answers which Eunice herself would have been quick
enough to interpret as three warnings to say no more. I felt a little
hurt by his keeping his back turned on me. At the same time, and
naturally, I think, I found my interest in Miss Chance (I don't say my
friendly interest) considerably increased by my father's unusually rude
behavior. I was also animated by an irresistible desire to make him turn
round and look at me.

"Miss Chance's letter was written many years ago," I resumed. "I wonder
what has become of her since she wrote to you."

"I know nothing about her."

"Not even whether she is alive or dead?"

"Not even that. What do these questions mean, Helena?"

"Nothing, father."

I declare he looked as if he suspected me!

"Why don't you speak out?" he said. "Have I ever taught you to conceal
your thoughts? Have I ever been a hard father, who discouraged you when
you wished to confide in him? What are you thinking about? Do _you_ know
anything of this woman?"

"Oh, father, what a question! I never even heard of her till I put the
torn letters together. I begin to wish you had not asked me to do it."

"So do I. It never struck me that you would feel such extraordinary--I
had almost said, such vulgar--curiosity about a worthless letter."

This roused my temper. When a young lady is told that she is vulgar,
if she has any self-conceit--I mean self-respect--she feels insulted. I
said something sharp in my turn. It was in the way of argument. I do
not know how it may be with other young persons, I never reason so well
myself as when I am angry.

"You call it a worthless letter," I said, "and yet you think it worth
preserving."

"Have you nothing more to say to me than that?" he asked.

"Nothing more," I answered.

He changed again. After having looked unaccountably angry, he now looked
unaccountably relieved.

"I will soon satisfy you," he said, "that I have a good reason for
preserving a worthless letter. Miss Chance, my dear, is not a woman to
be trusted. If she saw her advantage in making a bad use of my reply,
I am afraid she would not hesitate to do it. Even if she is no longer
living, I don't know into what vile hands my letter may not have fallen,
or how it might be falsified for some wicked purpose. Do you see now how
a correspondence may become accidentally important, though it is of no
value in itself?"

I could say "Yes" to this with a safe conscience.

But there were some perplexities still left in my mind. It seemed
strange that Miss Chance should (apparently) have submitted to the
severity of my father's reply. "I should have thought," I said to him,
"that she would have sent you another impudent letter--or perhaps have
insisted on seeing you, and using her tongue instead of her pen."

"She could do neither the one nor the other, Helena. Miss Chance will
never find out my address again; I have taken good care of that."

He spoke in a loud voice, with a flushed face--as if it was quite a
triumph to have prevented this woman from discovering his address. What
reason could he have for being so anxious to keep her away from him?
Could I venture to conclude that there was a mystery in the life of a
man so blameless, so truly pious? It shocked one even to think of it.

There was a silence between us, to which the housemaid offered a welcome
interruption. Dinner was ready.

He kissed me before we left the room. "One word more, Helena," he said,
"and I have done. Let there be no more talk between us about Elizabeth
Chance."



CHAPTER XVII. HELENA'S DIARY.

Miss Jillgall joined us at the dinner-table, in a state of excitement,
carrying a book in her hand.

I am inclined, on reflection, to suspect that she is quite clever enough
to have discovered that I hate her--and that many of the aggravating
things she says and does are assumed, out of retaliation, for the
purpose of making me angry. That ugly face is a double face, or I am
much mistaken.

To return to the dinner-table, Miss Jillgall addressed herself, with an
air of playful penitence, to my father.

"Dear cousin, I hope I have not done wrong. Helena left me all by
myself. When I had finished darning the curtain, I really didn't know
what to do. So I opened all the bedroom doors upstairs and looked into
the rooms. In the big room with two beds--oh, I am so ashamed--I found
this book. Please look at the first page."

My father looked at the title-page: "Doctor Watts's Hymns. Well, Selina,
what is there to be ashamed of in this?"

"Oh, no! no! It's the wrong page. Do look at the other page--the one
that comes first before that one."

My patient father turned to the blank page.

"Ah," he said quietly, "my other daughter's name is written in it--the
daughter whom you have not seen. Well?"

Miss Jillgall clasped her hands distractedly. "It's my ignorance I'm so
ashamed of. Dear cousin, forgive me, enlighten me. I don't know how to
pronounce your other daughter's name. Do you call her Euneece?"

The dinner was getting cold. I was provoked into saying: "No, we don't."

She had evidently not forgiven me for leaving her by herself. "Pardon
me, Helena, when I want information I don't apply to you: I sit, as it
were, at the feet of your learned father. Dear cousin, is it--"

Even my father declined to wait for his dinner any longer. "Pronounce it
as you like, Selina. Here we say Euni'ce--with the accent on the 'i' and
with the final 'e' sounded: Eu-ni'-see. Let me give you some soup."

Miss Jillgall groaned. "Oh, how difficult it seems to be! Quite beyond
my poor brains! I shall ask the dear girl's leave to call her Euneece.
What very strong soup! Isn't it rather a waste of meat? Give me a little
more, please."

I discovered another of Miss Jillgall's peculiarities. Her appetite
was enormous, and her ways were greedy. You heard her eat her soup. She
devoured the food on her plate with her eyes before she put it into
her mouth; and she criticised our English cookery in the most impudent
manner, under pretense of asking humbly how it was done. There was,
however, some temporary compensation for this. We had less of her talk
while she was eating her dinner.

With the removal of the cloth, she recovered the use of her tongue; and
she hit on the one subject of all others which proves to be the sorest
trial to my father's patience.

"And now, dear cousin, let us talk of your other daughter, our absent
Euneece. I do so long to see her. When is she coming back?"

"In a few days more."

"How glad I am! And do tell me--which is she? Your oldest girl or your
youngest?"

"Neither the one nor the other, Selina."

"Oh, my head! my head! This is even worse than the accent on the 'i' and
the final 'e.' Stop! I am cleverer than I thought I was. You mean that
the girls are twins. Are they both so exactly like each other that I
shan't know which is which? What fun!"

When the subject of our ages was unluckily started at Mrs. Staveley's,
I had slipped out of the difficulty easily by assuming the character of
the eldest sister--an example of ready tact which my dear stupid Eunice
doesn't understand. In my father's presence, it is needless to say that
I kept silence, and left it to him. I was sorry to be obliged to
do this. Owing to his sad state of health, he is easily
irritated--especially by inquisitive strangers.

"I must leave you," he answered, without taking the slightest notice of
what Miss Jillgall had said to him. "My work is waiting for me."

She stopped him on his way to the door. "Oh, tell me--can't I help you?"

"Thank you; no."

"Well--but tell me one thing. Am I right about the twins?"

"You are wrong."

Miss Jillgall's demonstrative hands flew up into the air again, and
expressed the climax of astonishment by quivering over her head. "This
is positively maddening," she declared. "What does it mean?"

"Take my advice, cousin. Don't attempt to find out what it means."

He left the room. Miss Jillgall appealed to me. I imitated my father's
wise brevity of expression: "Sorry to disappoint you, Selina; I know no
more about it than you do. Come upstairs."

Every step of the way up to the drawing-room was marked by a protest or
an inquiry. Did I expect her to believe that I couldn't say which of
us was the elder of the two? that I didn't really know what my father's
motive was for this extraordinary mystification? that my sister and I
had submitted to be robbed, as it were, of our own ages, and had not
insisted on discovering which of us had come into the world first? that
our friends had not put an end to this sort of thing by comparing us
personally, and discovering which was the elder sister by investigation
of our faces? To all this I replied: First, that I did certainly expect
her to believe whatever I might say: Secondly, that what she was pleased
to call the "mystification" had begun when we were both children; that
habit had made it familiar to us in the course of years; and above all,
that we were too fond of our good father to ask for explanations which
we knew by experience would distress him: Thirdly, that friends did try
to discover, by personal examination, which was the elder sister, and
differed perpetually in their conclusions; also that we had amused
ourselves by trying the same experiment before our looking-glasses, and
that Eunice thought Helena was the oldest, and Helena thought Eunice was
the oldest: Fourthly (and finally), that the Reverend Mr. Gracedieu's
cousin had better drop the subject, unless she was bent on making her
presence in the house unendurable to the Reverend Mr. Gracedieu himself.

I write it with a sense of humiliation; Miss Jillgall listened
attentively to all I had to say--and then took me completely by
surprise. This inquisitive, meddlesome, restless, impudent woman
suddenly transformed herself into a perfect model of amiability and
decorum. She actually said she agreed with me, and was much obliged for
my good advice!

A stupid young woman, in my place, would have discovered that this was
not natural, and that Miss Jillgall was presenting herself to me in
disguise, to reach some secret end of her own. I am not a stupid young
woman; I ought to have had at my service penetration enough to
see through and through Cousin Selina. Well! Cousin Selina was an
impenetrable mystery to me.

The one thing to be done was to watch her. I was at least sly enough to
take up a book, and pretend to be reading it. How contemptible!

She looked round the room, and discovered our pretty writing-table;
a present to my father from his congregation. After a little
consideration, she sat down to write a letter.

"When does the post go out?" she asked.

I mentioned the hour; and she began her letter. Before she could have
written more than the first two or three lines, she turned round on her
seat, and began talking to me.

"Do you like writing letters, my dear?"

"Yes--but then I have not many letters to write."

"Only a few friends, Helena, but those few worthy to be loved? My own
case exactly. Has your father told you of my troubles? Ah, I am glad of
that. It spares me the sad necessity of confessing what I have suffered.
Oh, how good my friends, my new friends, were to me in that dull little
Belgian town! One of them was generosity personified--ah, she had
suffered, too! A vile husband who had deceived and deserted her. Oh,
the men! When she heard of the loss of my little fortune, that noble
creature got up a subscription for me, and went round herself to
collect. Think of what I owe to her! Ought I to let another day pass
without writing to my benefactress? Am I not bound in gratitude to make
her happy in the knowledge of _my_ happiness--I mean the refuge opened
to me in this hospitable house?"

She twisted herself back again to the writing-table, and went on with
her letter.

I have not attempted to conceal my stupidity. Let me now record a
partial recovery of my intelligence.

It was not to be denied that Miss Jillgall had discovered a good reason
for writing to her friend; but I was at a loss to understand why
she should have been so anxious to mention the reason. Was it
possible--after the talk which had passed between us--that she had
something mischievous to say in her letter, relating to my father or
to me? Was she afraid I might suspect this? And had she been so
communicative for the purpose of leading my suspicions astray? These
were vague guesses; but, try as I might, I could arrive at no clearer
view of what was passing in Miss Jillgall's mind. What would I not have
given to be able to look over her shoulder, without discovery!

She finished her letter, and put the address, and closed the envelope.
Then she turned round toward me again.

"Have you got a foreign postage stamp, dear?"

If I could look at nothing else, I was resolved to look at her envelope.
It was only necessary to go to the study, and to apply to my father. I
returned with the foreign stamp, and I stuck it on the envelope with my
own hand.

There was nothing to interest _me_ in the address, as I ought to have
foreseen, if I had not been too much excited for the exercise of
a little common sense. Miss Jillgall's wonderful friend was only
remarkable by her ugly foreign name--MRS. TENBRUGGEN.



CHAPTER XVIII. EUNICE'S DIARY.

Here I am, writing my history of myself, once more, by my own bedside.
Some unexpected events have happened while I have been away. One of them
is the absence of my sister.

Helena has left home on a visit to a northern town by the seaside. She
is staying in the house of a minister (one of papa's friends), and is
occupying a position of dignity in which I should certainly lose my
head. The minister and his wife and daughters propose to set up a Girls'
Scripture Class, on the plan devised by papa; and they are at a loss,
poor helpless people, to know how to begin. Helena has volunteered to
set the thing going. And there she is now, advising everybody, governing
everybody, encouraging everybody--issuing directions, finding fault,
rewarding merit--oh, dear, let me put it all in one word, and say:
thoroughly enjoying herself.

Another event has happened, relating to papa. It so distressed me that I
even forgot to think of Philip--for a little while.

Traveling by railway (I suppose because I am not used to it) gives me
the headache. When I got to our station here, I thought it would do
me more good to walk home than to ride in the noisy omnibus. Half-way
between the railway and the town, I met one of the doctors. He is a
member of our congregation; and he it was who recommended papa, some
time since, to give up his work as a minister and take a long holiday in
foreign parts.

"I am glad to have met with you," the doctor said. "Your sister, I
find, is away on a visit; and I want to speak to one of you about your
father."

It seemed that he had been observing papa, in chapel, from what he
called his own medical point of view. He did not conceal from me that he
had drawn conclusions which made him feel uneasy. "It may be anxiety,"
he said, "or it may be overwork. In either case, your father is in
a state of nervous derangement, which is likely to lead to serious
results--unless he takes the advice that I gave him when he last
consulted me. There must be no more hesitation about it. Be careful not
to irritate him--but remember that he must rest. You and your sister
have some influence over him; he won't listen to me."

Poor dear papa! I did see a change in him for the worse--though I had
only been away for so short a time.

When I put my arms round his neck, and kissed him, he turned pale, and
then flushed up suddenly: the tears came into his eyes. Oh, it was hard
to follow the doctor's advice, and not to cry, too; but I succeeded in
controlling myself. I sat on his knee, and made him tell me all that I
have written here about Helena. This led to our talking next of the new
lady, who is to live with us as a member of the family. I began to feel
less uneasy at the prospect of being introduced to this stranger, when
I heard that she was papa's cousin. And when he mentioned her name, and
saw how it amused me, his poor worn face brightened into a smile. "Go
and find her," he said, "and introduce yourself. I want to hear, Eunice,
if you and my cousin are likely to get on well together."

The servants told me that Miss Jillgall was in the garden.

I searched here, there, and everywhere, and failed to find her. The
place was so quiet, it looked so deliciously pure and bright, after
smoky dreary London, that I sat down at the further end of the garden
and let my mind take me back to Philip. What was he doing at that
moment, while I was thinking of him? Perhaps he was in the company of
other young ladies, who drew all his thoughts away to themselves? Or
perhaps he was writing to his father in Ireland, and saying something
kindly and prettily about me? Or perhaps he was looking forward, as
anxiously as I do, to our meeting next week.

I have had my plans, and I have changed my plans.

On the railway journey, I thought I would tell papa at once of the new
happiness which seems to have put a new life into me. It would have been
delightful to make my confession to that first and best and dearest of
friends; but my meeting with the doctor spoiled it all. After what he
had said to me, I discovered a risk. If I ventured to tell papa that my
heart was set on a young gentleman who was a stranger to him, could I be
sure that he would receive my confession favorably? There was a chance
that it might irritate him--and the fault would then be mine of doing
what I had been warned to avoid. It might be safer in every way to wait
till Philip paid his visit, and he and papa had been introduced to each
other and charmed with each other. Could Helena herself have arrived at
a wiser conclusion? I declare I felt proud of my own discretion.

In this enjoyable frame of mind I was disturbed by a woman's voice. The
tone was a tone of distress, and the words reached my ears from the end
of the garden: "Please, miss, let me in."

A shrubbery marks the limit of our little bit of pleasure-ground. On the
other side of it there is a cottage standing on the edge of the
common. The most good-natured woman in the world lives here. She is our
laundress--married to a stupid young fellow named Molly, and blessed
with a plump baby as sweet-tempered at herself. Thinking it likely that
the piteous voice which had disturbed me might be the voice of Mrs.
Molly, I was astonished to hear her appealing to anybody (perhaps to
me?) to "let her in." So I passed through the shrubbery, wondering
whether the gate had been locked during my absence in London. No; it was
as easy to open as ever.

The cottage door was not closed.

I saw our amiable laundress in the passage, on her knees, trying to open
an inner door which seemed to be locked. She had her eye at the keyhole;
and, once again, she called out: "Please, miss, let me in." I waited to
see if the door would be opened--nothing happened. I waited again, to
hear if some person inside would answer--nobody spoke. But somebody,
or something, made a sound of splashing water on the other side of the
door.

I showed myself, and asked what was the matter.

Mrs. Molly looked at me helplessly. She said: "Miss Eunice, it's the
baby."

"What has the baby done?" I inquired.

Mrs. Molly got on her feet, and whispered in my ear: "You know he's a
fine child?"

"Yes."

"Well, miss, he's bewitched a lady."

"What lady?"

"Miss Jillgall."

The very person I had been trying to find! I asked where she was.

The laundress pointed dolefully to the locked door: "In there."

"And where is your baby?"

The poor woman still pointed to the door: "I'm beginning to doubt, miss,
whether it is my baby."

"Nonsense, Mrs. Molly. If it isn't yours, whose baby can it be?"

"Miss Jillgall's."

Her puzzled face made this singular reply more funny still. The
splashing of water on the other side of the door began again. "What is
Miss Jillgall doing now?" I said.

"Washing the baby, miss. A week ago, she came in here, one morning;
very pleasant and kind, I must own. She found me putting on the baby's
things. She says: 'What a cherub!' which I took as a compliment. She
says: 'I shall call again to-morrow.' She called again so early that
she found the baby in his crib. 'You be a good soul,' she says, 'and
go about your work, and leave the child to me.' I says: 'Yes, miss, but
please to wait till I've made him fit to be seen.' She says: 'That's
just what I mean to do myself.' I stared; and I think any other person
would have done the same in my place. 'If there's one thing more than
another I enjoy,' she says, 'it's making myself useful. Mrs. Molly, I've
taken a fancy to your boy-baby,' she says, 'and I mean to make myself
useful to _him_.' If you will believe me, Miss Jillgall has only let
me have one opportunity of putting my own child tidy. She was late
this morning, and I got my chance, and had the boy on my lap, drying
him--when in she burst like a blast of wind, and snatched the baby away
from me. 'This is your nasty temper,' she says; 'I declare I'm ashamed
of you!' And there she is, with the door locked against me, washing the
child all over again herself. Twice I've knocked, and asked her to let
me in, and can't even get an answer. They do say there's luck in odd
numbers; suppose I try again?" Mrs. Molly knocked, and the proverb
proved to be true; she got an answer from Miss Jillgall at last: "If you
don't be quiet and go away, you shan't have the baby back at all." Who
could help it?--I burst out laughing. Miss Jillgall (as I supposed from
the tone of her voice) took severe notice of this act of impropriety.
"Who's that laughing?" she called out; "give yourself a name." I gave
my name. The door was instantly thrown open with a bang. Papa's cousin
appeared, in a disheveled state, with splashes of soap and water all
over her. She held the child in one arm, and she threw the other arm
round my neck. "Dearest Euneece, I have been longing to see you. How do
you like Our baby?"

To the curious story of my introduction to Miss Jillgall, I ought
perhaps to add that I have got to be friends with her already. I am the
friend of anybody who amuses me. What will Helena say when she reads
this?



CHAPTER XIX. EUNICE'S DIARY.

When people are interested in some event that is coming, do they find
the dull days, passed in waiting for it, days which they are not able to
remember when they look back? This is my unfortunate case. Night after
night, I have gone to bed without so much as opening my Journal. There
was nothing worth writing about, nothing that I could recollect, until
the postman came to-day. I ran downstairs, when I heard his ring at the
bell, and stopped Maria on her way to the study. There, among papa's
usual handful of letters, was a letter for me.

"DEAR MISS EUNICE:

.......

"Yours ever truly."

I quote the passages in Philip's letter which most deeply interested
me--I am his dear miss; and he is mine ever truly. The other part of the
letter told me that he had been detained in London, and he lamented it.
At the end was a delightful announcement that he was coming to me by the
afternoon train. I ran upstairs to see how I looked in the glass.

My first feeling was regret. For the thousandth time, I was obliged to
acknowledge that I was not as pretty as Helena. But this passed off. A
cheering reflection occurred to me. Philip would not have found, in my
sister's face, what seems to have interested him in my face. Besides,
there is my figure.

The pity of it is that I am so ignorant about some things. If I had been
allowed to read novels, I might (judging by what papa said against them
in one of his sermons) have felt sure of my own attractions; I might
even have understood what Philip really thought of me. However, my mind
was quite unexpectedly set at ease on the subject of my figure. The
manner in which it happened was so amusing--at least, so amusing to
me--that I cannot resist mentioning it.

My sister and I are forbidden to read newspapers, as well as novels. But
the teachers at the Girls' Scripture Class are too old to be treated in
this way. When the morning lessons were over, one of them was reading
the newspaper to the other, in the empty schoolroom; I being in the
passage outside, putting on my cloak.

It was a report of "an application made to the magistrates by the lady
of his worship the Mayor." Hearing this, I stopped to listen. The
lady of his worship (what a funny way of describing a man's wife!) is
reported to be a little too fond of notoriety, and to like hearing the
sound of her own voice on public occasions. But this is only my writing;
I had better get back to the report. "In her address to the magistrates,
the Mayoress stated that she had seen a disgusting photograph in the
shop window of a stationer, lately established in the town. She desired
to bring this person within reach of the law, and to have all his
copies of the shameless photograph destroyed. The usher of the court
was thereupon sent to purchase the photograph."--On second thoughts,
I prefer going back to my own writing again; it is so uninteresting to
copy other people's writing. Two of the magistrates were doing justice.
They looked at the photograph--and what did it represent? The famous
statue called the Venus de' Medici! One of the magistrates took this
discovery indignantly. He was shocked at the gross ignorance which could
call the classic ideal of beauty and grace a disgusting work. The other
one made polite allowances. He thought the lady was much to be pitied;
she was evidently the innocent victim of a neglected education. Mrs.
Mayor left the court in a rage, telling the justices she knew where to
get law. "I shall expose Venus," she said, "to the Lord Chancellor."

When the Scripture Class had broken up for the day, duty ought to
have taken me home. Curiosity led me astray--I mean, led me to the
stationer's window.

There I found our two teachers, absorbed in the photograph; having got
to the shop first by a short cut. They seemed to think I had taken a
liberty whom I joined them. "We are here," they were careful to explain,
"to get a lesson in the ideal of beauty and grace." There was quite
a little crowd of townsfolk collected before the window. Some of them
giggled; and some of them wondered whether it was taken from the life.
For my own part, gratitude to Venus obliges me to own that she effected
a great improvement in the state of my mind. She encouraged me. If
that stumpy little creature--with no waist, and oh, such uncertain
legs!--represented the ideal of beauty and grace, I had reason indeed to
be satisfied with my own figure, and to think it quite possible that my
sweetheart's favorable opinion of me was not ill-bestowed.

I was at the bedroom window when the time approached for Philip's
arrival. Quite at the far end of the road, I discovered him. He was on
foot; he walked like a king. Not that I ever saw a king, but I have my
ideal. Ah, what a smile he gave me, when I made him look up by waving
my handkerchief out of the window! "Ask for papa," I whispered as he
ascended the house-steps.

The next thing to do was to wait, as patiently as I could, to be sent
for downstairs. Maria came to me in a state of excitement. "Oh, miss,
what a handsome young gentleman, and how beautifully dressed! Is he--?"
Instead of finishing what she had to say, she looked at me with a sly
smile. I looked at her with a sly smile. We were certainly a couple of
fools. But, dear me, how happy sometimes a fool can be!

My enjoyment of that delightful time was checked when I went into the
drawing-room.

I had expected to see papa's face made beautiful by his winning smile.
He was not only serious; he actually seemed to be ill at ease when he
looked at me. At the same time, I saw nothing to make me conclude that
Philip had produced an unfavorable impression. The truth is, we were all
three on our best behavior, and we showed it. Philip had brought with
him a letter from Mrs. Staveley, introducing him to papa. We spoke of
the Staveleys, of the weather, of the Cathedral--and then there seemed
to be nothing more left to talk about.

In the silence that followed--what a dreadful thing silence is!--papa
was sent for to see somebody who had called on business. He made his
excuses in the sweetest manner, but still seriously. When he and Philip
had shaken hands, would he leave us together? No; he waited. Poor Philip
had no choice but to take leave of me. Papa then went out by the door
that led into his study, and I was left alone.

Can any words say how wretched I felt?

I had hoped so much from that first meeting--and where were my hopes
now? A profane wish that I had never been born was finding its way into
my mind, when the door of the room was opened softly, from the side of
the passage. Maria, dear Maria, the best friend I have, peeped in. She
whispered: "Go into the garden, miss, and you will find somebody there
who is dying to see you. Mind you let him out by the shrubbery gate."
I squeezed her hand; I asked if she had tried the shrubbery gate with a
sweetheart of her own. "Hundreds of times, miss."

Was it wrong for me to go to Philip, in the garden? Oh, there is no end
to objections! Perhaps I did it _because_ it was wrong. Perhaps I had
been kept on my best behavior too long for human endurance.

How sadly disappointed he looked! And how rashly he had placed himself
just where he could be seen from the back windows! I took his arm and
led him to the end of the garden. There we were out of the reach of
inquisitive eyes; and there we sat down together, under the big mulberry
tree.

"Oh, Eunice, your father doesn't like me!"

Those were his first words. In justice to papa (and a little for my
own sake too) I told him he was quite wrong. I said: "Trust my father's
goodness, trust his kindness, as I do."

He made no reply. His silence was sufficiently expressive; he looked at
me fondly.

I may be wrong, but fond looks surely require an acknowledgment of some
kind? Is a young woman guilty of boldness who only follows her impulses?
I slipped my hand into his hand. Philip seemed to like it. We returned
to our conversation.

He began: "Tell me, dear, is Mr. Gracedieu always as serious as he is
to-day?"

"Oh no!"

"When he takes exercise, does he ride? or does he walk?"

"Papa always walks."

"By himself?"

"Sometimes by himself. Sometimes with me. Do you want to meet him when
he goes out?"

"Yes."

"When he is out with me?"

"No. When he is out by himself."

Was it possible to tell me more plainly that I was not wanted? I did my
best to express indignation by snatching my hand away from him. He was
completely taken by surprise.

"Eunice! don't you understand me?"

I was as stupid and as disagreeable as I could possibly be: "No; I
don't!"

"Then let me help you," he said, with a patience which I had not
deserved.

Up to that moment I had been leaning against the back of a garden
chair. Something else now got between me and my chair. It stole round
my waist--it held me gently--it strengthened its hold--it improved my
temper--it made me fit to understand him. All done by what? Only an arm!

Philip went on:

"I want to ask your father to do me the greatest of all favors--and
there is no time to lose. Every day, I expect to get a letter which may
recall me to Ireland."

My heart sank at this horrid prospect; and in some mysterious way my
head must have felt it too. I mean that I found my head resting on his
shoulder. He went on:

"How am I to get my opportunity of speaking to Mr. Gracedieu? I mustn't
call on him again as soon as to-morrow or next day. But I might meet
him, out walking alone, if you will tell me how to do it. A note to my
hotel is all I want. Don't tremble, my sweet. If you are not present at
the time, do you see any objection to my owning to your father that I
love you?"

I felt his delicate consideration for me--I did indeed feel it
gratefully. If he only spoke first, how well I should get on with papa
afterward! The prospect before me was exquisitely encouraging. I agreed
with Philip in everything; and I waited (how eagerly was only known to
myself) to hear what he would say to me next. He prophesied next:

"When I have told your father that I love you, he will expect me to tell
him something else. Can you guess what it is?"

If I had not been confused, perhaps I might have found the answer to
this. As it was, I left him to reply to himself. He did it, in words
which I shall remember as long as I live.

"Dearest Eunice, when your father has heard my confession, he will
suspect that there is another confession to follow it--he will want to
know if you love me. My angel, will my hopes be your hopes too, when I
answer him?"

What there was in this to make my heart beat so violently that I felt as
if I was being stifled, is more than I can tell. He leaned so close to
me, so tenderly, so delightfully close, that our faces nearly touched.
He whispered: "Say you love me, in a kiss!"

His lips touched my lips, pressed them, dwelt on them--oh, how can I
tell of it! Some new enchantment of feeling ran deliciously through
and through me. I forgot my own self; I only knew of one person in the
world. He was master of my lips; he was master of my heart. When he
whispered, "kiss me," I kissed. What a moment it was! A faintness stole
over me; I felt as if I was going to die some exquisite death; I laid
myself back away from him--I was not able to speak. There was no need
for it; my thoughts and his thoughts were one--he knew that I was
quite overcome; he saw that he must leave me to recover myself alone. I
pointed to the shrubbery gate. We took one long last look at each other
for that day; the trees hid him; I was left by myself.



CHAPTER XX. EUNICE'S DIARY.

How long a time passed before my composure came back to me, I cannot
remember now. It seemed as if I was waiting through some interval of my
life that was a mystery to myself. I was content to wait, and feel the
light evening air in the garden wafting happiness over me. And all this
had come from a kiss! I can call the time to mind when I used to wonder
why people made such a fuss about kissing.

I had been indebted to Maria for my first taste of Paradise. I was
recalled by Maria to the world that I had been accustomed to live in;
the world that was beginning to fade away in my memory already. She had
been sent to the garden in search of me; and she had a word of advice
to offer, after noticing my face when I stepped out of the shadow of the
tree: "Try to look more like yourself, miss, before you let them see you
at the tea-table."


Papa and Miss Jillgall were sitting together talking, when I opened the
door. They left off when they saw me; and I supposed, quite correctly
as it turned out, that I had been one of the subjects in their course
of conversation. My poor father seemed to be sadly anxious and out of
sorts. Miss Jillgall, if I had been in the humor to enjoy it, would have
been more amusing than ever. One of her funny little eyes persisted in
winking at me; and her heavy foot had something to say to my foot, under
the table, which meant a great deal perhaps, but which only succeeded in
hurting me.

My father left us; and Miss Jillgall explained herself.

"I know, dearest Euneece, that we have only been acquainted for a day or
two and that I ought not perhaps to have expected you to confide in
me so soon. Can I trust you not to betray me if I set an example of
confidence? Ah, I see I can trust you! And, my dear, I do so enjoy
telling secrets to a friend. Hush! Your father, your excellent father,
has been talking to me about young Mr. Dunboyne."

She provokingly stopped there. I entreated her to go on. She invited
me to sit on her knee. "I want to whisper," she said. It was too
ridiculous--but I did it. Miss Jillgall's whisper told me serious news.

"The minister has some reason, Euneece, for disapproving of Mr.
Dunboyne; but, mind this, I don't think he has a bad opinion of the
young man himself. He is going to return Mr. Dunboyne's call. Oh, I do
so hate formality; I really can't go on talking of _Mr._ Dunboyne. Tell
me his Christian name. Ah, what a noble name! How I long to be useful
to him! Tomorrow, my dear, after the one o'clock dinner, your papa will
call on Philip, at his hotel. I hope he won't be out, just at the wrong
time."

I resolved to prevent that unlucky accident by writing to Philip. If
Miss Jillgall would have allowed it, I should have begun my letter at
once. But she had more to say; and she was stronger than I was, and
still kept me on her knee.

"It all looks bright enough so far, doesn't it, dear sister? Will you
let me be your second sister? I do so love you, Euneece. Thank you!
thank you! But the gloomy side of the picture is to come next! The
minister--no! now I am your sister I must call him papa; it makes me
feel so young again! Well, then, papa has asked me to be your companion
whenever you go out. 'Euneece is too young and too attractive to be
walking about this great town (in Helena's absence) by herself.' That
was how he put it. Slyly enough, if one may say so of so good a man. And
he used your sister (didn't he?) as a kind of excuse. I wish your sister
was as nice as you are. However, the point is, why am I to be your
companion? Because, dear child, you and your young gentleman are not to
make appointments and to meet each other alone. Oh, yes--that's it!
Your father is quite willing to return Philip's call; he proposes (as a
matter of civility to Mrs. Staveley) to ask Philip to dinner; but, mark
my words, he doesn't mean to let Philip have you for his wife."

I jumped off her lap; it was horrible to hear her. "Oh," I said, "_can_
you be right about it?" Miss Jillgall jumped up too. She has foreign
ways of shrugging her shoulders and making signs with her hands. On this
occasion she laid both hands on the upper part of her dress, just below
her throat, and mysteriously shook her head.

"When my views are directed by my affections," she assured me, "I never
see wrong. My bosom is my strong point."

She has no bosom, poor soul--but I understood what she meant. It failed
to have any soothing effect on my feelings. I felt grieved and angry and
puzzled, all in one. Miss Jillgall stood looking at me, with her hands
still on the place where her bosom was supposed to be. She made my
temper hotter than ever.

"I mean to marry Philip," I said.

"Certainly, my dear Euneece. But please don't be so fierce about it."

"If my father does really object to my marriage," I went on, "it must be
because he dislikes Philip. There can be no other reason."

"Oh, yes, dear--there can."

"What is the reason, then?"

"That, my sweet girl, is one of the things that we have got to find
out."

.......

The post of this morning brought a letter from my sister. We were to
expect her return by the next day's train. This was good news. Philip
and I might stand in need of clever Helena's help, and we might be sure
of getting it now.

In writing to Philip, I had asked him to let me hear how papa and he had
got on at the hotel. I won't say how often I consulted my watch, or how
often I looked out of the window for a man with a letter in his hand. It
will be better to get on at once to the discouraging end of it, when the
report of the interview reached me at last. Twice Philip had attempted
to ask for my hand in marriage--and twice my father had "deliberately,
obstinately" (Philip's own words) changed the subject. Even this was not
all. As if he was determined to show that Miss Jillgall was perfectly
right, and I perfectly wrong, papa (civil to Philip as long as he did
not talk of Me) had asked him to dine with us, and Philip had accepted
the invitation!

What were we to think of it? What were we to do?

I wrote back to my dear love (so cruelly used) to tell him that Helena
was expected to return on the next day, and that her opinion would be of
the greatest value to both of us. In a postscript I mentioned the hour
at which we were going to the station to meet my sister. When I say
"we," I mean Miss Jillgall as well as myself.

.......

We found him waiting for us at the railway. I am afraid he resented
papa's incomprehensible resolution not to give him a hearing. He was
silent and sullen. I could not conceal that to see this state of feeling
distressed me. He showed how truly he deserved to be loved--he begged
my pardon, and he became his own sweet self again directly. I am more
determined to marry him than ever.

When the train entered the station, all the carriages were full. I went
one way, thinking I had seen Helena. Miss Jillgall went the other way,
under the same impression. Philip was a little way behind me.

Not seeing my sister, I had just turned back, when a young man jumped
out of a carriage, opposite Philip, and recognized and shook hands with
him. I was just near enough to hear the stranger say, "Look at the girl
in our carriage." Philip looked. "What a charming creature!" he said,
and then checked himself for fear the young lady should hear him. She
had just handed her traveling bag and wraps to a porter, and was getting
out. Philip politely offered his hand to help her. She looked my way.
The charming creature of my sweetheart's admiration was, to my infinite
amusement, Helena herself.



CHAPTER XXI. HELENA'S DIARY.

The day of my return marks an occasion which I am not likely to forget.
Hours have passed since I came home--and my agitation still forbids the
thought of repose.

As I sit at my desk I see Eunice in bed, sleeping peacefully, except
when she is murmuring enjoyment in some happy dream. To what end has my
sister been advancing blindfold, and (who knows?) dragging me with her,
since that disastrous visit to our friends in London? Strange that there
should be a leaven of superstition in _my_ nature! Strange that I should
feel fear of something--I hardly know what!

I have met somewhere (perhaps in my historical reading) with the
expression: "A chain of events." Was I at the beginning of that chain,
when I entered the railway carriage on my journey home?

Among the other passengers there was a young gentleman, accompanied by
a lady who proved to be his sister. They were both well-bred people.
The brother evidently admired me, and did his best to make himself
agreeable. Time passed quickly in pleasant talk, and my vanity was
flattered--and that was all. My fellow-travelers were going on to
London. When the train reached our station the young lady sent
her brother to buy some fruit, which she saw in the window of the
refreshment-room. The first man whom he encountered on the platform was
one of his friends; to whom he said something which I failed to hear.
When I handed my traveling bag and my wraps to the porter, and showed
myself at the carriage door, I heard the friend say: "What a charming
creature!" Having nothing to conceal in a journal which I protect by a
lock, I may own that the stranger's personal appearance struck me,
and that what I felt this time was not flattered vanity, but
gratified pride. He was young, he was remarkably handsome, he was a
distinguished-looking man.

All this happened in one moment. In the moment that followed, I found
myself in Eunice's arms. That odious person, Miss Jillgall, insisted on
embracing me next. And then I was conscious of an indescribable feeling
of surprise. Eunice presented the distinguished-looking gentleman to me
as a friend of hers--Mr. Philip Dunboyne.

"I had the honor of meeting your sister," he said, "in London, at Mr.
Staveley's house." He went on to speak easily and gracefully of the
journey I had taken, and of his friend who had been my fellow-traveler;
and he attended us to the railway omnibus before he took his leave. I
observed that Eunice had something to say to him confidentially, before
they parted. This was another example of my sister's childish character;
she is instantly familiar with new acquaintances, if she happens to like
them. I anticipated some amusement from hearing how she had contrived to
establish confidential relations with a highly-cultivated man like Mr.
Dunboyne. But, while Miss Jillgall was with us, it was just as well to
keep within the limits of commonplace conversation.

Before we got out of the omnibus I had, however, observed one
undesirable result of my absence from home. Eunice and Miss
Jillgall--the latter having, no doubt, finely flattered the
former--appeared to have taken a strong liking to each other.

Two curious circumstances also caught my attention. I saw a change to,
what I call self-assertion, in my sister's manner; something seemed to
have raised her in her own estimation. Then, again, Miss Jillgall was
not like her customary self. She had delightful moments of silence; and
when Eunice asked how I liked Mr. Dunboyne, she listened to my reply
with an appearance of interest in her ugly face which was quite a new
revelation in my experience of my father's cousin.

These little discoveries (after what I had already observed at the
railway-station) ought perhaps to have prepared me for what was to come,
when my sister and I were alone in our room. But Eunice, whether she
meant to do it or not, baffled my customary penetration. She looked as
if she had plenty of news to tell me--with some obstacle in the way of
doing it, which appeared to amuse instead of annoying her. If there is
one thing more than another that I hate, it is being puzzled. I asked
at once if anything remarkable had happened during Eunice's visit to
London.

She smiled mischievously. "I have got a delicious surprise for you, my
dear; and I do so enjoy prolonging it. Tell me, Helena, what did you
propose we should both do when we found ourselves at home again?"

My memory was at fault. Eunice's good spirits became absolutely
boisterous. She called out: "Catch!" and tossed her journal into my
hands, across the whole length of the room. "We were to read each
other's diaries," she said. "There is mine to begin with."

Innocent of any suspicion of the true state of affairs, I began the
reading of Eunice's journal. If I had not seen the familiar handwriting,
nothing would have induced me to believe that a girl brought up in
a pious household, the well-beloved daughter of a distinguished
Congregational Minister, could have written that shameless record of
passions unknown to young ladies in respectable English life. What to
say, what to do, when I had closed the book, was more than I felt myself
equal to decide. My wretched sister spared me the anxiety which I might
otherwise have felt. It was she who first opened her lips, after the
silence that had fallen on us while I was reading. These were literally
the words that she said:

"My darling, why don't you congratulate me?"

No argument could have persuaded me, as this persuaded me, that all
sisterly remonstrance on my part would be completely thrown away.

"My dear Eunice," I said, "let me beg you to excuse me. I am waiting--"

There she interrupted me--and, oh, in what an impudent manner! She took
my chin between her finger and thumb, and lifted my downcast face, and
looked at me with an appearance of eager expectation which I was quite
at a loss to understand.

"You have been away from home, too," she said. "Do I see in this serious
face some astonishing news waiting to overpower me? Have _you_ found a
sweetheart? Are _you_ engaged to be married?"

I only put her hand away from me, and advised her to return to her
chair. This perfectly harmless proceeding seemed absolutely to frighten
her.

"Oh, my dear," she burst out, "surely you are not jealous of me?"

There was but one possible reply to this: I laughed at it. Is Eunice's
head turned? She kissed me!

"Now you laugh," she said, "I begin to understand you again; I ought to
have known that you are superior to jealousy. But, do tell me, would it
be so very wonderful if other girls found something to envy in my good
luck? Just think of it! Such a handsome man, such an agreeable man,
such a clever man, such a rich man--and, not the least of his merits,
by-the-by, a man who admires You. Come! if you won't congratulate me,
congratulate yourself on having such a brother-in-law in prospect!"

Her head _was_ turned. I drew the poor soul's attention compassionately
to what I had said a moment since.

"Pardon me, dear, for reminding you that I have not yet refused to offer
my congratulations. I only told you I was waiting."

"For what?"

"Waiting, of course, to hear what my father thinks of your wonderful
good luck."

This explanation, offered with the kindest intentions, produced another
change in my very variable sister. I had extinguished her good spirits
as I might have extinguished a light. She sat down by me, and sighed in
the saddest manner. The heart must be hard indeed which can resist the
distress of a person who is dear to us. I put my arm round her; she was
becoming once more the Eunice whom I so dearly loved.

"My poor child," I said, "don't distress yourself by speaking of it; I
understand. Your father objects to your marrying Mr. Dunboyne."

She shook her head. "I can't exactly say, Helena, that papa does that.
He only behaves very strangely."

"Am I indiscreet, dear, if I ask in what way father's behavior has
surprised you?"

She was quite willing to enlighten me. It was a simple little story
which, to my mind, sufficiently explained the strange behavior that had
puzzled my unfortunate sister.

There could indeed be no doubt that my father considered Eunice far too
childish in character, as yet, to undertake the duties of matrimony.
But, with his customary delicacy, and dread of causing distress to
others, he had deferred the disagreeable duty of communicating his
opinion to Mr. Dunboyne. The adverse decision must, however, be sooner
or later announced; and he had arranged to inflict disappointment, as
tenderly as might be, at his own table.

Considerately leaving Eunice in the enjoyment of any vain hopes which
she may have founded on the event of the dinner-party, I passed the
evening until supper-time came in the study with my father.

Our talk was mainly devoted to the worthy people with whom I had been
staying, and whose new schools I had helped to found. Not a word was
said relating to my sister, or to Mr. Dunboyne. Poor father looked so
sadly weary and ill that I ventured, after what the doctor had said
to Eunice, to hint at the value of rest and change of scene to an
overworked man. Oh, dear me, he frowned, and waved the subject away from
him impatiently, with a wan, pale hand.

After supper, I made an unpleasant discovery. Not having completely
finished the unpacking of my boxes, I left Miss Jillgall and Eunice in
the drawing-room, and went upstairs. In half an hour I returned, and
found the room empty. What had become of them? It was a fine moonlight
night; I stepped into the back drawing-room, and looked out of the
window. There they were, walking arm-in-arm with their heads close
together, deep in talk. With my knowledge of Miss Jillgall, I call this
a bad sign.

An odd thought has just come to me. I wonder what might have happened,
if I had been visiting at Mrs. Staveley's, instead of Eunice, and if Mr.
Dunboyne had seen me first.

Absurd! if I was not too tired to do anything more, those last lines
should be scratched out.



CHAPTER XXII. EUNICE'S DIARY.

I said so to Miss Jillgall, and I say it again here. Nothing will induce
me to think ill of Helena.

My sister is a good deal tired, and a little out of temper after the
railway journey. This is exactly what happened to me when I went to
London. I attribute her refusal to let me read her journal, after she
had read mine, entirely to the disagreeable consequences of traveling
by railway. Miss Jillgall accounted for it otherwise, in her own funny
manner: "My sweet child, your sister's diary is full of abuse of poor
me." I humored the joke: "Dearest Selina, keep a diary of your own, and
fill it with abuse of my sister." This seemed to be a droll saying at
the time. But it doesn't look particularly amusing, now it is written
down. We had ginger wine at supper, to celebrate Helena's return.
Although I only drank one glass, I daresay it may have got into my head.

However that may be, when the lovely moonlight tempted us into the
garden, there was an end to our jokes. We had something to talk about
which still dwells disagreeably on my mind.

Miss Jillgall began it.

"If I trust you, dearest Euneece, with my own precious secrets, shall I
never, never, never live to repent it?"

I told my good little friend that she might depend on me, provided her
secrets did no harm to any person whom I loved.

She clasped her hands and looked up at the moon--I can only suppose that
her sentiments overpowered her. She said, very prettily, that her heart
and my heart beat together in heavenly harmony. It is needless to add
that this satisfied me.

Miss Jillgall's generous confidence in my discretion was, I am afraid,
not rewarded as it ought to have been. I found her tiresome at first.

She spoke of an excellent friend (a lady), who had helped her, at
the time when she lost her little fortune, by raising a subscription
privately to pay the expenses of her return to England. Her friend's
name--not very attractive to English ears--was Mrs. Tenbruggen; they had
first become acquainted under interesting circumstances. Miss Jillgall
happened to mention that my father was her only living relative; and
it turned out that Mrs. Tenbruggen was familiar with his name, and
reverenced his fame as a preacher. When he had generously received his
poor helpless cousin under his own roof, Miss Jillgall's gratitude and
sense of duty impelled her to write and tell Mrs. Tenbruggen how happy
she was as a member of our family.

Let me confess that I began to listen more attentively when the
narrative reached this point.

"I drew a little picture of our domestic circle here," Miss Jillgall
said, describing her letter; "and I mentioned the mystery in which
Mr. Gracedieu conceals the ages of you two dear girls. Mrs.
Tenbruggen--shall we shorten her ugly name and call her Mrs. T.? Very
well--Mrs. T. is a remarkably clever woman, and I looked for interesting
results, if she would give her opinion of the mysterious circumstance
mentioned in my letter."

By this time, I was all eagerness to hear more.

"Has she written to you?" I asked.

Miss Jillgall looked at me affectionately, and took the reply out of her
pocket.

"Listen, Euneece; and you shall hear her own words. Thus she writes:

"'Your letter, dear Selina, especially interests me by what it says
about the _two_ Miss Gracedieus. '--Look, dear; she underlines the word
Two. Why, I can't explain. Can you? Ah, I thought not. Well, let us get
back to the letter. My accomplished friend continues in these terms:

"'I can understand the surprise which you have felt at the strange
course taken by their father, as a means of concealing the difference
which there must be in the ages of these young ladies. Many years since,
I happened to discover a romantic incident in the life of your popular
preacher, which he has his reasons, as I suspect, for keeping strictly
to himself. If I may venture on a bold guess, I should say that any
person who could discover which was the oldest of the two daughters,
would be also likely to discover the true nature of the romance in Mr.
Gracedieu's life.'--Isn't that very remarkable, Euneece? You don't seem
to see it--you funny child! Pray pay particular attention to what comes
next. These are the closing sentences in my friend's letter:

"'If you find anything new to tell me which relates to this interesting
subject, direct your letter as before--provided you write within a week
from the present time. Afterward, my letters will be received by the
English physician whose card I inclose. You will be pleased to hear that
my professional interests call me to London at the earliest moment that
I can spare.'--There, dear child, the letter comes to an end. I daresay
you wonder what Mrs. T. means, when she alludes to her professional
interests?"

No: I was not wondering about anything. It hurt me to hear of a strange
woman exercising her ingenuity in guessing at mysteries in papa's life.

But Miss Jillgall was too eagerly bent on setting forth the merits
of her friend to notice this. I now heard that Mrs. T.'s marriage had
turned out badly, and that she had been reduced to earn her own bread.
Her manner of doing this was something quite new to me. She went
about, from one place to another, curing people of all sorts of painful
maladies, by a way she had of rubbing them with her hands. In Belgium
she was called a "Masseuse." When I asked what this meant in English,
I was told, "Medical Rubber," and that the fame of Mrs. T.'s wonderful
cures had reached some of the medical newspapers published in London.

After listening (I must say for myself) very patiently, I was bold
enough to own that my interest in what I had just heard was not quite so
plain to me as I could have wished it to be.

Miss Jillgall looked shocked at my stupidity. She reminded me that
there was a mystery in Mrs. Tenbruggen's letter and a mystery in papa's
strange conduct toward Philip. "Put two and two together, darling," she
said; "and, one of these days, they may make four."

If this meant anything, it meant that the reason which made papa keep
Helena's age and my age unknown to everybody but himself, was also the
reason why he seemed to be so strangely unwilling to let me be Philip's
wife. I really could not endure to take such a view of it as that, and
begged Miss Jillgall to drop the subject. She was as kind as ever.

"With all my heart, dear. But don't deceive yourself--the subject will
turn up again when we least expect it."



CHAPTER XXIII. EUNICE'S DIARY.

Only two days now, before we give our little dinner-party, and Philip
finds his opportunity of speaking to papa. Oh, how I wish that day had
come and gone!

I try not to take gloomy views of things; but I am not quite so happy as
I had expected to be when my dear was in the same town with me. If papa
had encouraged him to call again, we might have had some precious time
to ourselves. As it is, we can only meet in the different show-places
in the town--with Helena on one side, and Miss Jillgall on the other,
to take care of us. I do call it cruel not to let two young people love
each other, without setting third persons to watch them. If I was Queen
of England, I would have pretty private bowers made for lovers, in the
summer, and nice warm little rooms to hold two, in the winter. Why not?
What harm could come of it, I should like to know?

The cathedral is the place of meeting which we find most convenient,
under the circumstances. There are delightful nooks and corners about
this celebrated building in which lovers can lag behind. If we had been
in papa's chapel I should have hesitated to turn it to such a profane
use as this; the cathedral doesn't so much matter.

Shall I own that I felt my inferiority to Helena a little keenly? She
could tell Philip so many things that I should have liked to tell him
first. My clever sister taught him how to pronounce the name of the
bishop who began building the cathedral; she led him over the crypt, and
told him how old it was. He was interested in the crypt; he talked
to Helena (not to me) of his ambition to write a work on cathedral
architecture in England; he made a rough little sketch in his book of
our famous tomb of some king. Helena knew the late royal personage's
name, and Philip showed his sketch to her before he showed it to me. How
can I blame him, when I stood there the picture of stupidity, trying
to recollect something that I might tell him, if it was only the Dean's
name? Helena might have whispered it to me, I think. She remembered it,
not I--and mentioned it to Philip, of course. I kept close by him all
the time, and now and then he gave me a look which raised my spirits. He
might have given me something better than that--I mean a kiss--when we
had left the cathedral, and were by ourselves for a moment in a corner
of the Dean's garden. But he missed the opportunity. Perhaps he was
afraid of the Dean himself coming that way, and happening to see us.
However, I am far from thinking the worse of Philip. I gave his arm a
little squeeze--and that was better than nothing.

.......

He and I took a walk along the bank of the river to-day; my sister and
Miss Jillgall looking after us as usual. On our way through the town,
Helena stopped to give an order at a shop. She asked us to wait for her.
That best of good creatures, Miss Jillgall, whispered in my ear: "Go on
by yourselves, and leave me to wait for her." Philip interpreted this
act of kindness in a manner which would have vexed me, if I had not
understood that it was one of his jokes. He said to me: "Miss Jillgall
sees a chance of annoying your sister, and enjoys the prospect."

Well, away we went together; it was just what I wanted; it gave me an
opportunity of saying something to Philip, between ourselves.

I could now beg of him, in his interests and mine, to make the best of
himself when he came to dinner. Clever people, I told him, were people
whom papa liked and admired. I said: "Let him see, dear, how clever
_you_ are, and how many things you know--and you can't imagine what a
high place you will have in his opinion. I hope you don't think I am
taking too much on myself in telling you how to behave."

He relieved that doubt in a manner which I despair of describing. His
eyes rested on me with such a look of exquisite sweetness and love that
I was obliged to hold by his arm, I trembled so with the pleasure of
feeling it.

"I do sincerely believe," he said, "that you are the most innocent girl,
the sweetest, truest girl that ever lived. I wish I was a better man,
Eunice; I wish I was good enough to be worthy of you!"

To hear him speak of himself in that way jarred on me. If such words had
fallen from any other man's lips, I should have been afraid that he had
done something, or thought something, of which he had reason to feel
ashamed. With Philip this was impossible.

He was eager to walk on rapidly, and to turn a corner in the path,
before we could be seen. "I want to be alone with you," he said.

I looked back. We were too late; Helena and Miss Jillgall had nearly
overtaken us. My sister was on the point of speaking to Philip, when she
seemed to change her mind, and only looked at him. Instead of looking
at her in return, he kept his eyes cast down and drew figures on the
pathway with his stick. I think Helena was out of temper; she suddenly
turned my way. "Why didn't you wait for me?" she asked.

Philip took her up sharply. "If Eunice likes seeing the river better
than waiting in the street," he said, "isn't she free to do as she
pleases?"

Helena said nothing more; Philip walked on slowly by himself. Not
knowing what to make of it, I turned to Miss Jillgall. "Surely Philip
can't have quarreled with Helena?" I said.

Miss Jillgall answered in an odd off-hand manner: "Not he! He is a great
deal more likely to have quarreled with himself."

"Why?"

"Suppose you ask him why?"

It was not to be thought of; it would have looked like prying into his
thoughts. "Selina!" I said, "there is something odd about you to-day.
What is the matter? I don't understand you."

"My poor dear, you will find yourself understanding me before long." I
thought I saw something like pity in her face when she said that.

"My poor dear?" I repeated. "What makes you speak to me in that way?"

"I don't know--I'm tired; I'm an old fool--I'll go back to the house."

Without another word, she left me. I turned to look for Philip, and
saw that my sister had joined him while I had been speaking to Miss
Jillgall. It pleased me to find that they were talking in a friendly way
when I joined them. A quarrel between Helena and my husband that is to
be--no, my husband that _shall_ be--would have been too distressing, too
unnatural I might almost call it.

Philip looked along the backward path, and asked what had become of Miss
Jillgall. "Have you any objection to follow her example?" he said to me,
when I told him that Selina had returned to the town. "I don't care for
the banks of this river."

Helena, who used to like the river at other times, was as ready as
Philip to leave it now. I fancy they had both been kindly waiting to
change our walk, till I came to them, and they could study my wishes
too. Of course I was ready to go where they pleased. I asked Philip if
there was anything he would like to see, when we got into the streets
again.

Clever Helena suggested what seemed to be a strange amusement to offer
to Philip. "Let's take him to the Girls' School," she said.

It appeared to be a matter of perfect indifference to him; he was, what
they call, ironical. "Oh, yes, of course. Deeply interesting! deeply
interesting!" He suddenly broke into the wildest good spirits, and
tucked my hand under his arm with a gayety which it was impossible
to resist. "What a boy you are!" Helena said, enjoying his delightful
hilarity as I did.



CHAPTER XXIV. EUNICE'S DIARY.

On entering the schoolroom we lost our gayety, all in a moment.
Something unpleasant had evidently happened.

Two of the eldest girls were sitting together in a corner, separated
from the rest, and looking most wickedly sulky. The teachers were at the
other end of the room, appearing to be ill at ease. And there, standing
in the midst of them, with his face flushed and his eyes angry--there
was papa, sadly unlike his gentle self in the days of his health and
happiness. On former occasions, when the exercise of his authority was
required in the school, his forbearing temper always set things right.
When I saw him now, I thought of what the doctor had said of his health,
on my way home from the station.

Papa advanced to us the moment we showed ourselves at the door.

He shook hands--cordially shook hands--with Philip. It was delightful to
see him, delightful to hear him say: "Pray don't suppose, Mr. Dunboyne,
that you are intruding; remain with us by all means if you like." Then
he spoke to Helena and to me, still excited, still not like himself:
"You couldn't have come here, my dears, at a time when your presence
was more urgently needed." He turned to the teachers. "Tell my
daughters what has happened; tell them why they see me here--shocked and
distressed, I don't deny it."

We now heard that the two girls in disgrace had broken the rules, and in
such a manner as to deserve severe punishment.

One of them had been discovered hiding a novel in her desk. The other
had misbehaved herself more seriously still--she had gone to the
theater. Instead of expressing any regret, they had actually dared to
complain of having to learn papa's improved catechism. They had even
accused him of treating them with severity, because they were poor
girls brought up on charity. "If we had been young ladies," they were
audacious enough to say, "more indulgence would have been shown to us;
we should have been allowed to read stories and to see plays."

All this time I had been asking myself what papa meant, when he told us
we could not have come to the schoolroom at a better time. His meaning
now appeared. When he spoke to the offending girls, he pointed to Helena
and to me.

"Here are my daughters," he said. "You will not deny that they are young
ladies. Now listen. They shall tell you themselves whether my rules make
any difference between them and you. Helena! Eunice! do I allow you to
read novels? do I allow you to go to the play?"

We said, "No"--and hoped it was over. But he had not done yet. He turned
to Helena.

"Answer some of the questions," he went on, "from my Manual of Christian
Obligation, which the girls call my catechism." He asked one of the
questions: "If you are told to do unto others as you would they should
do unto you, and if you find a difficulty in obeying that Divine
Precept, what does your duty require?"

It is my belief that Helena has the materials in her for making another
Joan of Arc. She rose, and answered without the slightest sign of
timidity: "My duty requires me to go to the minister, and to seek for
advice and encouragement."

"And if these fail?"

"Then I am to remember that my pastor is my friend. He claims no
priestly authority or priestly infallibility. He is my fellow-Christian
who loves me. He will tell me how he has himself failed; how he has
struggled against himself; and what a blessed reward has followed his
victory--a purified heart, a peaceful mind."

Then papa released my sister, after she had only repeated two out of all
the answers in Christian Obligation, which we first began to learn when
we were children. He then addressed himself again to the girls.

"Is what you have just heard a part of my catechism? Has my daughter
been excused from repeating it because she is a young lady? Where is
the difference between the religious education which is given to my own
child, and that given to you?"

The wretched girls still sat silent and obstinate, with their heads
down. I tremble again as I write of what happened next. Papa fixed his
eyes on me. He said, out loud: "Eunice!"--and waited for me to rise and
answer, as my sister had done.

It was entirely beyond my power to get on my feet.

Philip had (innocently, I am sure) discouraged me; I saw displeasure,
I saw contempt in his face. There was a dead silence in the room.
Everybody looked at me. My heart beat furiously, my hands turned cold,
the questions and answers in Christian Obligation all left my memory
together. I looked imploringly at papa.

For the first time in his life, he was hard on me. His eyes were as
angry as ever; they showed me no mercy. Oh, what had come to me?
what evil spirit possessed me? I felt resentment; horrid, undutiful
resentment, at being treated in this cruel way. My fists clinched
themselves in my lap, my face felt as hot as fire. Instead of asking my
father to excuse me, I said: "I can't do it." He was astounded, as well
he might be. I went on from bad to worse. I said: "I won't do it."

He stooped over me; he whispered: "I am going to ask you something;
I insist on your answering, Yes or No." He raised his voice, and drew
himself back so that they could all see me.

"Have you been taught like your sister?" he asked. "Has the catechism
that has been her religious lesson, for all her life, been your
religious lesson, for all your life, too?"

I said: "Yes"--and I was in such a rage that I said it out loud. If
Philip had handed me his cane, and had advised me to give the young
hussies who were answerable for this dreadful state of things a good
beating, I believe I should have done it. Papa turned his back on me and
offered the girls a last chance: "Do you feel sorry for what you have
done? Do you ask to be forgiven?"

Neither the one nor the other answered him. He called across the room to
the teachers: "Those two pupils are expelled the school."

Both the women looked horrified. The elder of the two approached him,
and tried to plead for a milder sentence. He answered in one stern
word: "Silence!"--and left the schoolroom, without even a passing bow to
Philip. And this, after he had cordially shaken hands with my poor dear,
not half an hour before.

I ought to have made affectionate allowance for his nervous miseries;
I ought to have run after him, and begged his pardon. There must be
something wrong, I am afraid, in girls loving anybody but their fathers.
When Helena led the way out by another door, I ran after Philip; and I
asked _him_ to forgive me.

I don't know what I said; it was all confusion. The fear of having
forfeited his fondness must, I suppose, have shaken my mind. I remember
entreating Helena to say a kind word for me. She was so clever, she
had behaved so well, she had deserved that Philip should listen to her.
"Oh," I cried out to him desperately, "what must you think of me?"

"I will tell you what I think of you," he said. "It is your father who
is in fault, Eunice--not you. Nothing could have been in worse taste
than his management of that trumpery affair in the schoolroom; it was
a complete mistake from beginning to end. Make your mind easy; I don't
blame You."

"Are you, really and truly, as fond of me as ever?"

"Yes, to be sure!"

Helena seemed to be hardly as much interested in this happy ending of my
anxieties as I might have anticipated. She walked on by herself. Perhaps
she was thinking of poor papa's strange outbreak of excitement, and
grieving over it.

We had only a little way to walk, before we passed the door of Philip's
hotel. He had not yet received the expected letter from his father--the
cruel letter which might recall him to Ireland. It was then the hour of
delivery by our second post; he went to look at the letter-rack in the
hall. Helena saw that I was anxious. She was as kind again as ever; she
consented to wait with me for Philip, at the door.

He came out to us with an open letter in his hand.

"From my father, at last," he said--and gave me the letter to read. It
only contained these few lines:

"Do not be alarmed, my dear boy, at the change for the worse in my
handwriting. I am suffering for my devotion to the studious habits of a
lifetime: my right hand is attacked by the malady called Writer's Cramp.
The doctor here can do nothing. He tells me of some foreign woman,
mentioned in his newspaper, who cures nervous derangements of all kinds
by hand-rubbing, and who is coming to London. When you next hear from
me, I may be in London too."--There the letter ended.

Of course I knew who the foreign woman, mentioned in the newspaper, was.

But what does Miss Jillgall's friend matter to me? The one important
thing is, that Philip has not been called back to Ireland. Here is a
fortunate circumstance, which perhaps means more good luck. I may be
Mrs. Philip Dunboyne before the year is out.



CHAPTER XXV. HELENA'S DIARY.

They all notice at home that I am looking worn and haggard. That hideous
old maid, Miss Jillgall, had her malicious welcome ready for me when
we met at breakfast this morning: "Dear Helena, what has become of your
beauty? One would think you had left it in your room!" Poor deluded
Eunice showed her sisterly sympathy: "Don't joke about it, Selina: can't
you see that Helena is ill?"

I _have_ been ill; ill of my own wickedness.

But the recovery to my tranquillity will bring with it the recovery
of my good looks. My fatal passion for Philip promises to be the utter
destruction of everything that is good in me. Well! what is good in
me may not be worth keeping. There is a fate in these things. If I am
destined to rob Eunice of the one dear object of her love and hope--how
can I resist? The one kind thing I can do is to keep her in ignorance of
what is coming, by acts of affectionate deceit.

Besides, if she suffers, I suffer too. In the length and breadth of
England, I doubt if there is a much more wicked young woman to be found
than myself. Is it nothing to feel that, and to endure it as I do?

Upon my word, there is no excuse for me!

Is this sheer impudence? No; it is the bent of my nature. I have a
tendency to self-examination, accompanied by one merit--I don't spare
myself.

There are excuses for Eunice. She lives in a fools' paradise; and she
sees in her lover a radiant creature, shining in the halo thrown over
him by her own self-delusion, Nothing of this sort is to be said for me.
I see Philip as he is. My penetration looks into the lowest depths
of his character--when I am not in his company. There seems to be a
foundation of good, somewhere in his nature. He despises and hates
himself (he has confessed it to me), when Eunice is with him--still
believing in her false sweetheart. But how long do these better
influences last? I have only to show myself, in my sister's absence,
and Philip is mine body and soul. His vanity and his weakness take
possession of him the moment he sees my face. He is one of those
men--even in my little experience I have met with them--who are born to
be led by women. If Eunice had possessed my strength of character, he
would have been true to her for life.

Ought I not, in justice to myself, to have lifted my heart high above
the reach of such a creature as this? Certainly I ought! I know it, I
feel it. And yet, there is some fascination in having him which I am
absolutely unable to resist.

What, I ask myself, has fed the new flame which is burning in me? Did it
begin with gratified pride? I might well feel proud when I found
myself admired by a man of his beauty, set off by such manners and such
accomplishments as his. Or, has the growth of this masterful feeling
been encouraged by the envy and jealousy stirred in me, when I found
Eunice (my inferior in every respect) distinguished by the devotion of
a handsome lover, and having a brilliant marriage in view--while I was
left neglected, with no prospect of changing my title from Miss to Mrs.?
Vain inquiries! My wicked heart seems to have secrets of its own, and to
keep them a mystery to me.

What has become of my excellent education? I don't care to inquire; I
have got beyond the reach of good books and religious examples. Among
my other blamable actions there may now be reckoned disobedience to my
father. I have been reading novels in secret.

At first I tried some of the famous English works, published at a price
within the reach of small purses. Very well written, no doubt--but with
one unpardonable drawback, so far as I am concerned. Our celebrated
native authors address themselves to good people, or to penitent people
who want to be made good; not to wicked readers like me.

Arriving at this conclusion, I tried another experiment. In a small
bookseller's shop I discovered some cheap translations of French novels.
Here, I found what I wanted--sympathy with sin. Here, there was
opened to me a new world inhabited entirely by unrepentant people; the
magnificent women diabolically beautiful; the satanic men dead to
every sense of virtue, and alive--perhaps rather dirtily alive--to the
splendid fascinations of crime. I know now that Love is above everything
but itself. Love is the one law that we are bound to obey. How deep!
how consoling! how admirably true! The novelists of England have reason
indeed to hide their heads before the novelists of France. All that
I have felt, and have written here, is inspired by these wonderful
authors.


I have relieved my mind, and may now return to the business of my
diary--the record of domestic events.

An overwhelming disappointment has fallen on Eunice. Our dinner-party
has been put off.

The state of father's health is answerable for this change in our
arrangements. That wretched scene at the school, complicated by my
sister's undutiful behavior at the time, so seriously excited him that
he passed a sleepless night, and kept his bedroom throughout the day.
Eunice's total want of discretion added, no doubt, to his sufferings:
she rudely intruded on him to express her regret and to ask his pardon.
Having carried her point, she was at leisure to come to me, and to ask
(how amazingly simple of her!) what she and Philip were to do next.

"We had arranged it all so nicely," the poor wretch began. "Philip was
to have been so clever and agreeable at dinner, and was to have chosen
his time so very discreetly, that papa would have been ready to listen
to anything he said. Oh, we should have succeeded; I haven't a doubt of
it! Our only hope, Helena, is in you. What are we to do now?"

"Wait," I answered.

"Wait?" she repeated, hotly. "Is my heart to be broken? and, what is
more cruel still, is Philip to be disappointed? I expected something
more sensible, my dear, from you. What possible reason can there be for
waiting?"

The reason--if I could only have mentioned it--was beyond dispute. I
wanted time to quiet Philip's uneasy conscience, and to harden his
weak mind against outbursts of violence, on Eunice's part, which would
certainly exhibit themselves when she found that she had lost her lover,
and lost him to me. In the meanwhile, I had to produce my reason
for advising her to wait. It was easily done. I reminded her of the
irritable condition of our father's nerves, and gave it as my opinion
that he would certainly say No, if she was unwise enough to excite him
on the subject of Philip, in his present frame of mind.

These unanswerable considerations seemed to produce the right effect on
her. "I suppose you know best," was all she said. And then she left me.

I let her go without feeling any distrust of this act of submission on
her part; it was such a common experience, in my life, to find my
sister guiding herself by my advice. But experience is not always to
be trusted. Events soon showed that I had failed to estimate Eunice's
resources of obstinacy and cunning at their true value.

Half an hour later I heard the street door closed, and looked out of
the window. Miss Jillgall was leaving the house; no one was with her.
My dislike of this person led me astray once more. I ought to have
suspected her of being bent on some mischievous errand, and to have
devised some means of putting my suspicions to the test. I did nothing
of the kind. In the moment when I turned my head away from the window,
Miss Jillgall was a person forgotten--and I was a person who had made a
serious mistake.



CHAPTER XXVI. HELENA'S DIARY.

The event of to-day began with the delivery of a message summoning me to
my father's study. He had decided--too hastily, as I feared--that he was
sufficiently recovered to resume his usual employments. I was writing
to his dictation, when we were interrupted. Maria announced a visit from
Mr. Dunboyne.

Hitherto Philip had been content to send one of the servants of the
hotel to make inquiry after Mr. Gracedieu's health. Why had he now
called personally? Noticing that father seemed to be annoyed, I tried
to make an opportunity of receiving Philip myself. "Let me see him," I
suggested; "I can easily say you are engaged."

Very unwillingly, as it was easy to see, my father declined to allow
this. "Mr. Dunboyne's visit pays me a compliment," he said; "and I must
receive him." I made a show of leaving the room, and was called back to
my chair. "This is not a private interview, Helena; stay where you are."

Philip came in--handsomer than ever, beautifully dressed--and paid his
respects to my father with his customary grace. He was too well-bred
to allow any visible signs of embarrassment to escape him. But when he
shook hands with me, I felt a little trembling in his fingers, through
the delicate gloves which fitted him like a second skin. Was it the
true object of his visit to try the experiment designed by Eunice
and himself, and deferred by the postponement of our dinner-party?
Impossible surely that my sister could have practiced on his weakness,
and persuaded him to return to his first love! I waited, in breathless
interest, for his next words. They were not worth listening to. Oh, the
poor commonplace creature!

"I am glad, Mr. Gracedieu, to see that you are well enough to be in your
study again," he said. The writing materials on the table attracted his
attention. "Am I one of the idle people," he asked, with his charming
smile, "who are always interrupting useful employment?"

He spoke to my father, and he was answered by my father. Not once had
he addressed a word to me--no, not even when we shook hands. I was
angry enough to force him into taking some notice of me, and to make an
attempt to confuse him at the same time.

"Have you seen my sister?" I asked.

"No."

It was the shortest reply that he could choose. Having flung it at me,
he still persisted in looking at my father and speaking to my father:
"Do you think of trying change of air, Mr. Gracedieu, when you feel
strong enough to travel?"

"My duties keep me here," father answered; "and I cannot honestly say
that I enjoy traveling. I dislike manners and customs that are strange
to me; I don't find that hotels reward me for giving up the comforts of
my own house. How do you find the hotel here?"

"I submit to the hotel, sir. They are sad savages in the kitchen; they
put mushroom ketchup into their soup, and mustard and cayenne pepper
into their salads. I am half-starved at dinner-time, but I don't
complain."

Every word he said was an offense to me. With or without reason, I
attacked him again.

"I have heard you acknowledge that the landlord and landlady are very
obliging people," I said. "Why don't you ask them to let you make your
own soup and mix your own salad?"

I wondered whether I should succeed in attracting his notice, after
this. Even in these private pages, my self-esteem finds it hard to
confess what happened. I succeeded in reminding Philip that he had his
reasons for requesting me to leave the room.

"Will you excuse me, Miss Helena," he said, "if I ask leave to speak to
Mr. Gracedieu in private?"

The right thing for me to do was, let me hope, the thing that I did.
I rose, and waited to see if my father would interfere. He looked at
Philip with suspicion in his face, as well as surprise. "May I ask," he
said, coldly, "what is the object of the interview?"

"Certainly," Philip answered, "when we are alone." This cool reply
placed my father between two alternatives; he must either give way, or
be guilty of an act of rudeness to a guest in his own house. The choice
reserved for me was narrower still--I had to decide between being told
to go, or going of my own accord. Of course, I left them together.

The door which communicated with the next room was pulled to, but not
closed. On the other side of it, I found Eunice.

"Listening!" I said, in a whisper.

"Yes," she whispered back. "You listen, too!"

I was so indignant with Philip, and so seriously interested in what was
going on in the study, that I yielded to temptation. We both degraded
ourselves. We both listened.

Eunice's base lover spoke first. Judging by the change in his voice, he
must have seen something in my father's face that daunted him. Eunice
heard it, too. "He's getting nervous," she whispered; "he'll forget to
say the right thing at the right time."

"Mr. Gracedieu," Philip began, "I wish to speak to you--"

Father interrupted him: "We are alone now, Mr. Dunboyne. I want to know
why you consult me in private?"

"I am anxious to consult you, sir, on a subject--"

"On what subject? Any religious difficulty?"

"No."

"Anything I can do for you in the town?"

"Not at all. If you will only allow me--"

"I am still waiting, sir, to know what it is about."

Philip's voice suddenly became an angry voice. "Once for all, Mr.
Gracedieu," he said, "will you let me speak? It's about your daughter--"

"No more of it, Mr. Dunboyne!" (My father was now as loud as Philip.) "I
don't desire to hold a private conversation with you on the subject of
my daughter."

"If you have any personal objection to me, sir, be so good as to state
it plainly."

"You have no right to ask me to do that."

"You refuse to do it?"

"Positively."

"You are not very civil, Mr. Gracedieu."

"If I speak without ceremony, Mr. Dunboyne, you have yourself to thank
for it."

Philip replied to this in a tone of savage irony. "You are a minister
of religion, and you are an old man. Two privileges--and you presume on
them both. Good-morning."

I drew back into a corner, just in time to escape discovery in the
character of a listener. Eunice never moved. When Philip dashed into the
room, banging the door after him, she threw herself impulsively on his
breast: "Oh, Philip! Philip! what have you done? Why didn't you keep
your temper?"

"Did you hear what your father said to me?" he asked.

"Yes, dear; but you ought to have controlled yourself--you ought,
indeed, for my sake."

Her arms were still round him. It struck me that he felt her influence.
"If you wish me to recover myself," he said, gently, "you had better let
me go."

"Oh, how cruel, Philip, to leave me when I am so wretched! Why do you
want to go?"

"You told me just now what I ought to do," he answered, still
restraining himself. "If I am to get the better of my temper, I must be
left alone."

"I never said anything about your temper, darling."

"Didn't you tell me to control myself?"

"Oh, yes! Go back to Papa, and beg him to forgive you."

"I'll see him damned first!"

If ever a stupid girl deserved such an answer as this, the girl was
my sister. I had hitherto (with some difficulty) refrained from
interfering. But when Eunice tried to follow Philip out of the house, I
could hesitate no longer; I held her back. "You fool," I said; "haven't
you made mischief enough already?"

"What am I to do?" she burst out, helplessly.

"Do what I told you to do yesterday--wait."

Before she could reply, or I could say anything more, the door that led
to the landing was opened softly and slyly, and Miss Jillgall peeped
in. Eunice instantly left me, and ran to the meddling old maid. They
whispered to each other. Miss Jillgall's skinny arm encircled my
sister's waist; they disappeared together.

I was only too glad to get rid of them both, and to take the opportunity
of writing to Philip. I insisted on an explanation of his conduct while
I was in the study--to be given within an hour's time, at a place which
I appointed. "You are not to attempt to justify yourself in writing,"
I added in conclusion. "Let your reply merely inform me if you can keep
the appointment. The rest, when we meet."

Maria took the letter to the hotel, with instructions to wait.

Philip's reply reached me without delay. It pledged him to justify
himself as I had desired, and to keep the appointment. My own belief is
that the event of to-day will decide his future and mine.



CHAPTER XXVII. EUNICE'S DIARY.

Indeed, I am a most unfortunate creature; everything turns out badly
with me. My good, true friend, my dear Selina, has become the object of
a hateful doubt in my secret mind. I am afraid she is keeping something
from me.

Talking with her about my troubles, I heard for the first time that she
had written again to Mrs. Tenbruggen. The object of her letter was to
tell her friend of my engagement to young Mr. Dunboyne. I asked her why
she had done this. The answer informed me that there was no knowing, in
the present state of my affairs, how soon I might not want the help of a
clever woman. I ought, I suppose, to have been satisfied with this. But
there seemed to be something not fully explained yet.

Then again, after telling Selina what I heard in the study, and how
roughly Philip had spoken to me afterward, I asked her what she thought
of it. She made an incomprehensible reply: "My sweet child, I mustn't
think of it--I am too fond of you."

It was impossible to make her explain what this meant. She began to talk
of Philip; assuring me (which was quite needless) that she had done
her best to fortify and encourage him, before he called on papa. When
I asked her to help me in another way--that is to say, when I wanted to
find out where Philip was at that moment--she had no advice to give me.
I told her that I should not enjoy a moment's ease of mind until I and
my dear one were reconciled. She only shook her head and declared that
she was sorry for me. When I hit on the idea of ringing for Maria, this
little woman, so bright, and quick and eager to help me at other times,
said "I leave it to you, dear," and turned to the piano (close to which
I was sitting), and played softly and badly stupid little tunes.

"Maria, did you open the door for Mr. Dunboyne when he went away just
now?"

"No, miss."

Nothing but ill-luck for me! If I had been left to my own devices, I
should now have let the housemaid go. But Selina contrived to give me
a hint, on a strange plan of her own. Still at the piano, she began
to confuse talking to herself with playing to herself. The notes went
_tinkle, tinkle_--and the tongue mixed up words with the notes in this
way: "Perhaps they have been talking in the kitchen about Philip?"

The suggestion was not lost on me. I said to Maria--who was standing at
the other end of the room, near the door--"Did you happen to hear which
way Mr. Dunboyne went when he left us?"

"I know where he was, miss, half an hour ago."

"Where was he?"

"At the hotel."

Selina went on with her hints in the same way as before. "How does she
know--ah, how does she know?" was the vocal part of the performance this
time. My clever inquiries followed the vocal part as before:

"How do you know that Mr. Dunboyne was at the hotel?"

"I was sent there with a letter for him, and waited for the answer."

There was no suggestion required this time. The one possible question
was: "Who sent you?"

Maria replied, after first reserving a condition: "You won't tell upon
me, miss?"

I promised not to tell. Selina suddenly left off playing.

"Well," I repeated, "who sent you?"

"Miss Helena."

Selina looked round at me. Her little eyes seemed to have suddenly
become big, they stared me so strangely in the face. I don't know
whether she was in a state of fright or of wonder. As for myself, I
simply lost the use of my tongue. Maria, having no more questions to
answer, discreetly left us together.

Why should Helena write to Philip at all--and especially without
mentioning it to me? Here was a riddle which was more than I could
guess. I asked Selina to help me. She might at least have tried, I
thought; but she looked uneasy, and made excuses.

I said: "Suppose I go to Helena, and ask her why she wrote to Philip?"
And Selina said: "Suppose you do, dear."

I rang for Maria once more: "Do you know where my sister is?"

"Just gone out, miss."

There was no help for it but to wait till she came back, and to
get through the time in the interval as I best might. But for one
circumstance, I might not have known what to do. The truth is, there was
a feeling of shame in me when I remembered having listened at the study
door. Curious notions come into one's head--one doesn't know how or why.
It struck me that I might make a kind of atonement for having been mean
enough to listen, if I went to papa, and offered to keep him company
in his solitude. If we fell into pleasant talk, I had a sly idea of my
own--I meant to put in a good word for poor Philip.

When I confided my design to Selina, she shut up the piano and ran
across the room to me. But somehow she was not like her old self again,
yet.

"You good little soul, you are always right. Look at me again, Euneece.
Are you beginning to doubt me? Oh, my darling, don't do that! It isn't
using me fairly. I can't bear it--I can't bear it!"

I took her hand; I was on the point of speaking to her with the kindness
she deserved from me. On a sudden she snatched her hand away and ran
back to the piano. When she was seated on the music-stool, her face was
hidden from me. At that moment she broke into a strange cry--it began
like a laugh, and it ended like a sob.

"Go away to papa! Don't mind me--I'm a creature of impulse--ha! ha!
ha! a little hysterical--the state of the weather--I get rid of these
weaknesses, my dear, by singing to myself. I have a favorite song:
'My heart is light, my will is free.'--Go away! oh, for God's sake, go
away!"

I had heard of hysterics, of course; knowing nothing about them,
however, by my own experience. What could have happened to agitate her
in this extraordinary manner?

Had Helena's letter anything to do with it? Was my sister indignant with
Philip for swearing in my presence; and had she written him an angry
letter, in her zeal on my behalf? But Selina could not possibly have
seen the letter--and Helena (who is often hard on me when I do stupid
things) showed little indulgence for me, when I was so unfortunate as to
irritate Philip. I gave up the hopeless attempt to get at the truth
by guessing, and went away to forget my troubles, if I could, in my
father's society.

After knocking twice at the door of the study, and receiving no reply, I
ventured to look in.

The sofa in this room stood opposite the door. Papa was resting on it,
but not in comfort. There were twitching movements in his feet, and he
shifted his arms this way and that as if no restful posture could he
found for them. But what frightened me was this. His eyes, staring
straight at the door by which I had gone in, had an inquiring
expression, as if he actually did not know me! I stood midway between
the door and the sofa, doubtful about going nearer to him.

He said: "Who is it?" This to me--to his own daughter. He said: "What do
you want?"

I really could _not_ bear it. I went up to him. I said: "Papa, have you
forgotten Eunice?"

My name seemed (if one may say such a thing) to bring him to himself
again. He sat upon the sofa--and laughed as he answered me.

"My dear child, what delusion has got into that pretty little head of
yours? Fancy her thinking that I had forgotten my own daughter! I was
lost in thought, Eunice. For the moment, I was what they call an absent
man. Did I ever tell you the story of the absent man? He went to call
upon some acquaintance of his; and when the servant said, 'What
name, sir?' He couldn't answer. He was obliged to confess that he had
forgotten his own name. The servant said, 'That's very strange.' The
absent man at once recovered himself. 'That's it!' he said: 'my name is
Strange.' Droll, isn't it? If I had been calling on a friend to-day,
I daresay _I_ might have forgotten my name, too. Much to think of,
Eunice--too much to think of."

Leaving the sofa with a sigh, as if he was tired of it, he began walking
up and down. He seemed to be still in good spirits. "Well, my dear," he
said, "what can I do for you?"

"I came here, papa to see if there was anything I could do for You."

He looked at some sheets of paper, strung together, and laid on the
table. They were covered with writing (from his dictation) in my
sister's hand. "I ought to get on with my work," he said. "Where is
Helena?"

I told him that she had gone out, and begged leave to try what I could
do to supply her place.

The request seemed to please him; but he wanted time to think. I waited;
noticing that his face grew gradually worried and anxious. There came
a vacant look into his eyes which it grieved me to see; he appeared to
have quite lost himself again. "Read the last page," he said, pointing
to the manuscript on the table; "I don't remember where I left off."

I turned to the last page. As well as I could tell, it related to some
publication, which he was recommending to religious persons of our way
of thinking.

Before I had read half-way through it, he began to dictate, speaking so
rapidly that my pen was not always able to follow him. My handwriting is
as bad as bad can be when I am hurried. To make matters worse still, I
was confused. What he was now saying seemed to have nothing to do with
what I had been reading.

Let me try if I can call to mind the substance of it.

He began in the most strangely sudden way by asking: "Why should there
be any fear of discovery, when every possible care had been taken to
prevent it? The danger from unexpected events was far more disquieting.
A man might find himself bound in honor to disclose what it had been
the chief anxiety of his life to conceal. For example, could he let an
innocent person be the victim of deliberate suppression of the truth--no
matter how justifiable that suppression might appear to be? On the other
hand, dreadful consequences might follow an honorable confession.
There might be a cruel sacrifice of tender affection; there might be a
shocking betrayal of innocent hope and trust."

I remember those last words, just as he dictated them, because he
suddenly stopped there; looking, poor dear, distressed and confused. He
put his hand to his head, and went back to the sofa.

"I'm tired," he said. "Wait for me while I rest."

In a few minutes he fell asleep. It was a deep repose that came to him
now; and, though I don't think it lasted much longer than half an hour,
it produced a wonderful change in him for the better when he woke. He
spoke quietly and kindly; and when he returned to me at the table and
looked at the page on which I had been writing, he smiled.

"Oh, my dear, what bad writing! I declare I can't read what I myself
told you to write. No! no! don't be downhearted about it. You are not
used to writing from dictation; and I daresay I have been too quick
for you." He kissed me and encouraged me. "You know how fond I am of my
little girl," he said; "I am afraid I like my Eunice just the least in
the world more than I like my Helena. Ah, you are beginning to look a
little happier now!"

He had filled me with such confidence and such pleasure that I could
not help thinking of my sweetheart. Oh dear, when shall I learn to be
distrustful of my own feelings? The temptation to say a good word for
Philip quite mastered any little discretion that I possessed.

I said to papa: "If you knew how to make me happier than I have ever
been in all my life before, would you do it?"

"Of course I would."

"Then send for Philip, dear, and be a little kinder to him, this time."

His pale face turned red with anger; he pushed me away from him.

"That man again!" he burst out. "Am I never to hear the last of him? Go
away, Eunice. You are of no use here." He took up my unfortunate page of
writing and ridiculed it with a bitter laugh. "What is this fit for?" He
crumpled it up in his hand and tossed it into the fire.

I ran out of the room in such a state of mortification that I hardly
knew what I was about. If some hard-hearted person had come to me with
a cup of poison, and had said: "Eunice, you are not fit to live any
longer; take this," I do believe I should have taken it. If I thought of
anything, I thought of going back to Selina. My ill luck still pursued
me; she had disappeared. I looked about in a helpless way, completely at
a loss what to do next--so stupefied, I may even say, that it was some
time before I noticed a little three-cornered note on the table by which
I was standing. The note was addressed to me:


"EVER-DEAREST EUNEECE--I have tried to make myself useful to you, and
have failed. But how can I see the sad sight of your wretchedness, and
not feel the impulse to try again? I have gone to the hotel to find
Philip, and to bring him back to you a penitent and faithful man. Wait
for me, and hope for great things. A. hundred thousand kisses to my
sweet Euneece.

"S. J."


Wait for her, after reading that note! How could she expect it? I had
only to follow her, and to find Philip. In another minute, I was on my
way to the hotel.

CHAPTER XXVIII. HELENA'S DIARY.

Looking at the last entry in my Journal, I see myself anticipating
that the event of to-day will decide Philip's future and mine. This has
proved prophetic. All further concealment is now at an end.

Forced to it by fate, or helped to it by chance, Eunice has made the
discovery of her lover's infidelity. "In all human probability" (as my
father says in his sermons), we two sisters are enemies for life.


I am not suspected, as Eunice is, of making appointments with a
sweetheart. So I am free to go out alone, and to go where I please.
Philip and I were punctual to our appointment this afternoon.

Our place of meeting was in a secluded corner of the town park. We
found a rustic seat in our retirement, set up (one would suppose) as a
concession to the taste of visitors who are fond of solitude. The view
in front of us was bounded by the park wall and railings, and our seat
was prettily approached on one side by a plantation of young trees. No
entrance gate was near; no carriage road crossed the grass. A more safe
and more solitary nook for conversation, between two persons desiring to
be alone, it would be hard to find in most public parks. Lovers are said
to know it well, and to be especially fond of it toward evening. We
were there in broad daylight, and we had the seat to ourselves.

My memory of what passed between us is, in some degree, disturbed by the
formidable interruption which brought our talk to an end.

But among other things, I remember that I showed him no mercy at the
outset. At one time I was indignant; at another I was scornful. I
declared, in regard to my object in meeting him, that I had changed my
mind, And had decided to shorten a disagreeable interview by waiving my
right to an explanation, and bidding him farewell. Eunice, as I pointed
out, had the first claim to him; Eunice was much more likely to suit
him, as a companion for life, than I was. "In short," I said, in
conclusion, "my inclination for once takes sides with my duty, and
leaves my sister in undisturbed possession of young Mr. Dunboyne." With
this satirical explanation, I rose to say good-by.

I had merely intended to irritate him. He showed a superiority to anger
for which I was not prepared.

"Be so kind as to sit down again," he said quietly.

He took my letter from his pocket, and pointed to that part of it which
alluded to his conduct, when we had met in my father's study.

"You have offered me the opportunity of saying a word in my own
defense," he went on. "I prize that privilege far too highly to consent
to your withdrawing it, merely because you have changed your mind. Let
me at least tell you what my errand was, when I called on your father.
Loving you, and you only, I had forced myself to make a last effort
to be true to your sister. Remember that, Helena, and then say--is it
wonderful if I was beside myself, when I found You in the study?"

"When you tell me you were beside yourself," I said, "do you mean,
ashamed of yourself?"

That touched him. "I mean nothing of the kind," he burst out. "After the
hell on earth in which I have been living between you two sisters, a man
hasn't virtue enough left in him to be ashamed. He's half mad--that's
what he is. Look at my position! I had made up my mind never to see you
again; I had made up my mind (if I married Eunice) to rid myself of my
own miserable life when I could endure it no longer. In that state
of feeling, when my sense of duty depended on my speaking with Mr.
Gracedieu alone, whose was the first face I saw when I entered the room?
If I had dared to look at you, or to speak to you, what do you think
would have become of my resolution to sacrifice myself?"

"What has become of it now?" I asked.

"Tell me first if I am forgiven," he said--"and you shall know."

"Do you deserve to be forgiven?"

It has been discovered by wiser heads than mine that weak people are
always in extremes. So far, I had seen Philip in the vain and violent
extreme. He now shifted suddenly to the sad and submissive extreme. When
I asked him if he deserved to be forgiven, he made the humblest of all
replies--he sighed and said nothing.

"If I did my duty to my sister," I reminded him, "I should refuse to
forgive you, and send you back to Eunice."

"Your father's language and your father's conduct," he answered, "have
released me from that entanglement. I can never go back to Eunice. If
you refuse to forgive me, neither you nor she will see anything more of
Philip Dunboyne; I promise you that. Are you satisfied now?"

After holding out against him resolutely, I felt myself beginning to
yield. When a man has once taken their fancy, what helplessly weak
creatures women are! I saw through his vacillating weakness--and yet
I trusted him, with both eyes open. My looking-glass is opposite to me
while I write. It shows me a contemptible Helena. I lied, and said I was
satisfied--to please _him_.

"Am I forgiven?" he asked.

It is absurd to put it on record. Of course, I forgave him. What a good
Christian I am, after all!

He took my willing hand. "My lovely darling," he said, "our marriage
rests with you. Whether your father approves of it or not, say the word;
claim me, and I am yours for life."

I must have been infatuated by his voice and his look; my heart must
have been burning under the pressure of his hand on mine. Was it my
modesty or my self-control that deserted me? I let him take me in his
arms. Again, and again, and again I kissed him. We were deaf to what we
ought to have heard; we were blind to what we ought to have seen. Before
we were conscious of a movement among the trees, we were discovered.
My sister flew at me like a wild animal. Her furious hands fastened
themselves on my throat. Philip started to his feet. When he touched
her, in the act of forcing her back from me, Eunice's raging strength
became utter weakness in an instant. Her arms fell helpless at her
sides--her head drooped--she looked at him in silence which was
dreadful, at such a moment as that. He shrank from the unendurable
reproach in those tearless eyes. Meanly, he turned away from her.
Meanly, I followed him. Looking back for an instant, I saw her step
forward; perhaps to stop him, perhaps to speak to him. The effort was
too much for her strength; she staggered back against the trunk of a
tree. Like strangers, walking separate one from the other, we left her
to her companion--the hideous traitress who was my enemy and her friend.



CHAPTER XXIX. HELENA'S DIARY.

On reaching the street which led to Philip's hotel, we spoke to each
other for the first time.

"What are we to do?" I said.

"Leave this place," he answered.

"Together?" I asked.

"Yes."

To leave us (for a while), after what had happened, might be the wisest
thing which a man, in Philip's critical position, could do. But if I
went with him--unprovided as I was with any friend of my own sex, whose
character and presence might sanction the step I had taken--I should be
lost beyond redemption. Is any man that ever lived worth that sacrifice?
I thought of my father's house closed to me, and of our friends ashamed
of me. I have owned, in some earlier part of my Journal, that I am not
very patient under domestic cares. But the possibility of Eunice being
appointed housekeeper, with my power, in my place, was more than I could
calmly contemplate. "No," I said to Philip. "Your absence, at such a
time as this, may help us both; but, come what may of it, I must remain
at home."

He yielded, without an attempt to make me alter my mind. There was a
sullen submission in his manner which it was not pleasant to see. Was he
despairing already of himself and of me? Had Eunice aroused the watchful
demons of shame and remorse?

"Perhaps you are right," he said, gloomily. "Good-by."

My anxiety put the all-important question to him without hesitation.

"Is it good-by forever, Philip?"

His reply instantly relieved me: "God forbid!"

But I wanted more: "You still love me?" I persisted.

"More dearly than ever!"

"And yet you leave me!"

He turned pale. "I leave you because I am afraid."

"Afraid of what?"

"Afraid to face Eunice again."

The only possible way out of our difficulty that I could see, now
occurred to me. "Suppose my sister can be prevailed on to give you up?"
I suggested. "Would you come back to us in that case?"

"Certainly!"

"And you would ask my father to consent to our marriage?"

"On the day of my return, if you like."

"Suppose obstacles get in our way," I said--"suppose time passes and
tries your patience--will you still consider yourself engaged to me?"

"Engaged to you," he answered, "in spite of obstacles and in spite of
time."

"And while you are away from me," I ventured to add, "we shall write to
each other?"

"Go where I may," he said, "you shall always hear from me."

I could ask no more, and he could concede no more. The impression
evidently left on him by Eunice's terrible outbreak, was far more
serious than I had anticipated. I was myself depressed and ill at
ease. No expressions of tenderness were exchanged between us. There was
something horrible in our barren farewell. We merely clasped hands, at
parting. He went his way--and I went mine.

There are some occasions when women set an example of courage to men. I
was ready to endure whatever might happen to me, when I got home. What
a desperate wretch! some people might say, if they could look into this
diary!

Maria opened the door; she told me that my sister had already returned,
accompanied by Miss Jillgall. There had been apparently some difference
of opinion between them, before they entered the house. Eunice
had attempted to go on to some other place; and Miss Jillgall
had remonstrated. Maria had heard her say: "No, you would degrade
yourself"--and, with that, she had led Eunice indoors. I understood, of
course, that my sister had been prevented from following Philip to the
hotel. There was probably a serious quarrel in store for me. I went
straight to the bedroom, expecting to find Eunice there, and prepared
to brave the storm that might burst on me. There was a woman at Eunice's
end of the room, removing dresses from the wardrobe. I could only see
her back, but it was impossible to mistake _that_ figure--Miss Jillgall.
She laid the dresses on Eunice's bed, without taking the slightest
notice of me. In significant silence I pointed to the door. She went
on as coolly with her occupation as if the room had been, not mine but
hers; I stepped up to her, and spoke plainly.

"You oblige me to remind you," I said, "that you are not in your own
room." There, I waited a little, and found that I had produced no
effect. "With every disposition," I resumed, "to make allowance for
the disagreeable peculiarities of your character, I cannot consent to
overlook an act of intrusion, committed by a Spy. Now, do you understand
me?"

She looked round her. "I see no third person here," she said. "May I ask
if you mean me?"

"I mean you."

"Will you be so good, Miss Helena, as to explain yourself?"

Moderation of language would have been thrown away on this woman. "You
followed me to the park," I said. "It was you who found me with Mr.
Dunboyne, and betrayed me to my sister. You are a Spy, and you know it.
At this very moment you daren't look me in the face."

Her insolence forced its way out of her at last. Let me record it--and
repay it, when the time comes.

"Quite true," she replied. "If I ventured to look you in the face, I am
afraid I might forget myself. I have always been brought up like a lady,
and I wish to show it even in the company of such a wretch as you are.
There is not one word of truth in what you have said of me. I went to
the hotel to find Mr. Dunboyne. Ah, you may sneer! I haven't got your
good looks--and a vile use you have made of them. My object was to
recall that base young man to his duty to my dear charming injured
Euneece. The hotel servant told me that Mr. Dunboyne had gone out. Oh,
I had the means of persuasion in my pocket! The man directed me to the
park, as he had already directed Mr. Dunboyne. It was only when I had
found the place, that I heard some one behind me. Poor innocent Euneece
had followed me to the hotel, and had got her directions, as I had got
mine. God knows how hard I tried to persuade her to go back, and how
horribly frightened I was--No! I won't distress myself by saying a word
more. It would be too humiliating to let _you_ see an honest woman in
tears. Your sister has a spirit of her own, thank God! She won't inhabit
the same room with you; she never desires to see your false face again.
I take the poor soul's dresses and things away--and as a religious
person I wait, confidently wait, for the judgment that will fall on
you!"

She caught up the dresses all together; some of them were in her arms,
some of them fell on her shoulders, and one of them towered over her
head. Smothered in gowns, she bounced out of the room like a walking
milliner's shop. I have to thank the wretched old creature for a moment
of genuine amusement, at a time of devouring anxiety. The meanest
insect, they say, has its use in this world--and why not Miss Jillgall?

In half an hour more, an unexpected event raised my spirits. I heard
from Philip.

On his return to the hotel he had found a telegram waiting for him. Mr.
Dunboyne the elder had arrived in London; and Philip had arranged to
join his father by the next train. He sent me the address, and begged
that I would write and tell him my news from home by the next day's
post.

Welcome, thrice welcome, to Mr. Dunboyne the elder! If Philip can
manage, under my advice, to place me favorably in the estimation of this
rich old man, his presence and authority may do for us what we cannot
do for ourselves. Here is surely an influence to which my father must
submit, no matter how unreasonable or how angry he may be when he hears
what has happened. I begin already to feel hopeful of the future.



CHAPTER XXX. EUNICE'S DIARY.

Through the day, and through the night, I feel a misery that never
leaves me--I mean the misery of fear.

I am trying to find out some harmless means of employing myself, which
will keep evil remembrances from me. If I don't succeed, my fear tells
me what will happen. I shall be in danger of going mad.

I dare not confide in any living creature. I don't know what other
persons might think of me, or how soon I might find myself perhaps in an
asylum. In this helpless condition, doubt and fright seem to be driving
me back to my Journal. I wonder whether I shall find harmless employment
here.

I have heard of old people losing their memories. What would I not give
to be old! I remember! oh, how I remember! One day after another I see
Philip, I see Helena, as I first saw them when I was among the trees in
the park. My sweetheart's arms, that once held me, hold my sister now.
She kisses him, kisses him, kisses him.

Is there no way of making myself see something else? I want to get back
to remembrances that don't burn in my head and tear at my heart. How is
it to be done?

I have tried books--no! I have tried going out to look at the shops--no!
I have tried saying my prayers--no! And now I am making my last effort;
trying my pen. My black letters fall from it, and take their places
on the white paper. Will my black letters help me? Where can I find
something consoling to write down? Where? Where?

Selina--poor Selina, so fond of me, so sorry for me. When I was happy,
she was happy, too. It was always amusing to hear her talk. Oh, my
memory, be good to me! Save me from Philip and Helena. I want to
remember the pleasant days when my kind little friend and I used to
gossip in the garden.

No: the days in the garden won't come back. What else can I think of?

.......

The recollections that I try to encourage keep away from me. The other
recollections that I dread, come crowding back. Still Philip! Still
Helena!

But Selina mixes herself up with them. Let me try again if I can think
of Selina.

How delightfully good to me and patient with me she was, on our dismal
way home from the park! And how affectionately she excused herself for
not having warned me of it, when she first suspected that my own sister
and my worst enemy were one and the same!

"I know I was wrong, my dear, to let my love and pity close my lips.
But remember how happy you were at the time. The thought of making you
miserable was more than I could endure--I am so fond of you! Yes; I
began to suspect them, on the day when they first met at the station.
And, I am afraid, I thought it just likely that you might be as cunning
as I was, and have noticed them, too."

Oh, how ignorant she must have been of my true thoughts and feelings!
How strangely people seem to misunderstand their dearest friends!
knowing, as I did, that I could never love any man but Philip, could I
be wicked enough to suppose that Philip would love any woman but me?

I explained to Selina how he had spoken to me, when we were walking
together on the bank of the river. Shall I ever forget those exquisite
words? "I wish I was a better man, Eunice; I wish I was good enough to
be worthy of you." I asked Selina if she thought he was deceiving me
when he said that. She comforted me by owning that he must have been in
earnest, at the time--and then she distressed me by giving the reason
why.

"My love, you must have innocently said something to him, when you
and he were alone, which touched his conscience (when he _had_ a
conscience), and made him ashamed of himself. Ah, you were too fond of
him to see how he changed for the worse, when your vile sister joined
you, and took possession of him again. It made my heart ache to see
you so unsuspicious of them. You asked me, my poor dear, if they had
quarreled--you believed they were tired of walking by the river, when it
was you they were tired of--and you wondered why Helena took him to see
the school. My child! she was the leading spirit at the school, and you
were nobody. Her vanity saw the chance of making him compare you at a
disadvantage with your clever sister. I declare, Euneece, I lose my head
if I only think of it! All the strong points in my character seem to
slip away from me. Would you believe it?--I have neglected that sweet
infant at the cottage; I have even let Mrs. Molly have her baby back
again. If I had the making of the laws, Philip Dunboyne and Helena
Gracedieu should be hanged together on the same gallows. I see I shock
you. Don't let us talk of it! Oh, don't let us talk of it!"

And here am I writing of it! What I had determined not to do, is what I
have done. Am I losing my senses already? The very names that I was most
anxious to keep out of my memory stare me in the face in the lines that
I have just written. Philip again! Helena again!

.......

Another day, and something new that must and will be remembered, shrink
from it as I may. This afternoon, I met Helena on the stairs.

She stopped, and eyed me with a wicked smile; she held out her hand.
"We are likely to meet often, while we are in the same house," she said;
"hadn't we better consult appearances, and pretend to be as fond of each
other as ever?"

I took no notice of her hand; I took no notice of her shameless
proposal. She tried again: "After all, it isn't my fault if Philip likes
me better than he likes you. Don't you see that?" I still refused to
speak to her. She still persisted. "How black you look, Eunice! Are you
sorry you didn't kill me, when you had your hands on my throat?"

I said: "Yes."

She laughed, and left me. I was obliged to sit down on the stair--I
trembled so. My own reply frightened me. I tried to find out why I had
said Yes. I don't remember being conscious of meaning anything. It was
as if somebody else had said Yes--not I. Perhaps I was provoked, and the
word escaped me before I could stop it. Could I have stopped it? I don't
know.

.......

Another sleepless night.

Did I pass the miserable hours in writing letters to Philip and then
tearing them up? Or did I only fancy that I wrote to him? I have just
looked at the fireplace. The torn paper in it tells me that I did write.
Why did I destroy my letters? I might have sent one of them to Philip.
After what has happened? Oh, no! no!

Having been many days away from the Girls' Scripture Class, it seemed to
be possible that going back to the school and the teaching might help me
to escape from myself.

Nothing succeeds with me. I found it impossible to instruct the girls as
usual; their stupidity soon reached the limit of my patience--suffocated
me with rage. One of them, a poor, fat, feeble creature, began to cry
when I scolded her. I looked with envy at the tears rolling over her
big round cheeks. If I could only cry, I might perhaps bear my hard fate
with submission.

I walked toward home by a roundabout way; feeling as if want of sleep
was killing me by inches.

In the High Street, I saw Helena; she was posting a letter, and was
not aware that I was near her. Leaving the post-office, she crossed
the street, and narrowly escaped being run over. Suppose the threatened
accident had really taken place--how should I have felt, if it had ended
fatally? What a fool I am to be putting questions to myself about things
that have not happened!

The walking tired me; I went straight home.

Before I could ring the bell, the house door opened, and the doctor
came out. He stopped to speak to me. While I had been away (he said),
something had happened at home (he neither knew nor wished to know what)
which had thrown my father into a state of violent agitation. The doctor
had administered composing medicine. "My patient is asleep now," he told
me; "but remember what I said to you the last time we met; a longer rest
than any doctor's prescription can give him is what he wants. You are
not looking well yourself, my dear. What is the matter?"

I told him of my wretched restless nights; and asked if I might take
some of the composing medicine which he had given to my father. He
forbade me to touch a drop of it. "What is physic for your father, you
foolish child, is not physic for a young creature like you," he said.
"Count a thousand, if you can't sleep to-night, or turn your pillow. I
wish you pleasant dreams." He went away, amused at his own humor.

I found Selina waiting to speak with me, on the subject of poor papa.

She had been startled on hearing his voice, loud in anger. In the
fear that something serious had happened, she left her room to make
inquiries, and saw Helena on the landing of the flight of stairs
beneath, leaving the study. After waiting till my sister was out of the
way, Selina ventured to present herself at the study door, and to ask
if she could be of any use. My father, walking excitedly up and down the
room, declared that both his daughters had behaved infamously, and that
he would not suffer them to speak to him again until they had come to
their senses, on the subject of Mr. Dunboyne. He would enter into no
further explanation; and he had ordered, rather than requested, Selina
to leave him. Having obeyed, she tried next to find me, and had
just looked into the dining-room to see if I was there, when she was
frightened by the sound of a fall in the room above--that is to say, in
the study. Running upstairs again, she had found him insensible on the
floor and had sent for the doctor.

"And mind this," Selina continued, "the person who has done the mischief
is the person whom I saw leaving the study. What your unnatural sister
said to provoke her father--"

"That your unnatural sister will tell you herself," Helena's voice
added. She had opened the door while we were too much absorbed in our
talk to hear her.

Selina attempted to leave the room. I caught her by the hand, and held
her back. I was afraid of what I might do if she left me by myself.
Never have I felt anything like the rage that tortured me, when I saw
Helena looking at us with the same wicked smile on her lips that had
insulted me when we met on the stairs. "Have _we_ anything to be ashamed
of?" I said to Selina. "Stay where you are."

"You may be of some use, Miss Jillgall, if you stay," my sister
suggested. "Eunice seems to be trembling. Is she angry, or is she ill?"

The sting of this was in the tone of her voice. It was the hardest thing
I ever had to do in my life--but I did succeed in controlling myself.

"Go on with what you have to say," I answered, "and don't notice me."

"You are not very polite, my dear, but I can make allowances. Oh, come!
come! putting up your hands to stop your ears is too childish. You would
do better to express regret for having misled your father. Yes! you did
mislead him. Only a few days since, you left him to suppose that you
were engaged to Philip. It became my duty, after that, to open his eyes
to the truth; and if I unhappily provoked him, it was your fault. I was
strictly careful in the language I used. I said: 'Dear father, you have
been misinformed on a very serious subject. The only marriage engagement
for which your kind sanction is requested, is _my_ engagement. _I_ have
consented to become Mrs. Philip Dunboyne.'"

"Stop!" I said.

"Why am I to stop?"

"Because I have something to say. You and I are looking at each other.
Does my face tell you what is passing in my mind?"

"Your face seems to be paler than usual," she answered--"that's all."

"No," I said; "that is not all. The devil that possessed me, when I
discovered you with Philip, is not cast out of me yet. Silence the
sneering devil that is in You, or we may both live to regret it."

Whether I did or did not frighten her, I cannot say. This only I
know--she turned away silently to the door, and went out.

I dropped on the sofa. That horrid hungering for revenge, which I felt
for the first time when I knew how Helena had wronged me, began to
degrade and tempt me again. In the effort to get away from this new evil
self of mine, I tried to find sympathy in Selina, and called to her to
come and sit by me. She seemed to be startled when I looked at her, but
she recovered herself, and came to me, and took my hand.

"I wish I could comfort you!" she said, in her kind simple way.

"Keep my hand in your hand," I told her; "I am drowning in dark
water--and I have nothing to hold by but you."

"Oh, my darling, don't talk in that way!"

"Good Selina! dear Selina! You shall talk to me. Say something
harmless--tell me a melancholy story--try to make me cry."

My poor little friend looked sadly bewildered.

"I'm more likely to cry myself," she said. "This is so heart-breaking--I
almost wish I was back in the time, before you came home, the time
when your detestable sister first showed how she hated me. I was happy,
meanly happy, in the spiteful enjoyment of provoking her. Oh, Euneece,
I shall never recover my spirits again! All the pity in the world would
not be pity enough for _you_. So hardly treated! so young! so forlorn!
Your good father too ill to help you; your poor mother--"

I interrupted her; she had interested me in something better than my own
wretched self. I asked directly if she had known my mother.

"My dear child, I never even saw her!"

"Has my father never spoken to you about her?"

"Only once, when I asked him how long she had been dead. He told me you
lost her while you were an infant, and he told me no more. I was looking
at her portrait in the study, only yesterday. I think it must be a bad
portrait; your mother's face disappoints me."

I had arrived at the same conclusion years since. But I shrank from
confessing it.

"At any rate," Selina continued, "you are not like her. Nobody would
ever guess that you were the child of that lady, with the long slanting
forehead and the restless look in her eyes."

What Selina had said of me and my mother's portrait, other friends had
said. There was nothing that I know of to interest me in hearing it
repeated--and yet it set me pondering on the want of resemblance between
my mother's face and mine, and wondering (not for the first time) what
sort of woman my mother was. When my father speaks of her, no words of
praise that he can utter seem to be good enough for her. Oh, me, I wish
I was a little more like my mother!

It began to get dark; Maria brought in the lamp. The sudden brightness
of the flame struck my aching eyes, as if it had been a blow from a
knife. I was obliged to hide my face in my handkerchief. Compassionate
Selina entreated me to go to bed. "Rest your poor eyes, my child, and
your weary head--and try at least to get some sleep." She found me very
docile; I kissed her, and said good-night. I had my own idea.

When all was quiet in the house, I stole out into the passage and
listened at the door of my father's room.

I heard his regular breathing, and opened the door and went in. The
composing medicine, of which I was in search, was not on the table by
his bedside. I found it in the cupboard--perhaps placed purposely out of
his reach. They say that some physic is poison, if you take too much of
it. The label on the bottle told me what the dose was. I dropped it into
the medicine glass, and swallowed it, and went back to my father.

Very gently, so as not to wake him, I touched poor papa's forehead with
my lips. "I must have some of your medicine," I whispered to him; "I
want it, dear, as badly as you do."

Then I returned to my own room--and lay down in bed, waiting to be
composed.



CHAPTER XXXI. EUNICE'S DIARY.

My restless nights are passed in Selina's room.

Her bed remains near the window. My bed has been placed opposite, near
the door. Our night-light is hidden in a corner, so that the faint glow
of it is all that we see. What trifles these are to write about! But
they mix themselves up with what I am determined to set down in
my Journal, and then to close the book for good and all. I had not
disturbed my little friend's enviable repose, either when I left our
bed-chamber, or when I returned to it. The night was quiet, and the
stars were out. Nothing moved but the throbbing at my temples. The
lights and shadows in our half-darkened room, which at other times
suggest strange resemblances to my fancy, failed to disturb me now. I
was in a darkness of my own making, having bound a handkerchief, cooled
with water, over my hot eyes. There was nothing to interfere with the
soothing influence of the dose that I had taken, if my father's medicine
would only help me.

I began badly. The clock in the hall struck the quarter past the
hour, the half-past, the three-quarters past, the new hour. Time was
awake--and I was awake with Time.

It was such a trial to my patience that I thought of going back to my
father's room, and taking a second dose of the medicine, no matter what
the risk might be. On attempting to get up, I became aware of a change
in me. There was a dull sensation in my limbs which seemed to bind them
down on the bed. It was the strangest feeling. My will said, Get up--and
my heavy limbs said, No.

I lay quite still, thinking desperate thoughts, and getting nearer and
nearer to the end that I had been dreading for so many days past. Having
been as well educated as most girls, my lessons in history had made me
acquainted with assassination and murder. Horrors which I had recoiled
from reading in past happy days, now returned to my memory; and, this
time, they interested instead of revolting me. I counted the three
first ways of killing as I happened to remember them, in my books of
instruction:--a way by stabbing; a way by poison; a way in a bed, by
suffocation with a pillow. On that dreadful night, I never once called
to mind what I find myself remembering now--the harmless past time,
when our friends used to say: "Eunice is a good girl; we are all fond of
Eunice." Shall I ever be the same lovable creature again?

While I lay thinking, a strange thing happened. Philip, who had haunted
me for days and nights together, vanished out of my thoughts. My memory
of the love which had begun so brightly, and had ended so miserably,
became a blank. Nothing was left but my own horrid visions of vengeance
and death.

For a while, the strokes of the clock still reached my ears. But it was
an effort to count them; I ended in letting them pass unheeded. Soon
afterward, the round of my thoughts began to circle slowly and more
slowly. The strokes of the clock died out. The round of my thoughts
stopped.

All this time, my eyes were still covered by the handkerchief which I
had laid over them.

The darkness began to weigh on my spirits, and to fill me with distrust.
I found myself suspecting that there was some change--perhaps an
unearthly change--passing over the room. To remain blindfolded any
longer was more than I could endure. I lifted my hand--without being
conscious of the heavy sensation which, some time before, had laid my
limbs helpless on the bed--I lifted my hand, and drew the handkerchief
away from my eyes.

The faint glow of the night-light was extinguished.

But the room was not quite dark. There was a ghastly light trembling
over it; like nothing that I have ever seen by day; like nothing that I
have ever seen by night. I dimly discerned Selina's bed, and the frame
of the window, and the curtains on either side of it--but not the
starlight, and not the shadowy tops of the trees in the garden.

The light grew fainter and fainter; the objects in the room faded slowly
away. Darkness came.

It may be a saying hard to believe--but, when I declare that I was not
frightened, I am telling the truth. Whether the room was lighted by
awful light, or sunk in awful dark, I was equally interested in the
expectation of what might happen next. I listened calmly for what I
might hear: I waited calmly for what I might feel. A touch came first.
I feel it creeping on my face--like a little fluttering breeze. The
sensation pleased me for a while. Soon it grew colder, and colder, and
colder, till it froze me.

"Oh, no more!" I cried out. "You are killing me with an icy death!"

The dead-cold touches lingered a moment longer--and left me.

The first sound came.

It was the sound of a whisper on my pillow, close to my ear. My strange
insensibility to fear remained undisturbed. The whisper was welcome, it
kept me company in the dark room.

It said to me: "Do you know who I am?"

I answered: "No."

It said: "Who have you been thinking of this evening?"

I answered: "My mother."

The whisper said: "I am your mother."

"Oh, mother, command the light to come back! Show yourself to me!"

"No."

"Why not?"

"My face was hidden when I passed from life to death. My face no mortal
creature may see."

"Oh, mother, touch me! Kiss me!"

"No."

"Why not?"

"My touch is poison. My kiss is death."

The sense of fear began to come to me now. I moved my head away on the
pillow. The whisper followed my movement.

"Leave me," I said. "You are an Evil Spirit."

The whisper answered: "I am your mother."

"You come to tempt me."

"I come to harden your heart. Daughter of mine, whose blood is cool;
daughter of mine, who tamely submits--you have loved. Is it true?"

"It is true."

"The man you loved has deserted you. Is it true?"

"It is true."

"A woman has lured him away to herself. A woman has had no mercy on you,
or on him. Is it true?"

"It is true."

"If she lives, what crime toward you will she commit next?"

"If she lives, she will marry him."

"Will you let her live?"

"Never."

"Have I hardened your heart against her?"

"Yes."

"Will you kill her?"

"Show me how."

There was a sudden silence. I was still left in the darkness; feeling
nothing, hearing nothing. Even the consciousness that I was lying on
my bed deserted me. I had no idea that I was in the bedroom; I had no
knowledge of where I was.

The ghastly light that I had seen already dawned on me once more. I
was no longer in my bed, no longer in my room, no longer in the house.
Without wonder, without even a feeling of surprise, I looked round. The
place was familiar to me. I was alone in the Museum of our town.

The light flowed along in front of me. I followed, from room to room in
the Museum, where the light led.

First, through the picture-gallery, hung with the works of modern
masters; then, through the room filled with specimens of stuffed
animals. The lion and the tiger, the vulture of the Alps and the
great albatross, looked like living creatures threatening me, in the
supernatural light. I entered the third room, devoted to the exhibition
of ancient armor, and the weapons of all nations. Here the light rose
higher, and, leaving me in darkness where I stood, showed a collection
of swords, daggers, and knives arranged on the wall in imitation of the
form of a star.

The whisper sounded again, close at my ear. It echoed my own thought,
when I called to mind the ways of killing which history had taught me.
It said: "Kill her with the knife."

No. My heart failed me when I thought of the blood. I hid the dreadful
weapons from my view. I cried out: "Let me go! let me go!"

Again, I was lost in darkness. Again, I had no knowledge in me of where
I was. Again, after an interval, the light showed me the new place in
which I stood.

I was alone in the burial-ground of our parish church. The light led me
on, among the graves, to the lonely corner in which the great yew tree
stands; and, rising higher, revealed the solemn foliage, brightened by
the fatal red fruit which hides in itself the seeds of death.

The whisper tempted me again. It followed again the train of my own
thought. It said: "Kill her by poison."

No. Revenge by poison steals its way to its end. The base deceitfulness
of Helena's crime against me seemed to call for a day of reckoning that
hid itself under no disguise. I raised my cry to be delivered from the
sight of the deadly tree. The changes which I have tried to describe
followed once more the confession of what I felt; the darkness was
dispelled for the third time.

I was standing in Helena's room, looking at her as she lay asleep in her
bed.

She was quite still now; but she must have been restless at some earlier
time. The bedclothes were disordered, her head had sunk so low that the
pillow rose high and vacant above her. There, colored by a tender flush
of sleep, was the face whose beauty put my poor face to shame. There,
was the sister who had committed the worst of murders--the wretch who
had killed in me all that made life worth having. While that thought was
in my mind, I heard the whisper again. "Kill her openly," the tempter
mother said. "Kill her daringly. Faint heart, do you still want courage?
Rouse your spirit; look! see yourself in the act!"

The temptation took a form which now tried me for the first time.

As if a mirror had reflected the scene, I saw myself standing by the
bedside, with the pillow that was to smother the sleeper in my hands. I
heard the whispering voice telling me how to speak the words that warned
and condemned her: "Wake! you who have taken him from me! Wake! and meet
your doom."

I saw her start up in bed. The sudden movement disordered the nightdress
over her bosom and showed the miniature portrait of a man, hung round
her neck.

The man was Philip. The likeness was looking at me.

So dear, so lovely--those eyes that had once been the light of my heart,
mourned for me and judged me now. They saw the guilty thought that
polluted me; they brought me to my knees, imploring him to help me back
to my better self: "One last mercy, dear, to comfort me under the loss
of you. Let the love that was once my life, be my good angel still. Save
me, Philip, even though you forsake me--save me from myself!"

.......

There was a sudden cry.

The agony of it pierced my brain--drove away the ghastly light--silenced
the tempting whispers. I came to myself. I saw--and not in a dream.

Helena _had_ started up in her bed. That cry of terror, at the sight
of me in her room at night, _had_ burst from her lips. The miniature of
Philip hung round her neck, a visible reality. Though my head was dizzy,
though my heart was sinking, I had not lost my senses yet. All that the
night lamp could show me, I still saw; and I heard the sound, faintly,
when the door of the bed-chamber was opened. Alarmed by that piercing
cry, my father came hurrying into the room.

Not a word passed between us three. The whispers that I had heard were
wicked; the thoughts that had been in my mind were vile. Had they left
some poison in the air of the room, which killed the words on our lips?

My father looked at Helena. With a trembling hand she pointed to me. He
put his arm round me and held me up. I remember his leading me away--and
I remember nothing more.

My last words are written. I lock up this journal of misery-never, I
hope and pray, to open it again. ----

Second Period (continued).

EVENTS IN THE FAMILY, RELATED BY THE GOVERNOR. ----



CHAPTER XXXII. THE MIDDLE-AGED LADY.

In the year 1870 I found myself compelled to submit to the demands of
two hard task-masters.

Advancing age and failing health reminded the Governor of the Prison of
his duty to his successor, in one unanswerable word--Resign.

When they have employed us and interested us, for the greater part of
our lives, we bid farewell to our duties--even to the gloomy duties of a
prison--with a sense of regret. My view of the future presented a vacant
prospect indeed, when I looked at my idle life to come, and wondered
what I should do with it. Loose on the world--at my age!--I drifted into
domestic refuge, under the care of my two dear and good sons. After a
while (never mind how long a while) I began to grow restless under
the heavy burden of idleness. Having nothing else to complain of, I
complained of my health, and consulted a doctor. That sagacious man hit
on the right way of getting rid of me--he recommended traveling.

This was unexpected advice. After some hesitation, I accepted it
reluctantly.

The instincts of age recoil from making new acquaintances, contemplating
new places, and adopting new habits. Besides, I hate railway traveling.
However, I contrived to get as far as Italy, and stopped to rest at
Florence. Here, I found pictures by the old masters that I could really
enjoy, a public park that I could honestly admire, and an excellent
friend and colleague of former days; once chaplain to the prison, now
clergyman in charge of the English Church. We met in the gallery of the
Pitti Palace; and he recognized me immediately. I was pleased to find
that the lapse of years had made so little difference in my personal
appearance.

The traveler who advances as far as Florence, and does not go on to
Rome, must be regardless indeed of the opinions of his friends. Let me
not attempt to conceal it--I am that insensible traveler. Over and over
again, I said to myself: "Rome must be done"; and over and over again I
put off doing it. To own the truth, the fascinations of Florence, aided
by the society of my friend, laid so strong a hold on me that I believe
I should have ended my days in the delightful Italian city, but for the
dangerous illness of one of my sons. This misfortune hurried me back to
England, in dread, every step of the way, of finding that I had arrived
too late. The journey (thank God!) proved to have been taken without
need. My son was no longer in danger, when I reached London in the year
1875.

At that date I was near enough to the customary limit of human life to
feel the necessity of rest and quiet. In other words, my days of travel
had come to their end.

Having established myself in my own country, I did not forget to let old
friends know where they might find me. Among those to whom I wrote was
another colleague of past years, who still held his medical appointment
in the prison. When I received the doctor's reply, it inclosed a letter
directed to me at my old quarters in the Governor's rooms. Who could
possibly have sent a letter to an address which I had left five
years since? My correspondent proved to be no less a person than the
Congregational Minister--the friend whom I had estranged from me by the
tone in which I had written to him, on the long-past occasion of his
wife's death.

It was a distressing letter to read. I beg permission to give only the
substance of it in this place.

Entreating me, with touching expressions of humility and sorrow, to
forgive his long silence, the writer appealed to my friendly remembrance
of him. He was in sore need of counsel, under serious difficulties; and
I was the only person to whom he could apply for help. In the disordered
state of his health at that time, he ventured to hope that I would visit
him at his present place of abode, and would let him have the
happiness of seeing me as speedily as possible. He concluded with this
extraordinary postscript:

"When you see my daughters, say nothing to either of them which relates,
in any way, to the subject of their ages. You shall hear why when we
meet."

The reading of this letter naturally reminded me of the claims which my
friend's noble conduct had established on my admiration and respect, at
the past time when we met in the prison. I could not hesitate to grant
his request--strangely as it was expressed, and doubtful as the prospect
appeared to be of my answering the expectations which he had founded
on the renewal of our intercourse. Answering his letter by telegraph, I
promised to be with him on the next day.

On arriving at the station, I found that I was the only traveler, by a
first-class carriage, who left the train. A young lady, remarkable by
her good looks and good dressing, seemed to have noticed this trifling
circumstance. She approached me with a ready smile. "I believe I
am speaking to my father's friend," she said; "my name is Helena
Gracedieu."

Here was one of the Minister's two "daughters"; and that one of the
two--as I discovered the moment I shook hands with her--who was my
friend's own child. Miss Helena recalled to me her mother's face,
infinitely improved by youth and health, and by a natural beauty which
that cruel and deceitful woman could never have possessed. The slanting
forehead and the shifting, flashing eyes, that I recollected in the
parent, were reproduced (slightly reproduced, I ought to say) in the
child. As for the other features, I had never seen a more beautiful nose
and mouth, or a more delicately-shaped outline, than was presented by
the lower part of the face. But Miss Helena somehow failed to charm me.
I doubt if I should have fallen in love with her, even in the days when
I was a foolish young man.

The first question that I put, as we drove from the station to the
house, related naturally to her father.

"He is very ill," she began; "I am afraid you must prepare yourself to
see a sad change. Nerves. The mischief first showed itself, the doctor
tells us, in derangement of his nervous system. He has been, I regret
to tell you, obstinate in refusing to give up his preaching and pastoral
work. He ought to have tried rest at the seaside. Things have gone on
from bad to worse. Last Sunday, at the beginning of his sermon, he broke
down. Very, very sad, is it not? The doctor says that precious time has
been lost, and he must make up his mind to resign his charge. He won't
hear of it. You are his old friend. Please try to persuade him."

Fluently spoken; the words well chosen; the melodious voice reminding
me of the late Mrs. Gracedieu's advantages in that respect; little
sighs judiciously thrown in here and there, just at the right places;
everything, let me own, that could present a dutiful daughter as a
pattern of propriety--and nothing, let me add, that could produce an
impression on my insensible temperament. If I had not been too discreet
to rush at a hasty conclusion, I might have been inclined to say: her
mother's child, every inch of her!

The interest which I was still able to feel in my friend's domestic
affairs centered in the daughter whom he had adopted.

In her infancy I had seen the child, and liked her; I was the one person
living (since the death of Mrs. Gracedieu) who knew how the Minister had
concealed the sad secret of her parentage; and I wanted to discover if
the hereditary taint had begun to show itself in the innocent offspring
of the murderess. Just as I was considering how I might harmlessly speak
of Miss Helena's "sister," Miss Helena herself introduced the subject.

"May I ask," she resumed, "if you were disappointed when you found
nobody but me to meet you at our station?"

Here was an opportunity of paying her a compliment, if I had been a
younger man, or if she had produced a favorable impression on me. As it
was, I hit--if I may praise myself--on an ingenious compromise.

"What excuse could I have," I asked, "for feeling disappointed?"

"Well, I hear you are an official personage--I ought to say, perhaps,
a retired official personage. We might have received you more
respectfully, if _both_ my father's daughters had been present at the
station. It's not my fault that my sister was not with me."

The tone in which she said this strengthened my prejudice against her.
It told me that the two girls were living together on no very
friendly terms; and it suggested--justly or unjustly I could not then
decide--that Miss Helena was to blame.

"My sister is away from home."

"Surely, Miss Helena, that is a good reason for her not coming to meet
me?"

"I beg your pardon--it is a bad reason. She has been sent away for the
recovery of her health--and the loss of her health is entirely her own
fault."

What did this matter to me? I decided on dropping the subject. My memory
reverted, however, to past occasions on which the loss of _my_ health
had been entirely my own fault. There was something in these personal
recollections, which encouraged my perverse tendency to sympathize with
a young lady to whom I had not yet been introduced. The young lady's
sister appeared to be discouraged by my silence. She said: "I hope you
don't think the worse of me for what I have just mentioned?"

"Certainly not."

"Perhaps you will fail to see any need of my speaking of my sister at
all? Will you kindly listen, if I try to explain myself?"

"With pleasure."

She slyly set the best construction on my perfectly commonplace reply.

"Thank you," she said. "The fact is, my father (I can't imagine why)
wishes you to see my sister as well as me. He has written to the
farmhouse at which she is now staying, to tell her to come
home to-morrow. It is possible--if your kindness offers me an
opportunity--that I may ask to be guided by your experience, in a little
matter which interests me. My sister is rash, and reckless, and has a
terrible temper. I should be very sorry indeed if you were induced to
form an unfavorable opinion of me, from anything you might notice if you
see us together. You understand me, I hope?"

"I quite understand you."

To set me against her sister, in her own private interests--there, as
I felt sure, was the motive under which she was acting. As hard as
her mother, as selfish as her mother, and, judging from those two bad
qualities, probably as cruel as her mother. That was how I understood
Miss Helena Gracedieu, when our carriage drew up at her father's house.

A middle-aged lady was on the doorstep, when we arrived, just ringing
the bell. She looked round at us both; being evidently as complete a
stranger to my fair companion as she was to me. When the servant opened
the door, she said:

"Is Miss Jillgall at home?"

At the sound of that odd name, Miss Helena tossed her head disdainfully.
She took no sort of notice of the stranger-lady who was at the door
of her father's house. This young person's contempt for Miss Jillgall
appeared to extend to Miss Jillgall's friends.

In the meantime, the servant's answer was: "Not at home."

The middle aged lady said: "Do you expect her back soon?"

"Yes, ma'am."

"I will call again, later in the day."

"What name, if you please?"

The lady stole another look at me, before she replied.

"Never mind the name," she said--and walked away.



CHAPTER XXXIII. THE MINISTER'S MISFORTUNE.

"Do you know that lady?" Miss Helena asked, as we entered the house.

"She is a perfect stranger to me," I answered.

"Are you sure you have not forgotten her?"

"Why do you think I have forgotten her?"

"Because she evidently remembered you."

The lady had no doubt looked at me twice. If this meant that my face was
familiar to her, I could only repeat what I have already said. Never, to
my knowledge, had I seen her before.

Leading the way upstairs, Miss Helena apologized for taking me into her
father's bedroom. "He is able to sit up in an armchair," she said; "and
he might do more, as I think, if he would exert himself. He won't exert
himself. Very sad. Would you like to look at your room, before you see
my father? It is quite ready for you. We hope"--she favored me with
a fascinating smile, devoted to winning my heart when her interests
required it--"we hope you will pay us a long visit; we look on you as
one of ourselves."

I thanked her, and said I would shake hands with my old friend before I
went to my room. We parted at the bedroom door.

It is out of my power to describe the shock that overpowered me when I
first saw the Minister again, after the long interval of time that had
separated us. Nothing that his daughter said, nothing that I myself
anticipated, had prepared me for that lamentable change. For the moment,
I was not sufficiently master of myself to be able to speak to him. He
added to my embarrassment by the humility of his manner, and the formal
elaboration of his apologies.

"I feel painfully that I have taken a liberty with you," he said,
"after the long estrangement between us--for which my want of Christian
forbearance is to blame. Forgive it, sir, and forget it. I hope to
show that necessity justifies my presumption, in subjecting you to a
wearisome journey for my sake."

Beginning to recover myself, I begged that he would make no more
excuses. My interruption seemed to confuse him.

"I wished to say," he went on, "that you are the one man who can
understand me. There is my only reason for asking to see you, and
looking forward as I do to your advice. You remember the night--or was
it the day?--before that miserable woman was hanged? You were the only
person present when I agreed to adopt the poor little creature, stained
already (one may say) by its mother's infamy. I think your wisdom
foresaw what a terrible responsibility I was undertaking; you tried to
prevent it. Well! well! you have been in my confidence--you only. Mind!
nobody in this house knows that one of the two girls is not really my
daughter. Pray stop me, if you find me wandering from the point. My wish
is to show that you are the only man I can open my heart to. She--"
He paused, as if in search of a lost idea, and left the sentence
uncompleted. "Yes," he went on, "I was thinking of my adopted child. Did
I ever tell you that I baptized her myself? and by a good Scripture name
too--Eunice. Ah, sir, that little helpless baby is a grown-up girl now;
of an age to inspire love, and to feel love. I blush to acknowledge
it; I have behaved with a want of self-control, with a cowardly
weakness.--No! I am, indeed, wandering this time. I ought to have told
you first that I have been brought face to face with the possibility of
Eunice's marriage. And, to make it worse still, I can't help liking
the young man. He comes of a good family--excellent manners, highly
educated, plenty of money, a gentleman in every sense of the word. And
poor little Eunice is so fond of him! Isn't it dreadful to be obliged to
check her dearly-loved Philip? The young gentleman's name is Philip.
Do you like the name? I say I am obliged to cheek her sweetheart in
the rudest manner, when all he wants to do is to ask me modestly for
my sweet Eunice's hand. Oh, what have I not suffered, without a word
of sympathy to comfort me, before I had courage enough to write to you!
Shall I make a dreadful confession? If my religious convictions had not
stood in my way, I believe I should have committed suicide. Put yourself
in my place. Try to see yourself shrinking from a necessary
explanation, when the happiness of a harmless girl--so dutiful, so
affectionate--depended on a word of kindness from your lips. And that
word you are afraid to speak! Don't take offense, sir; I mean myself,
not you. Why don't you say something?" he burst out fiercely, incapable
of perceiving that he had allowed me no opportunity of speaking to him.
"Good God! don't you understand me, after all?"

The signs of mental confusion in his talk had so distressed me, that I
had not been composed enough to feel sure of what he really meant,
until he described himself as "shrinking from a necessary explanation."
Hearing those words, my knowledge of the circumstances helped me; I
realized what his situation really was.

"Compose yourself," I said, "I understand you at last."

He had suddenly become distrustful. "Prove it," he muttered, with a
furtive look at me. "I want to be satisfied that you understand my
position."

"This is your position," I told him. "You are placed between two
deplorable alternatives. If you tell this young gentleman that Miss
Eunice's mother was a criminal hanged for murder, his family--even if he
himself doesn't recoil from it--will unquestionably forbid the marriage;
and your adopted daughter's happiness will be the sacrifice."

"True!" he said. "Frightfully true! Go on."

"If, on the other hand, you sanction the marriage, and conceal the
truth, you commit a deliberate act of deceit; and you leave the lives of
the young couple at the mercy of a possible discovery, which might
part husband and wife--cast a slur on their children--and break up the
household."

He shuddered while he listened to me. "Come to the end of it," he cried.

I had no more to say, and I was obliged to answer him to that effect.

"No more to say?" he replied. "You have not told me yet what I most want
to know."

I did a rash thing; I asked what it was that he most wanted to know.

"Can't you see it for yourself?" he demanded indignantly. "Suppose you
were put between those two alternatives which you mentioned just now."

"Well?"

"What would you do, sir, in my place? Would you own the disgraceful
truth--before the marriage--or run the risk, and keep the horrid story
to yourself?"

Either way, my reply might lead to serious consequences. I hesitated.

He threatened me with his poor feeble hand. It was only the anger of a
moment; his humor changed to supplication. He reminded me piteously of
bygone days: "You used to be a kind-hearted man. Has age hardened you?
Have you no pity left for your old friend? My poor heart is sadly in
want of a word of wisdom, spoken kindly."

Who could have resisted this? I took his hand: "Be at ease, dear
Minister. In your place I should run the risk, and keep that horrid
story to myself."

He sank back gently in his chair. "Oh, the relief of it!" he said. "How
can I thank you as I ought for quieting my mind?"

I seized the opportunity of quieting his mind to good purpose by
suggesting a change of subject. "Let us have done with serious talk for
the present," I proposed. "I have been an idle man for the last five
years, and I want to tell you about my travels."

His attention began to wander, he evidently felt no interest in my
travels. "Are you sure," he asked anxiously, "that we have said all we
ought to say? No!" he cried, answering his own question. "I believe
I have forgotten something--I am certain I have forgotten something.
Perhaps I mentioned it in the letter I wrote to you. Have you got my
letter?"

I showed it to him. He read the letter, and gave it back to me with a
heavy sigh. "Not there!" he said despairingly. "Not there!"

"Is the lost remembrance connected with anybody in the house?" I asked,
trying to help him. "Does it relate, by any chance, to one of the young
ladies?"

"You wonderful man! Nothing escapes you. Yes; the thing I have forgotten
concerns one of the girls. Stop! Let me get at it by myself. Surely
it relates to Helena?" He hesitated; his face clouded over with an
expression of anxious thought. "Yes; it relates to Helena," he repeated
"but how?" His eyes filled with tears. "I am ashamed of my weakness,"
he said faintly. "You don't know how dreadful it is to forget things in
this way."

The injury that his mind had sustained now assumed an aspect that was
serious indeed. The subtle machinery, which stimulates the memory, by
means of the association of ideas, appeared to have lost its working
power in the intellect of this unhappy man. I made the first suggestion
that occurred to me, rather than add to his distress by remaining
silent.

"If we talk of your daughter," I said, "the merest accident--a word
spoken at random by. you or me--may be all your memory wants to rouse
it."

He agreed eagerly to this: "Yes! Yes! Let me begin. Helena met you, I
think, at the station. Of course, I remember that; it only happened
a few hours since. Well?" he went on, with a change in his manner to
parental pride, which it was pleasant to see, "did you think my daughter
a fine girl? I hope Helena didn't disappoint you?"

"Quite the contrary." Having made that necessary reply, I saw my way to
keeping his mind occupied by a harmless subject. "It must, however, be
owned," I went on, "that your daughter surprised me."

"In what way?"

"When she mentioned her name. Who could have supposed that you--an
inveterate enemy to the Roman Catholic Church--would have christened
your daughter by the name of a Roman Catholic Saint?"

He listened to this with a smile. Had I happily blundered on some
association which his mind was still able to pursue?

"You happen to be wrong this time," he said pleasantly. "I never gave
my girl the name of Helena; and, what is more, I never baptized her.
You ought to know that. Years and years ago, I wrote to tell you that my
poor wife had made me a proud and happy father. And surely I said that
the child was born while she was on a visit to her brother's rectory.
Do you remember the name of the place? I told you it was a remote
little village, called--Suppose we put _your_ memory to a test? Can you
remember the name?" he asked, with a momentary appearance of triumph
showing itself, poor fellow, in his face.

After the time that had elapsed, the name had slipped my memory. When I
confessed this, he exulted over me, with an unalloyed pleasure which it
was cheering to see.

"_Your_ memory is failing you now," he said. "The name is Long Lanes.
And what do you think my wife did--this is so characteristic of
her!--when I presented myself at her bedside. Instead of speaking of our
own baby, she reminded me of the name that I had given to our adopted
daughter when I baptized the child. 'You chose the ugliest name that a
girl can have,' she said. I begged her to remember that 'Eunice' was
a name in Scripture. She persisted in spite of me. (What firmness of
character!) 'I detest the name of Eunice!' she said; 'and now that I
have a girl of my own, it's my turn to choose the name; I claim it as my
right.' She was beginning to get excited; I allowed her to have her own
way, of course. 'Only let me know,' I said, 'what the name is to be when
you have thought of it.' My dear sir, she had the name ready, without
thinking about it: 'My baby shall be called by the name that is sweetest
in my ears, the name of my dear lost mother.' We had--what shall I call
it?--a slight difference of opinion when I heard that the name was to be
Helena. I really could _not_ reconcile it to my conscience to baptize
a child of mine by the name of a Popish saint. My wife's brother set
things right between us. A worthy good man; he died not very long ago--I
forget the date. Not to detain you any longer, the rector of Long Lanes
baptized our daughter. That is how she comes by her un-English name; and
so it happens that her birth is registered in a village which her father
has never inhabited. I hope, sir, you think a little better of my memory
now?"

I was afraid to tell him what I really did think.

He was not fifty years old yet; and he had just exhibited one of the sad
symptoms which mark the broken memory of old age. Lead him back to the
events of many years ago, and (as he had just proved to me) he could
remember well and relate coherently. But let him attempt to recall
circumstances which had only taken place a short time since, and
forgetfulness and confusion presented the lamentable result, just as I
have related it.

The effort that he had made, the agitation that he had undergone in
talking to me, had confirmed my fears that he would overtask his
wasted strength. He lay back in his chair. "Let us go on with our
conversation," he murmured. "We haven't recovered what I had forgotten,
yet." His eyes closed, and opened again languidly. "There was something
I wanted to recall--" he resumed, "and you were helping me." His weak
voice died away; his weary eyes closed again. After waiting until there
could be no doubt that he was resting peacefully in sleep, I left the
room.



CHAPTER XXXIV. THE LIVELY OLD MAID.

A perfect stranger to the interior of the house (seeing that my
experience began and ended with the Minister's bedchamber), I
descended the stairs, in the character of a guest in search of domestic
information.

On my way down, I heard the door of a room on the ground floor opened,
and a woman' s voice below, speaking in a hurry: "My dear, I have not a
moment to spare; my patients are waiting for me." This was followed by a
confidential communication, judging by the tone. "Mind! not a word about
me to that old gentleman!" Her patients were waiting for her--had I
discovered a female doctor? And there was some old gentleman whom she
was not willing to trust--surely I was not that much-injured man?

Reaching the hall just as the lady said her last words, I caught a
glimpse of her face, and discovered the middle-aged stranger who had
called on "Miss Jillgall," and had promised to repeat her visit. A
second lady was at the door, with her back to me, taking leave of her
friend. Having said good-by, she turned round--and we confronted each
other.

I found her to be a little person, wiry and active; past the prime of
life, and ugly enough to encourage prejudice, in persons who take a
superficial view of their fellow-creatures. Looking impartially at
the little sunken eyes which rested on me with a comical expression of
embarrassment, I saw signs that said: There is some good here, under a
disagreeable surface, if you can only find it.

She saluted me with a carefully-performed curtsey, and threw open the
door of a room on the ground floor.

"Pray walk in, sir, and permit me to introduce myself. I am Mr.
Gracedieu's cousin--Miss Jillgall. Proud indeed to make the acquaintance
of a gentleman distinguished in the service of his country--or perhaps I
ought to say, in the service of the Law. The Governor offers hospitality
to prisoners. And who introduces prisoners to board and lodging with the
Governor?--the Law. Beautiful weather for the time of year, is it not?
May I ask--have you seen your room?"

The embarrassment which I had already noticed had extended by this time
to her voice and her manner. She was evidently trying to talk herself
into a state of confidence. It seemed but too probable that I was indeed
the person mentioned by her prudent friend at the door.

Having acknowledged that I had not seen my room yet, my politeness
attempted to add that there was no hurry. The wiry little lady was of
the contrary opinion; she jumped out of her chair as if she had been
shot out of it. "Pray let me make myself useful. The dream of my life
is to make myself useful to others; and to such a man as you--I consider
myself honored. Besides, I do enjoy running up and down stairs. This
way, dear sir; this way to your room."

She skipped up the stairs, and stopped on the first landing. "Do you
know, I am a timid person, though I may not look like it. Sometimes,
curiosity gets the better of me--and then I grow bold. Did you notice a
lady who was taking leave of me just now at the house door?"

I replied that I had seen the lady for a moment, but not for the first
time. "Just as I arrived here from the station," I said, "I found her
paying a visit when you were not at home."

"Yes--and do tell me one thing more." My readiness in answering
seemed to have inspired Miss Jillgall with confidence. I heard no more
confessions of overpowering curiosity. "Am I right," she proceeded, "in
supposing that Miss Helena accompanied you on your way here from the
station?"

"Quite right."

"Did she say anything particular, when she saw the lady asking for me at
the door?"

"Miss Helena thought," I said, "that the lady recognized me as a person
whom she had seen before."

"And what did you think yourself?"

"I thought Miss Helena was wrong."

"Very extraordinary!" With that remark, Miss Jillgall dropped the
subject. The meaning of her reiterated inquiries was now, as it seemed
to me, clear enough. She was eager to discover how I could have inspired
the distrust of me, expressed in the caution addressed to her by her
friend.

When we reached the upper floor, she paused before the Minister's room.

"I believe many years have passed," she said, "since you last saw Mr.
Gracedieu. I am afraid you have found him a sadly changed man? You won't
be angry with me, I hope, for asking more questions? I owe Mr. Gracedieu
a debt of gratitude which no devotion, on my part, can ever repay. You
don't know what a favor I shall consider it, if you will tell me what
you think of him. Did it seem to you that he was not quite himself? I
don't mean in his looks, poor dear--I mean in his mind."

There was true sorrow and sympathy in her face. I believe I should
hardly have thought her ugly, if we had first met at that moment. Thus
far, she had only amused me. I began really to like Miss Jillgall now.

"I must not conceal from you," I replied, "that the state of Mr.
Gracedieu's mind surprised and distressed me. But I ought also to tell
you that I saw him perhaps at his worst. The subject on which he wished
to speak with me would have agitated any man, in his state of health. He
consulted me about his daughter's marriage."

Miss Jillgall suddenly turned pale.

"His daughter's marriage?" she repeated. "Oh, you frighten me!"

"Why should I frighten you?"

She seemed to find some difficulty in expressing herself. "I hardly
know how to put it, sir. You will excuse me (won't you?) if I say what
I feel. You have influence--not the sort of influence that finds
places for people who don't deserve them, and gets mentioned in the
newspapers--I only mean influence over Mr. Gracedieu. That's what
frightens me. How do I know--? Oh, dear, I'm asking another question!
Allow me, for once, to be plain and positive. I'm afraid, sir, you have
encouraged the Minister to consent to Helena's marriage."

"Pardon me," I answered, "you mean Eunice's marriage."

"No, sir! Helena."

"No, madam! Eunice."

"What does he mean?" said Miss Jillgall to herself.

I heard her. "This is what I mean," I asserted, in my most positive
manner. "The only subject on which the Minister has consulted me is Miss
Eunice's marriage."

My tone left her no alternative but to believe me. She looked not only
bewildered, but alarmed. "Oh, poor man, has he lost himself in such a
dreadful way as that?" she said to herself. "I daren't believe it!" She
turned to me. "You have been talking with him for some time. Please try
to remember. While Mr. Gracedieu was speaking of Euneece, did he say
nothing of Helena's infamous conduct to her sister?"

Not the slightest hint of any such thing, I assured her, had reached my
ears.

"Then," she cried, "I can tell you what he has forgotten! We kept as
much of that miserable story to ourselves as we could, in mercy to him.
Besides, he was always fondest of Euneece; she would live in his memory
when he had forgotten the other--the wretch, the traitress, the plotter,
the fiend!" Miss Jillgall's good manners slipped, as it were, from
under her; she clinched her fists as a final means of expressing her
sentiments. "The wretched English language isn't half strong enough for
me," she declared with a look of fury.

I took a liberty. "May I ask what Miss Helena has done?" I said.

"_May_ you ask? Oh, Heavens! you must ask, you shall ask. Mr. Governor,
if your eyes are not opened to Helena's true character, I can tell you
what she will do; she will deceive you into taking her part. Do you
think she went to the station out of regard for the great man? Pooh! she
went with an eye to her own interests; and she means to make the great
man useful. Thank God, I can stop that!"

She checked herself there, and looked suspiciously at the door of Mr.
Gracedieu's room.

"In the interest of our conversation," she whispered, "we have not
given a thought to the place we have been talking in. Do you think the
Minister has heard us?"

"Not if he is asleep--as I left him."

Miss Jillgall shook her head ominously. "The safe way is this way," she
said. "Come with me."



CHAPTER XXXV. THE FUTURE LOOKS GLOOMY.

My ever-helpful guide led me to my room--well out of Mr. Gracedieu's
hearing, if he happened to be awake--at the other end of the passage.
Having opened the door, she paused on the threshold. The decrees of that
merciless English despot, Propriety, claimed her for their own. "Oh,
dear!" she said to herself, "ought I to go in?"

My interest as a man (and, what is more, an old man) in the coming
disclosure was too serious to be trifled with in this way. I took her
arm, and led her into my room as if I was at a dinner-party, leading
her to the table. Is it the good or the evil fortune of mortals that
the comic side of life, and the serious side of life, are perpetually in
collision with each other? We burst out laughing, at a moment of grave
importance to us both. Perfectly inappropriate, and perfectly natural.
But we were neither of us philosophers, and we were ashamed of our own
merriment the moment it had ceased.

"When you hear what I have to tell you," Miss Jillgall began, "I hope
you will think as I do. What has slipped Mr. Gracedieu's memory, it
may be safer to say--for he is sometimes irritable, poor dear--where he
won't know anything about it."

With that she told the lamentable story of the desertion of Eunice.

In silence I listened, from first to last. How could I trust myself
to speak, as I must have spoken, in the presence of a woman? The cruel
injury inflicted on the poor girl, who had interested and touched me in
the first innocent year of her life--who had grown to womanhood to be
the victim of two wretches, both trusted by her, both bound to her by
the sacred debt of love--so fired my temper that I longed to be within
reach of the man, with a horsewhip in my hand. Seeing in my face, as I
suppose, what was passing in my mind, Miss Jillgall expressed sympathy
and admiration in her own quaint way: "Ah, I like to see you so angry!
It's grand to know that a man who has governed prisoners has got such
a pitying heart. Let me tell you one thing, sir. You will be more angry
than ever, when you see my sweet girl to-morrow. And mind this--it is
Helena's devouring vanity, Helena's wicked jealousy of her sister's good
fortune, that has done the mischief. Don't be too hard on Philip? I do
believe, if the truth was told, he is ashamed of himself."

I felt inclined to be harder on Philip than ever. "Where is he?" I
asked.

Miss Jillgall started. "Oh, Mr. Governor, don't show the severe side of
yourself, after the pretty compliment I have just paid to you! What a
masterful voice! and what eyes, dear sir; what terrifying eyes! I feel
as if I was one of your prisoners, and had misbehaved myself."

I repeated my question with improvement, I hope, in my looks and tones:
"Don't think me obstinate, my dear lady. I only want to know if he is in
this town."

Miss Jillgall seemed to take a curious pleasure in disappointing me;
she had not forgotten my unfortunate abruptness of look and manner. "You
won't find him here," she said.

"Perhaps he has left England?"

"If you must know, sir, he is in London--with Mr. Dunboyne."

The name startled me.

In a moment more it recalled to my memory a remarkable letter, addressed
to me many years ago, which will be found in my introductory narrative.
The writer--an Irish gentleman, named Dunboyne confided to me that
his marriage had associated him with the murderess, who had then been
recently executed, as brother-in-law to that infamous woman. This
circumstance he had naturally kept a secret from every one, including
his son, then a boy. I alone was made an exception to the general rule,
because I alone could tell him what had become of the poor little girl,
who in spite of the disgraceful end of her mother was still his niece.
If the child had not been provided for, he felt it his duty to take
charge of her education, and to watch over her prospects in the future.
Such had been his object in writing to me; and such was the substance
of his letter. I had merely informed him, in reply, that his kind
intentions had been anticipated, and that the child's prosperous future
was assured.

Miss Jillgall's keen observation noticed the impression that had been
produced upon me. "Mr. Dunboyne's name seems to surprise you." she said.

"This is the first time I have heard you mention it," I answered.

She looked as if she could hardly believe me. "Surely you must have
heard the name," she said, "when I told you about poor Euneece?"

"No."

"Well, then, Mr. Gracedieu must have mentioned it?"

"No."

This second reply in the negative irritated her.

"At any rate," she said, sharply, "you appeared to know Mr. Dunboyne's
name, just now."

"Certainly!"

"And yet," she persisted, "the name seemed to come upon you as a
surprise. I don't understand it. If I have mentioned Philip's name once,
I have mentioned it a dozen times."

We were completely at cross-purposes. She had taken something for
granted which was an unfathomable mystery to me.

"Well," I objected, "if you did mention his name a dozen times--excuse
me for asking the question---what then?"

"Good heavens!" cried Miss Jillgall, "do you mean to say you never
guessed that Philip was Mr. Dunboyne's son?"

I was petrified.

His son! Dunboyne's son! How could I have guessed it?

At a later time only, the good little creature who had so innocently
deceived me, remembered that the mischief might have been wrought by the
force of habit. While he had still a claim on their regard the family
had always spoken of Eunice's unworthy lover by his Christian name; and
what had been familiar in their mouths felt the influence of custom,
before time enough had elapsed to make them think as readily of the
enemy as they had hitherto thought of the friend.

But I was ignorant of this: and the disclosure by which I found myself
suddenly confronted was more than I could support. For the moment,
speech was beyond me.

His son! Dunboyne's son!

What a position that young man had occupied, unsuspected by his father,
unknown to himself! kept in ignorance of the family disgrace, he had
been a guest in the house of the man who had consoled his infamous
aunt on the eve of her execution--who had saved his unhappy cousin from
poverty, from sorrow, from shame. And but one human being knew this. And
that human being was myself!

Observing my agitation, Miss Jillgall placed her own construction on it.

"Do you know anything bad of Philip?" she asked eagerly. "If it's
something that will prevent Helena from marrying him, tell me what it
is, I beg and pray."

I knew no more of "Philip" (whom she still called by his Christian
name!) than she had told me herself: there was no help for it but to
disappoint her. At the same time I was unable to conceal that I was ill
at ease, and that it might be well to leave me by myself. After a look
round the bedchamber to see that nothing was wanting to my comfort, she
made her quaint curtsey, and left me with her own inimitable form of
farewell. "Oh, indeed, I have been here too long! And I'm afraid I have
been guilty, once or twice, of vulgar familiarity. You will excuse me, I
hope. This has been an exciting interview--I think I am going to cry."

She ran out of the room; and carried away with her some of my kindliest
feelings, short as the time of our acquaintance had been. What a wife
and what a mother was lost there--and all for want of a pretty face!

Left alone, my thoughts inevitably reverted to Dunboyne the elder,
and to all that had happened in Mr. Gracedieu's family since the Irish
gentleman had written to me in bygone years.

The terrible choice of responsibilities which had preyed on the
Minister's mind had been foreseen by Mr. Dunboyne, when he first thought
of adopting his infant niece, and had warned him to dread what might
happen in the future, if he brought her up as a member of the family
with his own boy, and if the two young people became at a later period
attached to each other. How had the wise foresight, which offered such
a contrast to the poor Minister's impulsive act of mercy, met with its
reward? Fate or Providence (call it which we may) had brought Dunboyne's
son and the daughter of the murderess together; had inspired those two
strangers with love; and had emboldened them to plight their troth by a
marriage engagement. Was the man's betrayal of the trust placed in him
by the faithful girl to be esteemed a fortunate circumstance by the
two persons who knew the true story of her parentage, the Minister and
myself? Could we rejoice in an act of infidelity which had embittered
and darkened the gentle harmless life of the victim? Or could we, on the
other hand, encourage the ruthless deceit, the hateful treachery,
which had put the wicked Helena--with no exposure to dread if _she_
married--into her wronged sister's place? Impossible! In the one case as
in the other, impossible!

Equally hopeless did the prospect appear, when I tried to determine what
my own individual course of action ought to be.

In my calmer moments, the idea had occurred to my mind of going to
Dunboyne the younger, and, if he had any sense of shame left, exerting
my influence to lead him back to his betrothed wife. How could I now do
this, consistently with my duty to the young man's father; knowing what
I knew, and not forgetting that I had myself advised Mr. Gracedieu
to keep the truth concealed, when I was equally ignorant of Philip
Dunboyne's parentage and of Helena Gracedieu's treachery?

Even if events so ordered it that the marriage of Eunice might yet take
place--without any interference exerted to produce that result, one way
or the other, on my part--it would be just as impossible for me to speak
out now, as it had been in the long-past years when I had so cautiously
answered Mr. Dunboyne's letter. But what would he think of me if
accident led, sooner or later, to the disclosure which I had felt bound
to conceal? The more I tried to forecast the chances of the future, the
darker and the darker was the view that faced me.

To my sinking heart and wearied mind, good Dame Nature presented a more
acceptable prospect, when I happened to look out of the window of my
room. There I saw the trees and flowerbeds of a garden, tempting me
irresistibly under the cloudless sunshine of a fine day. I was on my way
out, to recover heart and hope, when a knock at the door stopped me.

Had Miss Jillgall returned? When I said "Come in," Mr. Gracedieu opened
the door, and entered the room.

He was so weak that he staggered as he approached me. Leading him to
a chair, I noticed a wild look in his eyes, and a flush on his haggard
cheeks. Something had happened.

"When you were with me in my room," he began, "did I not tell you that I
had forgotten something?"

"Certainly you did."

"Well, I have found the lost remembrance. My misfortune--I ought to call
it the punishment for my sins, is recalled to me now. The worst curse
that can fall on a father is the curse that has come to me. I have a
wicked daughter. My own child, sir! my own child!"

Had he been awake, while Miss Jillgall and I had been talking outside
his door? Had he heard her ask me if Mr. Gracedieu had said nothing
of Helena's infamous conduct to her sister, while he was speaking of
Eunice? The way to the lost remembrance had perhaps been found there.
In any case, after that bitter allusion to his "wicked daughter" some
result must follow. Helena Gracedieu and a day of reckoning might be
nearer to each other already than I had ventured to hope.

I waited anxiously for what he might say to me next.



CHAPTER XXXVI. THE WANDERING MIND.

For the moment, the Minister disappointed me.

Without speaking, without even looking up, he took out his pocketbook,
and began to write in it. Constantly interrupted either by a trembling
in the hand that held the pencil, or by a difficulty (as I imagined)
in expressing thoughts imperfectly realized--his patience gave way; he
dashed the book on the floor.

"My mind is gone!" he burst out. "Oh, Father in Heaven, let death
deliver me from a body without a mind!"

Who could hear him, and be guilty of the cruelty of preaching
self-control? I picked up the pocketbook, and offered to help him.

"Do you think you can?" he asked.

"I can at least try."

"Good fellow! What should I do without you? See now; here is my
difficulty. I have got so many things to say, I want to separate
them--or else they will all run into each other. Look at the book," my
poor friend said mournfully; "they have run into each other in spite of
me."

The entries proved to be nearly incomprehensible. Here and there I
discovered some scattered words, which showed themselves more or less
distinctly in the midst of the surrounding confusion. The first word
that I could make out was "Education." Helped by that hint, I trusted
to guess-work to guide me in speaking to him. It was necessary to be
positive, or he would have lost all faith in me.

"Well?" he said impatiently.

"Well," I answered, "you have something to say to me about the education
which you have given to your daughters."

"Don't put them together!" he cried. "Dear, patient, sweet Eunice must
not be confounded with that she-devil--"

"Hush, hush, Mr. Gracedieu! Badly as Miss Helena has behaved, she is
your own child."

"I repudiate her, sir! Think for a moment of what she has done--and
then think of the religious education that I have given her. Heartless!
Deceitful! The most ignorant creature in the lowest dens of this town
could have done nothing more basely cruel. And this, after years on
years of patient Christian instruction on my part! What is religion?
What is education? I read a horrible book once (I forget who was the
author); it called religion superstition, and education empty form.
I don't know; upon my word I don't know that the book may not--Oh, my
tongue! Why don't I keep a guard over my tongue? Are you a father,
too? Don't interrupt me. Put yourself in my place, and think of it.
Heartless, deceitful, and _my_ daughter. Give me the pocketbook; I want
to see which memorandum comes first."

He had now wrought himself into a state of excitement, which relieved
his spirits of the depression that had weighed on them up to this time.
His harmless vanity, always, as I suspect, a latent quality in
his kindly nature, had already restored his confidence. With a
self-sufficient smile he consulted his own unintelligible entries, and
made his own wild discoveries.

"Ah, yes; 'M' stands for Minister; I come first. Am I to blame? Am
I--God forgive me my many sins--am I heartless? Am I deceitful?"

"My good friend, not even your enemies could say that!"

"Thank you. Who comes next?" He consulted the book again. "Her mother,
her sainted mother, comes next. People say she is like her mother. Was
my wife heartless? Was the angel of my life deceitful?"

("That," I thought to myself, "is exactly what your wife was--and
exactly what reappears in your wife's child.")

"Where does her wickedness come from?" he went on. "Not from her mother;
not from me; not from a neglected education." He suddenly stepped up
to me and laid his hands on my shoulders; his voice dropped to hoarse,
moaning, awestruck tones. "Shall I tell you what it is? A possession of
the devil."

It was so evidently desirable to prevent any continuation of such
a train of thought as this, that I could feel no hesitation in
interrupting him.

"Will you hear what I have to say?" I asked bluntly.

His humor changed again; he made me a low bow, and went back to his
chair. "I will hear you with pleasure," he answered politely. "You
are the most eloquent man I know, with one exception--myself. Of
course--myself."

"It is mere waste of time," I continued, "to regret the excellent
education which your daughter has misused." Making that reply, I was
tempted to add another word of truth. All education is at the mercy of
two powerful counter-influences: the influence of temperament, and the
influence of circumstances. But this was philosophy. How could I expect
him to submit to philosophy? "What we know of Miss Helena," I went on,
"must be enough for us. She has plotted, and she means to succeed. Stop
her."

"Just my idea!" he declared firmly. "I refuse my consent to that
abominable marriage."

In the popular phrase, I struck while the iron was hot. "You must do
more than that, sir," I told him.

His vanity suddenly took the alarm--I was leading him rather too
undisguisedly. He handed his book back to me. "You will find," he said
loftily, "that I have put it all down there."

I pretended to find it, and read an imaginary entry to this effect:
"After what she has already done, Helena is capable of marrying in
defiance of my wishes and commands. This must be considered and provided
against." So far, I had succeeded in flattering him. But when (thinking
of his paternal authority) I alluded next to his daughter's age, his
eyes rested on me with a look of downright terror.

"No more of that!" he said. "I won't talk of the girls' ages even with
you."

What did he mean? It was useless to ask. I went on with the matter in
hand--still deliberately speaking to him, as I might have spoken to
a man with an intellect as clear as my own. In my experience, this
practice generally stimulates a weak intelligence to do its best. We
all know how children receive talk that is lowered, or books that are
lowered, to their presumed level. "I shall take it for granted," I
continued, "that Miss Helena is still under your lawful authority. She
can only arrive at her ends by means of a runaway marriage. In that
case, much depends on the man. You told me you couldn't help liking him.
This was, of course, before you knew of the infamous manner in which he
has behaved. You must have changed your opinion now."

He seemed to be at a loss how to reply. "I am afraid," he said, "the
young man was drawn into it by Helena."

Here was Miss Jillgall's apology for Philip Dunboyne repeated in other
words. Despising and detesting the fellow as I did, I was forced to
admit to myself that he must be recommended by personal attractions
which it would be necessary to reckon with. I tried to get some more
information from Mr. Gracedieu.

"The excuse you have just made for him," I resumed, "implies that he is
a weak man; easily persuaded, easily led."

The Minister answered by nodding his head.

"Such weakness as that," I persisted, "is a vice in itself. It has led
already, sir, to the saddest results."

He admitted this by another nod.

"I don't wish to shock you, Mr. Gracedieu; but I must recommend
employing the means that present themselves. You must practice on this
man's weakness, for the sake of the good that may come of it. I hear he
is in London with his father. Try the strong influence, and write to
his father. There is another reason besides for doing this. It is quite
possible that the truth has been concealed from Mr. Dunboyne the elder.
Take care that he is informed of what has really happened. Are you
looking for pen, ink, and paper? Let me offer you the writing materials
which I use in traveling."

I placed them before him. He took up the pen; he arranged the paper; he
was eager to begin.

After writing a few words, he stopped--reflected--tried again--stopped
again--tore up the little that he had done--and began a new letter,
ending in the same miserable result. It was impossible to witness
his helplessness, to see how pitiably patient he was over his own
incapacity, and to let the melancholy spectacle go on. I proposed to
write the letter; authenticating it, of course, by his signature. When
he allowed me to take the pen, he turned away his face, ashamed to let
me see what he suffered. Was this the same man, whose great nature had
so nobly asserted itself in the condemned cell? Poor mortality!

The letter was easily written.

I had only to inform Mr. Dunboyne of his son's conduct; repeating, in
the plainest language that I could use, what Miss Jillgall had related
to me. Arrived at the conclusion, I contrived to make Mr. Gracedieu
express himself in these strong terms: "I protest against the marriage
in justice to you, sir, as well as to myself. We can neither of us
content to be accomplices in an act of domestic treason of the basest
kind."

In silence, the Minister read the letter, and attached his signature to
it. In silence, he rose and took my arm. I asked if he wished to go to
his room. He only replied by a sign. I offered to sit with him, and try
to cheer him. Gratefully, he pressed my hand: gently, he put me back
from the door. Crushed by the miserable discovery of the decay of his
own faculties! What could I do? what could I say? Nothing!


Miss Jillgall was in the drawing-room. With the necessary explanations,
I showed her the letter. She read it with breathless interest. "It
terrifies one to think how much depends on old Mr. Dunboyne," she said.
"You know him. What sort of man is he?"

I could only assure her (after what I remembered of his letter to me)
that he was a man whom we could depend upon.

Miss Jillgall possessed treasures of information to which I could lay
no claim. Mr. Dunboyne, she told me, was a scholar, and a writer, and a
rich man. His views on marriage were liberal in the extreme. Let his
son find good principles, good temper, and good looks, in a wife, and he
would promise to find the money.

"I get these particulars," said Miss Jillgall, "from dear Euneece. They
are surely encouraging? That Helena may carry out Mr. Dunboyne's views
in her personal appearance is, I regret to say, what I can't deny.
But as to the other qualifications, how hopeful is the prospect! Good
principles, and good temper? Ha! ha! Helena has the principles of
Jezebel, and the temper of Lady Macbeth."

After dashing off this striking sketch of character, the fair artist
asked to look at my letter again, and observed that the address was
wanting. "I can set this right for you," she resumed, "thanks, as
before, to my sweet Euneece. And (don't be in a hurry) I can make myself
useful in another way. Oh, how I do enjoy making myself useful! If
you trust your letter to the basket in the hall, Helena's lovely
eyes--capable of the meanest conceivable actions--are sure to take a
peep at the address. In that case, do you think your letter would get to
London? I am afraid you detect a faint infusion of spitefulness in that
question. Oh, for shame! I'll post the letter myself."



CHAPTER XXXVII. THE SHAMELESS SISTER.

For some reason, which my unassisted penetration was unable to discover,
Miss Helena Gracedieu kept out of my way.

At dinner, on the day of my arrival, and at breakfast on the next
morning, she was present of course; ready to make herself agreeable in
a modest way, and provided with the necessary supply of cheerful
small-talk. But the meal having come to an end, she had her domestic
excuse ready, and unostentatiously disappeared like a well-bred young
lady. I never met her on the stairs, never found myself intruding on
her in the drawing-room, never caught her getting out of my way in the
garden. As much at a loss for an explanation of these mysteries as I
was, Miss Jillgall's interest in my welfare led her to caution me in a
vague and general way.

"Take my word for it, dear Mr. Governor, she has some design on you.
Will you allow an insignificant old maid to offer a suggestion? Oh,
thank you; I will venture to advise. Please look back at your experience
of the very worst female prisoner you ever had to deal with--and be
guided accordingly if Helena catches you at a private interview."

In less than half an hour afterward, Helena caught me. I was writing
in my room, when the maidservant came in with a message: "Miss
Helena's compliments, sir, and would you please spare her half an hour,
downstairs?"

My first excuse was of course that I was engaged. This was disposed of
by a second message, provided beforehand, no doubt, for an anticipated
refusal: "Miss Helena wished me to say, sir, that her time is your
time." I was still obstinate; I pleaded next that my day was filled up.
A third message had evidently been prepared, even for this emergency:
"Miss Helena will regret, sir, having the pleasure deferred, but she
will leave you to make your own appointment for to-morrow." Persistency
so inveterate as this led to a result which Mr. Gracedieu's cautious
daughter had not perhaps contemplated: it put me on my guard. There
seemed to be a chance, to say the least of it, that I might serve
Eunice's interests if I discovered what the enemy had to say. I locked
up my writing--declared myself incapable of putting Miss Helena to
needless inconvenience--and followed the maid to the lower floor of the
house.

The room to which I was conducted proved to be empty. I looked round me.

If I had been told that a man lived there who was absolutely indifferent
to appearances, I should have concluded that his views were faithfully
represented by his place of abode. The chairs and tables reminded me of
a railway waiting-room. The shabby little bookcase was the mute record
of a life indifferent to literature. The carpet was of that dreadful
drab color, still the cherished favorite of the average English mind, in
spite of every protest that can be entered against it, on behalf of Art.
The ceiling, recently whitewashed; made my eyes ache when they looked at
it. On either side of the window, flaccid green curtains hung helplessly
with nothing to loop them up. The writing-desk and the paper-case,
viewed as specimens of woodwork, recalled the ready-made bedrooms on
show in cheap shops. The books, mostly in slate-colored bindings, were
devoted to the literature which is called religious; I only discovered
three worldly publications among them--Domestic Cookery, Etiquette for
Ladies, and Hints on the Breeding of Poultry. An ugly little clock,
ticking noisily in a black case, and two candlesticks of base
metal placed on either side of it, completed the ornaments on the
chimney-piece. Neither pictures nor prints hid the barrenness of the
walls. I saw no needlework and no flowers. The one object in the place
which showed any pretensions to beauty was a looking-glass in an elegant
gilt frame--sacred to vanity, and worthy of the office that it filled.
Such was Helena Gracedieu's sitting-room. I really could not help
thinking: How like her!

She came in with a face perfectly adapted to the circumstances--pleased
and smiling; amiably deferential, in consideration of the claims of her
father's guest--and, to my surprise, in some degree suggestive of one of
those incorrigible female prisoners, to whom Miss Jillgall had referred
me when she offered a word of advice.

"How kind of you to come so soon! Excuse my receiving you in my
housekeeping-room; we shall not be interrupted here. Very plainly
furnished, is it not? I dislike ostentation and display. Ornaments are
out of place in a room devoted to domestic necessities. I hate domestic
necessities. You notice the looking-glass? It's a present. I should
never have put such a thing up. Perhaps my vanity excuses it."

She pointed the last remark by a look at herself in the glass; using it,
while she despised it. Yes: there was a handsome face, paying her its
reflected compliment--but not so well matched as it might have been by
a handsome figure. Her feet were too large; her shoulders were too
high; the graceful undulations of a well-made girl were absent when she
walked; and her bosom was, to my mind, unduly developed for her time of
life.

She sat down by me with her back to the light. Happening to be opposite
to the window, I offered her the advantage of a clear view of my face.
She waited for me, and I waited for her--and there was an awkward pause
before we spoke. She set the example.

"Isn't it curious?" she remarked. "When two people have something
particular to say to each other, and nothing to hinder them, they never
seem to know how to say it. You are the oldest, sir. Why don't you
begin?"

"Because I have nothing particular to say."

"In plain words, you mean that I must begin?"

"If you please."

"Very well. I want to know whether I have given you (and Miss Jillgall,
of course) as much time as you want, and as many opportunities as you
could desire?"

"Pray go on, Miss Helena."

"Have I not said enough already?"

"Not enough, I regret to say, to convey your meaning to me."

She drew her chair a little further away from me. "I am sadly
disappointed," she said. "I had such a high opinion of your perfect
candor. I thought to myself: There is such a striking expression of
frankness in his face. Another illusion gone! I hope you won't think I
am offended, if I say a bold word. I am only a young girl, to be sure;
but I am not quite such a fool as you take me for. Do you really think
I don't know that Miss Jillgall has been telling you everything that is
bad about me; putting every mistake that I have made, every fault that
I have committed, in the worst possible point of view? And you have
listened to her--quite naturally! And you are prejudiced, strongly
prejudiced, against me--what else could you be, under the circumstances?
I don't complain; I have purposely kept out of your way, and out of Miss
Jillgall's way; in short, I have afforded you every facility, as the
prospectuses say. I only want to know if my turn has come at last. Once
more, have I given you time enough, and opportunities enough?"

"A great deal more than enough."

"Do you mean that you have made up your mind about me without stopping
to think?"

"That is exactly what I mean. An act of treachery, Miss Helena, _is_
an act of treachery; no honest person need hesitate to condemn it. I am
sorry you sent for me."

I got up to go. With an ironical gesture of remonstrance, she signed to
me to sit down again.

"Must I remind you, dear sir, of our famous native virtue? Fair play is
surely due to a young person who has nobody to take her part. You talked
of treachery just how. I deny the treachery. Please give me a hearing."

I returned to my chair.

"Or would you prefer waiting," she went out, "till my sister comes here
later in the day, and continues what Miss Jillgall has begun, with the
great advantage of being young and nice-looking?"

When the female mind gets into this state, no wise man answers the
female questions.

"Am I to take silence as meaning Go on?" Miss Helena inquired.

I begged her to interpret my silence in the sense most agreeable to
herself.

This naturally encouraged her. She made a proposal:

"Do you mind changing places, sir?"

"Just as you like, Miss Helena."

We changed chairs; the light now fell full on her face. Had she
deliberately challenged me to look into her secret mind if I could?
Anything like the stark insensibility of that young girl to every
refinement of feeling, to every becoming doubt of herself, to every
customary timidity of her age and sex in the presence of a man who had
not disguised his unfavorable opinion of her, I never met with in all my
experience of the world and of women.

"I wish to be quite mistress of myself," she explained; "your face, for
some reason which I really don't know, irritates me. The fact is, I have
great pride in keeping my temper. Please make allowances. Now about Miss
Jillgall. I suppose she told you how my sister first met with Philip
Dunboyne?"

"Yes."

"She also mentioned, perhaps, that he was a highly-cultivated man?"

"She did."

"Now we shall get on. When Philip came to our town here, and saw me for
the first time--Do you object to my speaking familiarly of him, by his
Christian name?"

"In the case of any one else in your position, Miss Helena, I should
venture to call it bad taste."

I was provoked into saying that. It failed entirely as a well-meant
effort in the way of implied reproof. Miss Helena smiled.

"You grant me a liberty which you would not concede to another girl."
That was how she viewed it. "We are getting on better already. To return
to what I was saying. When Philip first saw me--I have it from himself,
mind--he felt that I should have been his choice, if he had met with me
before he met with my sister. Do you blame him?"

"If you will take my advice," I said, "you will not inquire too closely
into my opinion of Mr. Philip Dunboyne."

"Perhaps you don't wish me to say anymore?" she suggested.

"On the contrary, pray go on, if you like."

After that concession, she was amiability itself. "Oh, yes," she assured
me, "that's easily done." And she went on accordingly: "Philip having
informed me of the state of his affections, I naturally followed his
example. In fact, we exchanged confessions. Our marriage engagement
followed as a matter of course. Do you blame me?"

"I will wait till you have done."

"I have no more to say."

She made that amazing reply with such perfect composure, that I began
to fear there must have been some misunderstanding between us. "Is that
really all you have to say for yourself?" I persisted.

Her patience with me was most exemplary. She lowered herself to my
level. Not trusting to words only on this occasion, she (so to say) beat
her meaning into my head by gesticulating on her fingers, as if she was
educating a child.

"Philip and I," she began, "are the victims of an accident, which kept
us apart when we ought to have met together--we are not responsible
for an accident." She impressed this on me by touching her forefinger.
"Philip and I fell in love with each other at first sight--we are not
responsible for the feelings implanted in our natures by an all-wise
Providence." She assisted me in understanding this by touching her
middle finger. "Philip and I owe a duty to each other, and accept a
responsibility under those circumstances--the responsibility of getting
married." A touch on her third finger, and an indulgent bow, announced
that the lesson was ended. "I am not a clever man like you," she
modestly acknowledged, "but I ask you to help us, when you next see my
father, with some confidence. You know exactly what to say to him, by
this time. Nothing has been forgotten."

"Pardon me," I said, "a person has been forgotten."

"Indeed? What person?"

"Your sister."

A little perplexed at first, Miss Helena reflected, and recovered
herself.

"Ah, yes," she said; "I was afraid I might be obliged to trouble you
for an explanation--I see it now. You are shocked (very properly) when
feelings of enmity exist between near relations; and you wish to be
assured that I bear no malice toward Eunice. She is violent, she is
sulky, she is stupid, she is selfish; and she cruelly refuses to live in
the same house with me. Make your mind easy, sir, I forgive my sister."

Let me not attempt to disguise it--Miss Helena Gracedieu confounded me.

Ordinary audacity is one of those forms of insolence which mature
experience dismisses with contempt. This girl's audacity struck down
all resistance, for one shocking reason: it was unquestionably sincere.
Strong conviction of her own virtue stared at me in her proud and daring
eyes. At that time, I was not aware of what I have learned since. The
horrid hardening of her moral sense had been accomplished by herself.
In her diary, there has been found the confession of a secret course of
reading--with supplementary reflections flowing from it, which need only
to be described as worthy of their source.

A person capable of repentance and reform would, in her place, have
seen that she had disgusted me. Not a suspicion of this occurred to Miss
Helena. "I see you are embarrassed," she remarked, "and I am at no loss
to account for it. You are too polite to acknowledge that I have not
made a friend of you yet. Oh, I mean to do it!"

"No," I said, "I think not."

"We shall see," she replied. "Sooner or later, you will find yourself
saying a kind word to my father for Philip and me." She rose, and took
a turn in the room--and stopped, eying me attentively. "Are you thinking
of Eunice?" she asked.

"Yes."

"She has your sympathy, I suppose?"

"My heart-felt sympathy."

"I needn't ask how I stand in your estimation, after that. Pray express
yourself freely. Your looks confess it--you view me with a feeling of
aversion."

"I view you with a feeling of horror."

The exasperating influences of her language, her looks, and her tones
would, as I venture to think, have got to the end of another man's
self-control before this. Anyway, she had at last irritated me into
speaking as strongly as I felt. What I said had been so plainly
(perhaps so rudely) expressed, that misinterpretation of it seemed to be
impossible. She mistook me, nevertheless. The most merciless disclosure
of the dreary side of human destiny is surely to be found in the failure
of words, spoken or written, so to answer their purpose that we can
trust them, in our attempts to communicate with each other. Even when
he seems to be connected, by the nearest and dearest relations, with his
fellow-mortals, what a solitary creature, tried by the test of sympathy,
the human being really is in the teeming world that he inhabits!
Affording one more example of the impotence of human language to speak
for itself, my misinterpreted words had found their way to the one
sensitive place in Helena Gracedieu's impenetrable nature. She betrayed
it in the quivering and flushing of her hard face, and in the appeal to
the looking-glass which escaped her eyes the next moment. My hasty reply
had roused the idea of a covert insult addressed to her handsome face.
In other words, I had wounded her vanity. Driven by resentment, out came
the secret distrust of me which had been lurking in that cold heart,
from the moment when we first met.

"I inspire you with horror, and Eunice inspires you with compassion,"
she said. "That, Mr. Governor, is not natural."

"May I ask why?"

"You know why."

"No."

"You will have it?"

"I want an explanation, Miss Helena, if that is what you mean."

"Take your explanation, then! You are not the stranger you are said
to be to my sister and to me. Your interest in Eunice is a personal
interest of some kind. I don't pretend to guess what it is. As for
myself, it is plain that somebody else has been setting you against me,
before Miss Jillgall got possession of your private ear."

In alluding to Eunice, she had blundered, strangely enough, on something
like the truth. But when she spoke of herself, the headlong malignity
of her suspicions--making every allowance for the anger that had hurried
her into them--seemed to call for some little protest against a false
assertion. I told her that she was completely mistaken.

"I am completely right," she answered; "I saw it."

"Saw what?"

"Saw you pretending to be a stranger to me."

"When did I do that?"

"You did it when we met at the station."

The reply was too ridiculous for the preservation of any control over my
own sense of humor. It was wrong; but it was inevitable--I laughed. She
looked at me with a fury, revealing a concentration of evil passion in
her which I had not seen yet. I asked her pardon; I begged her to think
a little before she persisted in taking a view of my conduct unworthy of
her, and unjust to myself.

"Unjust to You!" she burst out. "Who are You? A man who has driven your
trade has spies always at his command--yes! and knows how to use them.
You were primed with private information--you had, for all I know, a
stolen photograph of me in your pocket--before ever you came to our
town. Do you still deny it? Oh, sir, why degrade yourself by telling a
lie?"

No such outrage as this had ever been inflicted on me, at any time in my
life. My forbearance must, I suppose, have been more severely tried than
I was aware of myself. With or without excuse for me, I was weak enough
to let a girl's spiteful tongue sting me, and, worse still, to let her
see that I felt it.

"You shall have no second opportunity, Miss Gracedieu, of insulting me."
With that foolish reply, I opened the door violently and went out.

She ran after me, triumphing in having roused the temper of a man old
enough to have been her grandfather, and caught me by the arm. "Your
own conduct has exposed you." (That was literally how she expressed
herself.) "I saw it in your eyes when we met at the station. You, the
stranger--you who allowed poor ignorant me to introduce myself--you knew
me all the time, knew me by sight!"

I shook her hand off with an inconsiderable roughness, humiliating to
remember. "It's false!" I cried. "I knew you by your likeness to your
mother."

The moment the words had passed my lips, I came to my senses again; I
remembered what fatal words they might prove to be, if they reached the
Minister's ears.

Heard only by his daughter, my reply seemed to cool the heat of her
anger in an instant.

"So you knew my mother?" she said. "My father never told us that, when
he spoke of your being such a very old friend of his. Strange, to say
the least of it."

I was wise enough--now when wisdom had come too late--not to attempt to
explain myself, and not to give her an opportunity of saying more.
"We are neither of us in a state of mind," I answered, "to allow this
interview to continue. I must try to recover my composure; and I leave
you to do the same."

In the solitude of my room, I was able to look my position fairly in the
face.

Mr. Gracedieu's wife had come to me, in the long-past time, without her
husband's knowledge. Tempted to a cruel resolve by the maternal triumph
of having an infant of her own, she had resolved to rid herself of the
poor little rival in her husband's fatherly affection, by consigning the
adopted child to the keeping of a charitable asylum. She had dared to
ask me to help her. I had kept the secret of her shameful visit--I can
honestly say, for the Minister's sake. And now, long after time had
doomed those events to oblivion, they were revived--and revived by me.
Thanks to my folly, Mr. Gracedieu's daughter knew what I had concealed
from Mr. Gracedieu himself.

What course did respect for my friend, and respect for myself, counsel
me to take?

I could only see before me a choice of two evils. To wait for
events--with the too certain prospect of a vindictive betrayal of my
indiscretion by Helena Gracedieu. Or to take the initiative into my own
hands, and risk consequences which I might regret to the end of my life,
by making my confession to the Minister.

Before I had decided, somebody knocked at the door. It was the
maid-servant again. Was it possible she had been sent by Helena?

"Another message?"

"Yes, sir. My master wishes to see you."



CHAPTER XXXVIII. THE GIRLS' AGES.

Had the Minister's desire to see me been inspired by his daughter's
betrayal of what I had unfortunately said to her? Although he would
certainly not consent to receive her personally, she would be at liberty
to adopt a written method of communication with him, and the letter
might be addressed in such a manner as to pique his curiosity. If
Helena's vindictive purpose had been already accomplished--and if Mr.
Gracedieu left me no alternative but to present his unworthy wife in her
true character--I can honestly say that I dreaded the consequences, not
as they might affect myself, but as they might affect my unhappy friend
in his enfeebled state of body and mind.

When I entered his room, he was still in bed.

The bed-curtains were so drawn, on the side nearest to the window, as to
keep the light from falling too brightly on his weak eyes. In the shadow
thus thrown on him, it was not possible to see his face plainly enough,
from the open side of the bed, to arrive at any definite conclusion as
to what might be passing in his mind. After having been awake for some
hours during the earlier part of the night, he had enjoyed a long and
undisturbed sleep. "I feel stronger this morning," he said, "and I wish
to speak to you while my mind is clear."

If the quiet tone of his voice was not an assumed tone, he was surely
ignorant of all that had passed between his daughter and myself.

"Eunice will be here soon," he proceeded, "and I ought to explain why I
have sent for her to come and meet you. I have reasons, serious reasons,
mind, for wishing you to compare her personal appearance with Helena's
personal appearance, and then to tell me which of the two, on a fair
comparison, looks the eldest. Pray bear in mind that I attach the
greatest importance to the conclusion at which you may arrive."

He spoke more clearly and collectedly than I had heard him speak yet.

Here and there I detected hesitations and repetitions, which I have
purposely passed over. The substance of what he said to me is all that I
shall present in this place. Careful as I have been to keep my record of
events within strict limits, I have written at a length which I was far
indeed from contemplating when I accepted Mr. Gracedieu's invitation.

Having promised to comply with the strange request which he had
addressed to me, I ventured to remind him of past occasions on which
he had pointedly abstained, when the subject presented itself, from
speaking of the girls' ages. "You have left it to my discretion," I
added, "to decide a question in which you are seriously interested,
relating to your daughters. Have I no excuse for regretting that I have
not been admitted to your confidence a little more freely?"

"You have every excuse," he answered. "But you trouble me all the same.
There was something else that I had to say to you--and your curiosity
gets in the way."

He said this with a sullen emphasis. In my position, the worst of evils
was suspense. I told him that my curiosity could wait; and I begged that
he would relieve his mind of what was pressing on it at the moment.

"Let me think a little," he said.

I waited anxiously for the decision at which he might arrive. Nothing
came of it to justify my misgivings. "Leave what I have in my mind to
ripen in my mind," he said. "The mystery about the girls' ages seems to
irritate you. If I put my good friend's temper to any further trial, he
will be of no use to me. Never mind if my head swims; I'm used to that.
Now listen!"

Strange as the preface was, the explanation that followed was stranger
yet. I offer a shortened and simplified version, giving accurately the
substance of what I heard.

The Minister entered without reserve on the mysterious subject of the
ages. Eunice, he informed me, was nearly two years older than Helena. If
she outwardly showed her superiority of age, any person acquainted with
the circumstances under which the adopted infant had been received into
Mr. Gracedieu's childless household, need only compare the so-called
sisters in after-life, and would thereupon identify the eldest-looking
young lady of the two as the offspring of the woman who had been hanged
for murder. With such a misfortune as this presenting itself as a
possible prospect, the Minister was bound to prevent the girls from
ignorantly betraying each other by allusions to their ages and their
birthdays. After much thought, he had devised a desperate means of
meeting the difficulty--already made known, as I am told, for the
information of strangers who may read the pages that have gone before
mine. My friend's plan of proceeding had, by the nature of it, exposed
him to injurious comment, to embarrassing questions, and to doubts and
misconceptions, all patiently endured in consideration of the security
that had been attained. Proud of his explanation, Mr. Gracedieu's vanity
called upon me to acknowledge that my curiosity had been satisfied, and
my doubts completely set at rest.

No: my obstinate common sense was not reduced to submission, even yet.
Looking back over a lapse of seventeen years, I asked what had happened,
in that long interval, to justify the anxieties which still appeared to
trouble my friend.

This time, my harmless curiosity could be gratified by a reply expressed
in three words--nothing had happened.

Then what, in Heaven's name, was the Minister afraid of?

His voice dropped to a whisper. He said: "I am afraid of the women."

Who were the women?

Two of them actually proved to be the servants employed in Mr.
Gracedieu's house, at the bygone time when he had brought the child home
with him from the prison! To point out the absurdity of the reasons
that he gave for fearing what female curiosity might yet attempt, if
circumstances happened to encourage it, would have been a mere waste of
words. Dismissing the subject, I next ascertained that the Minister's
doubts extended even to the two female warders, who had been appointed
to watch the murderess in turn, during her last days in prison. I easily
relieved his mind in this case. One of the warders was dead. The
other had married a farmer in Australia. Had we exhausted the list of
suspected persons yet? No: there was one more left; and the Minister
declared that he had first met with her in my official residence, at the
time when I was Governor of the prison.

"She presented herself to me by name," he said; "and she spoke rudely.
A Miss--" He paused to consult his memory, and this time (thanks perhaps
to his night's rest) his memory answered the appeal. "I have got it!" he
cried--"Miss Chance."

My friend had interested me in his imaginary perils at last. It was just
possible that he might have a formidable person to deal with now.

During my residence at Florence, the Chaplain and I had taken many a
retrospective look (as old men will) at past events in our lives. My
former colleague spoke of the time when he had performed clerical duty
for his friend, the rector of a parish church in London. Neither he
nor I had heard again of the "Miss Chance" of our disagreeable prison
experience, whom he had married to the dashing Dutch gentleman, Mr.
Tenbruggen. We could only wonder what had become of that mysterious
married pair.

Mr. Gracedieu being undoubtedly ignorant of the woman's marriage, it was
not easy to say what the consequence might be, in his excitable state,
if I informed him of it. He would, in all probability, conclude that I
knew more of the woman than he did. I decided on keeping my own counsel,
for the present at least.

Passing at once, therefore, to the one consideration of any importance,
I endeavored to find out whether Mr. Gracedieu and Mrs. Tenbruggen had
met, or had communicated with each other in any way, during the long
period of separation that had taken place between the Minister and
myself. If he had been so unlucky as to offend her, she was beyond all
doubt an enemy to be dreaded. Apart, however, from a misfortune of this
kind, she would rank, in my opinion, with the other harmless objects of
Mr. Gracedieu's distrust.

In making my inquiries, I found that I had an obstacle to contend with.

While he felt the renovating influence of the repose that he enjoyed,
the Minister had been able to think and to express himself with less
difficulty than usual. But the reserves of strength, on which the useful
exercise of his memory depended, began to fail him as the interview
proceeded. He distinctly recollected that "something unpleasant had
passed between that audacious woman and himself." But at what date--and
whether by word of mouth or by correspondence--was more than his memory
could now recall. He believed he was not mistaken in telling me that he
"had been in two minds about her." At one time, he was satisfied that he
had taken wise measures for his own security, if she attempted to annoy
him. But there was another and a later time, when doubts and fears had
laid hold of him again. If I wanted to know how this had happened, he
fancied it was through a dream; and if I asked what the dream was, he
could only beg and pray that I would spare his poor head.

Unwilling even yet to submit unconditionally to defeat, it occurred to
me to try a last experiment on my friend, without calling for any mental
effort on his own part. The "Miss Chance" of former days might, by a
bare possibility, have written to him. I asked accordingly if he was in
the habit of keeping his letters, and if he would allow me (when he had
rested a little) to lay them open before him, so that he could look at
the signatures. "You might find the lost recollection in that way," I
suggested, "at the bottom of one of your letters."

He was in that state of weariness, poor fellow, in which a man will do
anything for the sake of peace. Pointing to a cabinet in his room,
he gave me a key taken from a little basket on his bed. "Look for
yourself," he said. After some hesitation--for I naturally recoiled
from examining another man's correspondence--I decided on opening the
cabinet, at any rate.

The letters--a large collection--were, to my relief, all neatly folded,
and indorsed with the names of the writers. I could run harmlessly
through bundle after bundle in search of the one name that I wanted,
and still respect the privacy of the letters. My perseverance deserved
a reward--and failed to get it. The name I wanted steadily eluded my
search. Arriving at the upper shelf of the cabinet, I found it so high
that I could barely reach it with my hand. Instead of getting more
letters to look over, I pulled down two newspapers.

One of them was an old copy of the _Times_, dating back as far as
the 13th December, 1858. It was carefully folded, longwise, with the
title-page uppermost. On the first column, at the left-hand side of the
sheet, appeared the customary announcements of Births. A mark with a
blue pencil, against one of the advertisements, attracted my attention.
I read these lines:

"On the 10th inst., the wife of the Rev. Abel Gracedieu, of a daughter."

The second newspaper bore a later date, and contained nothing that
interested me. I naturally assumed that the advertisement in the _Times_
had been inserted at the desire of Mrs. Gracedieu; and, after all that
I had heard, there was little difficulty in attributing the curious
omission of the place in which the child had been born to the caution of
her husband. If Mrs. Tenbruggen (then Miss Chance) had happened to see
the advertisement in the great London newspaper, Mr. Gracedieu might
yet have good reason to congratulate himself on his prudent method of
providing against mischievous curiosity.

I turned toward the bed and looked at him. His eyes were closed. Was he
sleeping? Or was he trying to remember what he had desired to say to me,
when the demands which I made on his memory had obliged him to wait for
a later opportunity?

Either way, there was something that quickened my sympathies, in the
spectacle of his helpless repose. It suggested to me personal reasons
for his anxieties, which he had not mentioned, and which I had not
thought of, up to this time. If the discovery that he dreaded took
place, his household would be broken up, and his position as pastor
would suffer in the estimation of the flock. His own daughter would
refuse to live under the same roof with the daughter of an infamous
woman. Popular opinion, among his congregation, judging a man who had
passed off the child of other parents as his own, would find that man
guilty of an act of deliberate deceit.

Still oppressed by reflections which pointed to the future in this
discouraging way, I was startled by a voice outside the door--a sweet,
sad voice--saying, "May I come in?"

The Minister's eyes opened instantly: he raised himself in his bed.

"Eunice, at last!" he cried. "Let her in."



CHAPTER XXXIX. THE ADOPTED CHILD

I opened the door.

Eunice passed me with the suddenness almost of a flash of light. When I
turned toward the bed, her arms were round her father's neck. "Oh, poor
papa, how ill you look!" Commonplace expressions of fondness, and no
more; but the tone gave them a charm that subdued me. Never had I felt
so indulgent toward Mr. Gracedieu's unreasonable fears as when I saw him
in the embrace of his adopted daughter. She had already reminded me
of the bygone day when a bright little child had sat on my knee and
listened to the ticking of my watch.

The Minister gently lifted her head from his breast. "My darling,"
he said, "you don't see my old friend. Love him, and look up to him,
Eunice. He will be your friend, too, when I am gone."

She came to me and offered her cheek to be kissed. It was sadly pale,
poor soul--and I could guess why. But her heart was now full of her
father. "Do you think he is seriously ill?" she whispered. What I ought
to have said I don't know. Her eyes, the sweetest, truest, loveliest
eyes I ever saw in a human face, were pleading with me. Let my enemies
make the worst of it, if they like--I did certainly lie. And if I
deserved my punishment, I got it; the poor child believed me! "Now I
am happier," she said, gratefully. "Only to hear your voice seems to
encourage me. On our way here, Selina did nothing but talk of you. She
told me I shouldn't have time to feel afraid of the great man; he would
make me fond of him directly. I said, 'Are you fond of him?' She said,
'Madly in love with him, my dear.' My little friend really thinks you
like her, and is very proud of it. There are some people who call her
ugly. I hope you don't agree with them?"

I believe I should have lied again, if Mr. Gracedieu had not called me
to the bedside.

"How does she strike you?" he whispered, eagerly. "Is it too soon to ask
if she shows her age in her face?"

"Neither in her face nor her figure," I answered: "it astonishes me
that you can ever have doubted it. No stranger, judging by personal
appearance, could fail to make the mistake of thinking Helena the oldest
of the two."

He looked fondly at Eunice. "Her figure seems to bear out what you say,"
he went on. "Almost childish, isn't it?"

I could not agree to that. Slim, supple, simply graceful in every
movement, Eunice's figure, in the charm of first youth, only waited its
perfect development. Most men, looking at her as she stood at the other
end of the room with her back toward us, would have guessed her age to
be sixteen.

Finding that I failed to agree with him, Mr. Gracedieu's misgivings
returned. "You speak very confidently," he said, "considering that you
have not seen the girls together. Think what a dreadful blow it would be
to me if you made a mistake."

I declared, with perfect sincerity, that there was no fear of a mistake.
The bare idea of making the proposed comparison was hateful to me. If
Helena and I had happened to meet at that moment, I should have turned
away from her by instinct--she would have disturbed my impressions of
Eunice.

The Minister signed to me to move a little nearer to him. "I must say
it," he whispered, "and I am afraid of her hearing me. Is there anything
in her face that reminds you of her miserable mother?"

I had hardly patience to answer the question: it was simply
preposterous. Her hair was by many shades darker than her mother's hair;
her eyes were of a different color. There was an exquisite tenderness
and sincerity in their expression--made additionally beautiful, to my
mind, by a gentle, uncomplaining sadness. It was impossible even to
think of the eyes of the murderess when I looked at her child.
Eunice's lower features, again, had none of her mother's regularity
of proportion. Her smile, simple and sweet, and soon passing away,
was certainly not an inherited smile on the maternal side. Whether she
resembled her father, I was unable to conjecture--having never seen him.
The one thing certain was, that not the faintest trace, in feature or
expression, of Eunice's mother was to be seen in Eunice herself. Of the
two girls, Helena--judging by something in the color of her hair, and by
something in the shade of her complexion--might possibly have suggested,
in those particulars only, a purely accidental resemblance to my
terrible prisoner of past times.

The revival of Mr. Gracedieu's spirits indicated a temporary change
only, and was already beginning to pass away. The eyes which had looked
lovingly at Eunice began to look languidly now: his head sank on the
pillow with a sigh of weak content. "My pleasure has been almost too
much for me," he said. "Leave me for a while to rest, and get used to
it."

Eunice kissed his forehead--and we left the room.



CHAPTER XL. THE BRUISED HEART.

When we stepped out on the landing, I observed that my companion paused.
She looked at the two flights of stairs below us before she descended
them. It occurred to me that there must be somebody in the house whom
she was anxious to avoid.

Arrived at the lower hall, she paused again, and proposed in a whisper
that we should go into the garden. As we advanced along the backward
division of the hall, I saw her eyes turn distrustfully toward the
door of the room in which Helena had received me. At last, my slow
perceptions felt with her and understood her. Eunice's sensitive nature
recoiled from a chance meeting with the wretch who had laid waste all
that had once been happy and hopeful in that harmless young life.

"Will you come with me to the part of the garden that I am fondest of?"
she asked.

I offered her my arm. She led me in silence to a rustic seat, placed
under the shade of a mulberry tree. I saw a change in her face as we sat
down--a tender and beautiful change. At that moment the girl's heart
was far away from me. There was some association with this corner of the
garden, on which I felt that I must not intrude.

"I was once very happy here," she said. "When the time of the heartache
came soon after, I was afraid to look at the old tree and the bench
under it. But that is all over now. I like to remember the hours that
were once dear to me, and to see the place that recalls them. Do you
know who I am thinking of? Don't be afraid of distressing me. I never
cry now."

"My dear child, I have heard your sad story--but I can't trust myself to
speak of it."

"Because you are so sorry for me?"

"No words can say how sorry I am!"

"But you are not angry with Philip?"

"Not angry! My poor dear, I am afraid to tell you how angry I am with
him."

"Oh, no! You mustn't say that. If you wish to be kind to me--and I am
sure you do wish it--don't think bitterly of Philip."

When I remember that the first feeling she roused in me was nothing
worthier of a professing Christian than astonishment, I drop in my own
estimation to the level of a savage. "Do you really mean," I was base
enough to ask, "that you have forgiven him?"

She said, gently: "How could I help forgiving him?"

The man who could have been blessed with such love as this, and who
could have cast it away from him, can have been nothing but an idiot.
On that ground--though I dared not confess it to Eunice--I forgave him,
too.

"Do I surprise you?" she asked simply. "Perhaps love will bear any
humiliation. Or perhaps I am only a poor weak creature. You don't know
what a comfort it was to me to keep the few letters that I received from
Philip. When I heard that he had gone away, I gave his letters the kiss
that bade him good-by. That was the time, I think, when my poor
bruised heart got used to the pain; I began to feel that there was one
consolation still left for me--I might end in forgiving him. Why do I
tell you all this? I think you must have bewitched me. Is this really
the first time I have seen you?"

She put her little trembling hand into mine; I lifted it to my lips, and
kissed it. Sorely was I tempted to own that I had pitied and loved her
in her infancy. It was almost on my lips to say: "I remember you an
easily-pleased little creature, amusing yourself with the broken toys
which were once the playthings of my own children." I believe I should
have said it, if I could have trusted myself to speak composedly to
her. This was not to be done. Old as I was, versed as I was in the hard
knowledge of how to keep the mask on in the hour of need, this was not
to be done.

Still trying to understand that I was little better than a stranger to
her, and still bent on finding the secret of the sympathy that united
us, Eunice put a strange question to me.

"When you were young yourself," she said, "did you know what it was to
love, and to be loved--and then to lose it all?"

It is not given to many men to marry the woman who has been the object
of their first love. My early life had been darkened by a sad story;
never confided to any living creature; banished resolutely from my own
thoughts. For forty years past, that part of my buried self had lain
quiet in its grave--and the chance touch of an innocent hand had raised
the dead, and set us face to face again! Did I know what it was to
love, and to be loved, and then to lose it all? "Too well, my child; too
well!"

That was all I could say to her. In the last days of my life, I shrank
from speaking of it. When I had first felt that calamity, and had
felt it most keenly, I might have given an answer worthier of me, and
worthier of her.

She dropped my hand, and sat by me in silence, thinking. Had I--without
meaning it, God knows!--had I disappointed her?

"Did you expect me to tell my own sad story," I said, "as frankly and as
trustfully as you have told yours?"

"Oh, don't think that! I know what an effort it was to you to answer me
at all. Yes, indeed! I wonder whether I may ask something. The sorrow
you have just told me of is not the only one--is it? You have had other
troubles?"

"Many of them."

"There are times," she went on, "when one can't help thinking of one's
own miserable self. I try to be cheerful, but those times come now and
then."

She stopped, and looked at me with a pale fear confessing itself in her
face.

"You know who Selina is?" she resumed. "My friend! The only friend I
had, till you came here."

I guessed that she was speaking of the quaint, kindly little woman,
whose ugly surname had been hitherto the only name known to me.

"Selina has, I daresay, told you that I have been ill," she continued,
"and that I am staying in the country for the benefit of my health."

It was plain that she had something to say to me, far more important
than this, and that she was dwelling on trifles to gain time and
courage. Hoping to help her, I dwelt on trifles, too; asking commonplace
questions about the part of the country in which she was staying. She
answered absently--then, little by little, impatiently. The one poor
proof of kindness that I could offer, now, was to say no more.

"Do you know what a strange creature I am?" she broke out. "Shall I make
you angry with me? or shall I make you laugh at me? What I have shrunk
from confessing to Selina--what I dare not confess to my father--I must,
and will, confess to You."

There was a look of horror in her face that alarmed me. I drew her to
me so that she could rest her head on my shoulder. My own agitation
threatened to get the better of me. For the first time since I had seen
this sweet girl, I found myself thinking of the blood that ran in her
veins, and of the nature of the mother who had borne her.

"Did you notice how I behaved upstairs?" she said. "I mean when we left
my father, and came out on the landing."

It was easily recollected; I begged her to go on.

"Before I went downstairs," she proceeded, "you saw me look and listen.
Did you think I was afraid of meeting some person? and did you guess who
it was I wanted to avoid?"

"I guessed that--and I understood you."

"No! You are not wicked enough to understand me. Will you do me a favor?
I want you to look at me."

It was said seriously. She lifted her head for a moment, so that I could
examine her face.

"Do you see anything," she asked, "which makes you fear that I am not in
my right mind?"

"Good God! how can you ask such a horrible question?"

She laid her head back on my shoulder with a sad little sigh of
resignation. "I ought to have known better," she said; "there is no such
easy way out of it as that. Tell me--is there one kind of wickedness
more deceitful than another? Can it be hid in a person for years
together, and show itself when a time of suffering--no; I mean when a
sense of injury comes? Did you ever see that, when you were master in
the prison?"

I had seen it--and, after a moment's doubt, I said I had seen it.

"Did you pity those poor wretches?"

"Certainly! They deserved pity."

"I am one of them!" she said. "Pity _me_. If Helena looks at me--if
Helena speaks to me--if I only see Helena by accident--do you know what
she does? She tempts me! Tempts me to do dreadful things! Tempts me--"
The poor child threw her arms round my neck, and whispered the next
fatal words in my ear.

The mother! Prepared as I was for the accursed discovery, the horror of
it shook me.

She left me, and started to her feet. The inherited energy showed itself
in furious protest against the inherited evil. "What does it mean?" she
cried. "I'll submit to anything. I'll bear my hard lot patiently, if you
will only tell me what it means. Where does this horrid transformation
of me out of myself come from? Look at my good father. In all this world
there is no man so perfect as he is. And oh, how he has taught me! there
isn't a single good thing that I have not learned from him since I was
a little child. Did you ever hear him speak of my mother? You must have
heard him. My mother was an angel. I could never be worthy of her at my
best--but I have tried! I have tried! The wickedest girl in the world
doesn't have worse thoughts than the thoughts that have come to me.
Since when? Since Helena--oh, how can I call her by her name as if I
still loved her? Since my sister--can she be my sister, I ask myself
sometimes! Since my enemy--there's the word for her--since my enemy took
Philip away from me. What does it mean? I have asked in my prayers--and
have got no answer. I ask you. What does it mean? You must tell me! You
shall tell me! What does it mean?"

Why did I not try to calm her? I had vainly tried to calm her--I who
knew who her mother was, and what her mother had been.

At last, she had forced the sense of my duty on me. The simplest way
of calming her was to put her back in the place by my side that she had
left. It was useless to reason with her, it was impossible to answer
her. I had my own idea of the one way in which I might charm Eunice back
to her sweeter self.

"Let us talk of Philip," I said.

The fierce flush on her face softened, the swelling trouble of her bosom
began to subside, as that dearly-loved name passed my lips! But there
was some influence left in her which resisted me.

"No," she said; "we had better not talk of him."

"Why not?"

"I have lost all my courage. If you speak of Philip, you will make me
cry."

I drew her nearer to me. If she had been my own child, I don't think I
could have felt for her more truly than I felt at that moment. I only
looked at her; I only said:

"Cry!"

The love that was in her heart rose, and poured its tenderness into her
eyes. I had longed to see the tears that would comfort her. The tears
came.

There was silence between us for a while. It was possible for me to
think.

In the absence of physical resemblance between parent and child, is an
unfavorable influence exercised on the tendency to moral resemblance?
Assuming the possibility of such a result as this, Eunice (entirely
unlike her mother) must, as I concluded, have been possessed of
qualities formed to resist, as well as of qualities doomed to undergo,
the infection of evil. While, therefore, I resigned myself to recognize
the existence of the hereditary maternal taint, I firmly believed in the
counterbalancing influences for good which had been part of the girl's
birthright. They had been derived, perhaps, from the better qualities
in her father's nature; they had been certainly developed by the tender
care, the religious vigilance, which had guarded the adopted child so
lovingly in the Minister's household; and they had served their purpose
until time brought with it the change, for which the tranquil domestic
influences were not prepared. With the great, the vital transformation,
which marks the ripening of the girl into the woman's maturity of
thought and passion, a new power for Good, strong enough to resist the
latent power for Evil, sprang into being, and sheltered Eunice under
the supremacy of Love. Love ill-fated and ill-bestowed--but love that no
profanation could stain, that no hereditary evil could conquer--the
True Love that had been, and was, and would be, the guardian angel of
Eunice's life.

If I am asked whether I have ventured to found this opinion on what
I have observed in one instance only, I reply that I have had other
opportunities of investigation, and that my conclusions are derived from
experience which refers to more instances than one.

No man in his senses can doubt that physical qualities are transmitted
from parents to children. But inheritance of moral qualities is less
easy to trace. Here, the exploring mind finds its progress beset by
obstacles. That those obstacles have been sometimes overcome I do not
deny. Moral resemblances have been traced between parents and children.
While, however, I admit this, I doubt the conclusion which sees, in
inheritance of moral qualities, a positive influence exercised on moral
destiny. There are inherent emotional forces in humanity to which the
inherited influences must submit; they are essentially influences under
control--influences which can be encountered and forced back. That we,
who inhabit this little planet, may be the doomed creatures of fatality,
from the cradle to the grave, I am not prepared to dispute. But I
absolutely refuse to believe that it is a fatality with no higher
origin than can be found in our accidental obligation to our fathers and
mothers.


Still absorbed in these speculations, I was disturbed by a touch on my
arm.

I looked up. Eunice's eyes were fixed on a shrubbery, at some little
distance from us, which closed the view of the garden on that side. I
noticed that she was trembling. Nothing to alarm her was visible that I
could discover. I asked what she had seen to startle her. She pointed to
the shrubbery.

"Look again," she said.

This time I saw a woman's dress among the shrubs. The woman herself
appeared in a moment more. It was Helena. She carried a small portfolio,
and she approached us with a smile.



CHAPTER XLI. THE WHISPERING VOICE.

I looked at Eunice. She had risen, startled by her first suspicion of
the person who was approaching us through the shrubbery; but she kept
her place near me, only changing her position so as to avoid confronting
Helena. Her quickened breathing was all that told me of the effort she
was making to preserve her self-control. Entirely free from unbecoming
signs of hurry and agitation, Helena opened her business with me by
means of an apology.

"Pray excuse me for disturbing you. I am obliged to leave the house on
one of my tiresome domestic errands. If you will kindly permit it, I
wish to express, before I go, my very sincere regret for what I was rude
enough to say, when I last had the honor of seeing you. May I hope to
be forgiven? How-do-you-do, Eunice? Have you enjoyed your holiday in the
country?"

Eunice neither moved nor answered. Having some doubt of what might
happen if the two girls remained together, I proposed to Helena to leave
the garden and to let me hear what she had to say, in the house.

"Quite needless," she replied; "I shall not detain you for more than a
minute. Please look at this."

She offered to me the portfolio that she had been carrying, and pointed
to a morsel of paper attached to it, which contained this inscription:


"Philip's Letters To Me. Private. Helena Gracedieu."


"I have a favor to ask," she said, "and a proof of confidence in you
to offer. Will you be so good as to look over what you find in my
portfolio? I am unwilling to give up the hopes that I had founded on our
interview, when I asked for it. The letters will, I venture to think,
plead my cause more convincingly than I was able to plead it for myself.
I wish to forget what passed between us, to the last word. To the
last word," she repeated emphatically--with a look which sufficiently
informed me that I had not been betrayed to her father yet. "Will you
indulge me?" she asked, and offered her portfolio for the second time.

A more impudent bargain could not well have been proposed to me.

I was to read, and to be favorably impressed by, Mr. Philip Dunboyne's
letters; and Miss Helena was to say nothing of that unlucky slip of the
tongue, relating to her mother, which she had discovered to be a serious
act of self-betrayal--thanks to my confusion at the time. If I had not
thought of Eunice, and of the desolate and loveless life to which the
poor girl was so patiently resigned, I should have refused to read Miss
Gracedieu's love-letters.

But, as things were, I was influenced by the hope (innocently encouraged
by Eunice herself) that Philip Dunboyne might not be so wholly unworthy
of the sweet girl whom he had injured as I had hitherto been too hastily
disposed to believe. To act on this view with the purpose of promoting
a reconciliation was impossible, unless I had the means of forming a
correct estimate of the man's character. It seemed to me that I had
found the means. A fair chance of putting his sincerity to a trustworthy
test, was surely offered by the letters (the confidential letters) which
I had been requested to read. To feel this as strongly as I felt it,
brought me at once to a decision. I consented to take the portfolio--on
my own conditions.

"Understand, Miss Helena," I said, "that I make no promises. I reserve
my own opinion, and my own right of action."

"I am not afraid of your opinions or your actions," she answered
confidently, "if you will only read the letters. In the meantime, let me
relieve my sister, there, of my presence. I hope you will soon recover,
Eunice, in the country air."

If the object of the wretch was to exasperate her victim, she had
completely failed. Eunice remained as still as a statue. To all
appearance, she had not even heard what had been said to her. Helena
looked at me, and touched her forehead with a significant smile. "Sad,
isn't it?" she said--and bowed, and went briskly away on her household
errand.

We were alone again.

Still, Eunice never moved. I spoke to her, and produced no impression.
Beginning to feel alarmed, I tried the effect of touching her. With
a wild cry, she started into a state of animation. Almost at the same
moment, she weakly swayed to and fro as if the pleasant breeze in the
garden moved her at its will, like the flowers. I held her up, and led
her to the seat.

"There is nothing to be afraid of," I said. "She has gone."

Eunice's eyes rested on me in vacant surprise. "How do you know?" she
asked. "I hear her; but I never see her. Do you see her?"

"My dear child! of what person are you speaking?"

She answered: "Of no person. I am speaking of a Voice that whispers and
tempts me, when Helena is near."

"What voice, Eunice?"

"The whispering Voice. It said to me, 'I am your mother;' it called
me Daughter when I first heard it. My father speaks of my mother, the
angel. That good spirit has never come to me from the better world. It
is a mock-mother who comes to me--some spirit of evil. Listen to this.
I was awake in my bed. In the dark I heard the mock-mother whispering,
close at my ear. Shall I tell you how she answered me, when I longed
for light to see her by, when I prayed to her to show herself to me? She
said: 'My face was hidden when I passed from life to death; my face no
mortal creature may see.' I have never seen her--how can _you_ have seen
her? But I heard her again, just now. She whispered to me when Helena
was standing there--where you are standing. She freezes the life in me.
Did she freeze the life in _you?_ Did you hear her tempting me? Don't
speak of it, if you did. Oh, not a word! not a word!"

A man who has governed a prison may say with Macbeth, "I have supped
full with horrors." Hardened as I was--or ought to have been--the effect
of what I had just heard turned me cold. If I had not known it to be
absolutely impossible, I might have believed that the crime and the
death of the murderess were known to Eunice, as being the crime and the
death of her mother, and that the horrid discovery had turned her brain.
This was simply impossible. What did it mean? Good God! what did it
mean?

My sense of my own helplessness was the first sense in me that
recovered. I thought of Eunice's devoted little friend. A woman's
sympathy seemed to be needed now. I rose to lead the way out of the
garden.

"Selina will think we are lost," I said. "Let us go and find Selina."

"Not for the world," she cried.

"Why not?"

"Because I don't feel sure of myself. I might tell Selina something
which she must never know; I should be so sorry to frighten her. Let me
stop here with you."

I resumed my place at her side.

"Let me take your hand."

I gave her my hand. What composing influence this simple act may, or
may not, have exercised, it is impossible to say. She was quiet, she
was silent. After an interval, I heard her breathe a long-drawn sigh of
relief.

"I am afraid I have surprised you," she said. "Helena brings the
dreadful time back to me--" She stopped and shuddered.

"Don't speak of Helena, my dear."

"But I am afraid you will think--because I have said strange
things--that I have been talking at random," she insisted. "The doctor
will say that, if you meet with him. He believes I am deluded by a
dream. I tried to think so myself. It was of no use; I am quite sure he
is wrong."

I privately determined to watch for the doctor's arrival, and to consult
with him. Eunice went on:

"I have the story of a terrible night to tell you; but I haven't the
courage to tell it now. Why shouldn't you come back with me to the place
that I am staying at? A pleasant farm-house, and such kind people. You
might read the account of that night in my journal. I shall not regret
the misery of having written it, if it helps you to find out how this
hateful second self of mine has come to me. Hush! I want to ask you
something. Do you think Helena is in the house?"

"No--she has gone out."

"Did she say that herself? Are you sure?"

"Quite sure."

She decided on going back to the farm, while Helena was out of the way.
We left the garden together. For the first time, my companion noticed
the portfolio. I happened to be carrying it in the hand that was nearest
to her, as she walked by my side.

"Where did you get that?" she asked.

It was needless to reply in words. My hesitation spoke for me.

"Carry it in your other hand," she said--"the hand that's furthest away
from me. I don't want to see it! Do you mind waiting a moment while I
find Selina? You will go to the farm with us, won't you?"

I had to look over the letters, in Eunice's own interests; and I
begged her to let me defer my visit to the farm until the next day. She
consented, after making me promise to keep my appointment. It was of
some importance to her, she told me, that I should make acquaintance
with the farmer and his wife and children, and tell her how I liked
them. Her plans for the future depended on what those good people might
be willing to do. When she had recovered her health, it was impossible
for her to go home again while Helena remained in the house. She had
resolved to earn her own living, if she could get employment as a
governess. The farmer's children liked her; she had already helped their
mother in teaching them; and there was reason to hope that their father
would see his way to employing her permanently. His house offered the
great advantage of being near enough to the town to enable her to hear
news of the Minister's progress toward recovery, and to see him herself
when safe opportunities offered, from time to time. As for her salary,
what did she care about money? Anything would be acceptable, if the good
man would only realize her hopes for the future.

It was disheartening to hear that hope, at her age, began and ended
within such narrow limits as these. No prudent man would have tried to
persuade her, as I now did, that the idea of reconciliation offered the
better hope of the two.

"Suppose I see Mr. Philip Dunboyne when I go back to London," I began,
"what shall I say to him?"

"Say I have forgiven him."

"And suppose," I went on, "that the blame really rests, where you all
believe it to rest, with Helena. If that young man returns to you, truly
ashamed of himself, truly penitent, will you--?"

She resolutely interrupted me: "No!"

"Oh, Eunice, you surely mean Yes?"

"I mean No!"

"Why?"

"Don't ask me! Good-by till to-morrow."



CHAPTER XLII. THE QUAINT PHILOSOPHER.

No person came to my room, and nothing happened to interrupt me while I
was reading Mr. Philip Dunboyne's letters.

One of them, let me say at once, produced a very disagreeable impression
on me. I have unexpectedly discovered Mrs. Tenbruggen--in a postscript.
She is making a living as a Medical Rubber (or Masseuse), and is in
professional attendance on Mr. Dunboyne the elder. More of this, a
little further on.

Having gone through the whole collection of young Dunboyne's letters, I
set myself to review the differing conclusions which the correspondence
had produced on my mind.

I call the papers submitted to me a correspondence, because the greater
part of Philip's letters exhibit notes in pencil, evidently added by
Helena. These express, for the most part, the interpretation which she
had placed on passages that perplexed or displeased her; and they have,
as Philip's rejoinders show, been employed as materials when she wrote
her replies.

On reflection, I find myself troubled by complexities and contradictions
in the view presented of this young man's character. To decide
positively whether I can justify to myself and to my regard for Eunice,
an attempt to reunite the lovers, requires more time for consideration
than I can reasonably expect that Helena's patience will allow. Having
a quiet hour or two still before me, I have determined to make extracts
from the letters for my own use; with the intention of referring to
them while I am still in doubt which way my decision ought to incline. I
shall present them here, to speak for themselves. Is there any objection
to this? None that I can see.

In the first place, those extracts have a value of their own. They add
necessary information to the present history of events.

In the second place, I am under no obligation to Mr. Gracedieu's
daughter which forbids me to make use of her portfolio. I told her
that I only consented to receive it, under reserve of my own right of
action--and her assent to that stipulation was expressed in the clearest
terms.


EXTRACTS FROM MR. PHILIP DUNBOYNE'S LETTERS.

First Extract.

You blame me, dear Helena, for not having paid proper attention to the
questions put to me in your last letter. I have only been waiting to
make up my mind, before I replied.

First question: Do I think it advisable that you should write to my
father? No, my dear; I beg you will defer writing, until you hear from
me again.

Second question: Considering that he is still a stranger to you, is
there any harm in your asking me what sort of man my father is? No
harm, my sweet one; but, as you will presently see, I am afraid you have
addressed yourself to the wrong person.

My father is kind, in his own odd way--and learned, and rich--a more
high-minded and honorable man (as I have every reason to believe)
doesn't live. But if you ask me which he prefers, his books or his son,
I hope I do him no injustice when I answer, his books. His reading and
his writing are obstacles between us which I have never been able to
overcome. This is the more to be regretted because he is charming, on
the few occasions when I find him disengaged. If you wish I knew more
about my father, we are in complete agreement as usual--I wish, too.

But there is a dear friend of yours and mine, who is just the person we
want to help us. Need I say that I allude to Mrs. Staveley?

I called on her yesterday, not long after she had paid a visit to my
father. Luck had favored her. She arrived just at the time when hunger
had obliged him to shut up his books, and ring for something to eat.
Mrs. Staveley secured a favorable reception with her customary tact and
delicacy. He had a fowl for his dinner. She knows his weakness of old;
she volunteered to carve it for him.

If I can only repeat what this clever woman told me of their talk,
you will have a portrait of Mr. Dunboyne the elder--not perhaps a
highly-finished picture, but, as I hope and believe, a good likeness.

Mrs. Staveley began by complaining to him of the conduct of his son.
I had promised to write to her, and I had never kept my word. She had
reasons for being especially interested in my plans and prospects, just
then; knowing me to be attached (please take notice that I am quoting
her own language) to a charming friend of hers, whom I had first met
at her house. To aggravate the disappointment that I had inflicted, the
young lady had neglected her, too. No letters, no information. Perhaps
my father would kindly enlighten her? Was the affair going on? or was it
broken off?

My father held out his plate and asked for the other wing of the
fowl. "It isn't a bad one for London," he said; "won't you have some
yourself?"

"I don't seem to have interested you," Mrs. Staveley remarked.

"What did you expect me to be interested in?" my father inquired. "I was
absorbed in the fowl. Favor me by returning to the subject."

Mrs. Staveley admits that she answered this rather sharply: "The
subject, sir, was your son's admiration for a charming girl: one of the
daughters of Mr. Gracedieu, the famous preacher."

My father is too well-bred to speak to a lady while his attention is
absorbed by a fowl. He finished the second wing, and then he asked if
"Philip was engaged to be married."

"I am not quite sure," Mrs. Staveley confessed.

"Then, my dear friend, we will wait till we _are_ sure."

"But, Mr. Dunboyne, there is really no need to wait. I suppose your son
comes here, now and then, to see you?"

"My son is most attentive. In course of time he will contrive to hit on
the right hour for his visit. At present, poor fellow, he interrupts me
every day."

"Suppose he hits upon the right time to-morrow?"

"Yes?"

"You might ask him if he is engaged?"

"Pardon me. I think I might wait till Philip mentions it without
asking."

"What an extraordinary man you are!"

"Oh, no, no--only a philosopher."

This tried Mrs. Staveley's temper. You know what a perfectly candid
person our friend is. She owned to me that she felt inclined to make
herself disagreeable. "That's thrown away upon me," she said: "I don't
know what a philosopher is."

Let me pause for a moment, dear Helena. I have inexcusably forgotten
to speak of my father's personal appearance. It won't take long. I need
only notice one interesting feature which, so to speak, lifts his face
out of the common. He has an eloquent nose. Persons possessing this
rare advantage are blest with powers of expression not granted to their
ordinary fellow-creatures. My father's nose is a mine of information to
friends familiarly acquainted with it. It changes color like a modest
young lady's cheek. It works flexibly from side to side like the rudder
of a ship. On the present occasion, Mrs. Staveley saw it shift toward
the left-hand side of his face. A sigh escaped the poor lady. Experience
told her that my father was going to hold forth.

"You don't know what a philosopher is!" he repeated. "Be so kind as to
look at me. I am a philosopher."

Mrs. Staveley bowed.

"And a philosopher, my charming friend, is a man who has discovered a
system of life. Some systems assert themselves in volumes--_my_ system
asserts itself in two words: Never think of anything until you have
first asked yourself if there is an absolute necessity for doing it,
at that particular moment. Thinking of things, when things needn't
be thought of, is offering an opportunity to Worry; and Worry is
the favorite agent of Death when the destroyer handles his work in a
lingering way, and achieves premature results. Never look back, and
never look forward, as long as you can possibly help it. Looking back
leads the way to sorrow. And looking forward ends in the cruelest of all
delusions: it encourages hope. The present time is the precious time.
Live for the passing day: the passing day is all that we can be sure of.
You suggested, just now, that I should ask my son if he was engaged to
be married. How do we know what wear and tear of your nervous texture I
succeeded in saving when I said. 'Wait till Philip mentions it without
asking?' There is the personal application of my system. I have
explained it in my time to every woman on the list of my acquaintance,
including the female servants. Not one of them has rewarded me by
adopting my system. How do you feel about it?"

Mrs. Staveley declined to tell me whether she had offered a bright
example of gratitude to the rest of the sex. When I asked why, she
declared that it was my turn now to tell her what I had been doing.

You will anticipate what followed. She objected to the mystery in which
my prospects seemed to be involved. In plain English, was I, or was I
not, engaged to marry her dear Eunice? I said, No. What else could I
say? If I had told Mrs. Staveley the truth, when she insisted on my
explaining myself, she would have gone back to my father, and would
have appealed to his sense of justice to forbid our marriage. Finding me
obstinately silent, she has decided on writing to Eunice. So we parted.
But don't be disheartened. On my way out of the house, I met Mr.
Staveley coming in, and had a little talk with him. He and his wife and
his family are going to the seaside, next week. Mrs. Staveley once out
of our way, I can tell my father of our engagement without any fear
of consequences. If she writes to him, the moment he sees my name
mentioned, and finds violent language associated with it, he will hand
the letter to me. "Your business, Philip: don't interrupt me." He will
say that, and go back to his books. There is my father, painted to the
life! Farewell, for the present.

.......

Remarks by H. G.--Philip's grace and gayety of style might be envied by
any professional Author. He amuses me, but he rouses my suspicion at the
same time. This slippery lover of mine tells me to defer writing to
his father, and gives no reason for offering that strange advice to the
young lady who is soon to be a member of the family. Is this merely one
more instance of the weakness of his character? Or, now that he is away
from my influence, is he beginning to regret Eunice already?

Added by the Governor.--I too have my doubts. Is the flippant nonsense
which Philip has written inspired by the effervescent good spirits of a
happy young man? Or is it assumed for a purpose? In this latter case, I
should gladly conclude that he was regarding his conduct to Eunice with
becoming emotions of sorrow and shame.



CHAPTER XLIII. THE MASTERFUL MASSEUSE.

My next quotations will suffer a process of abridgment. I intend them to
present the substance of three letters, reduced as follows:


Second Extract.

Weak as he may be, Mr. Philip Dunboyne shows (in his second letter)
that he can feel resentment, and that he can express his feelings, in
replying to Miss Helena. He protests against suspicions which he has not
deserved. That he does sometimes think of Eunice he sees no reason to
deny. He is conscious of errors and misdeeds, which--traceable as they
are to Helena's irresistible fascinations--may perhaps be considered
rather his misfortune than his fault. Be that as it may, he does indeed
feel anxious to hear good accounts of Eunice's health. If this honest
avowal excites her sister's jealousy, he will be disappointed in Helena
for the first time.

His third letter shows that this exhibition of spirit has had its
effect.

The imperious young lady regrets that she has hurt his feelings, and is
rewarded for the apology by receiving news of the most gratifying kind.
Faithful Philip has told his father that he is engaged to be married
to Miss Helena Gracedieu, daughter of the celebrated Congregational
preacher--and so on, and so on. Has Mr. Dunboyne the elder expressed
any objection to the young lady? Certainly not! He knows nothing of
the other engagement to Eunice; and he merely objects, on principle, to
looking forward. "How do we know," says the philosopher, "what accidents
may happen, or what doubts and hesitations may yet turn up? I am not
to burden my mind in this matter, till I know that I must do it. Let
me hear when she is ready to go to church, and I will be ready with
the settlements. My compliments to Miss and her papa, and let us wait a
little." Dearest Helena--isn't he funny?

The next letter has been already mentioned.

In this there occurs the first startling reference to Mrs. Tenbruggen,
by name. She is in London, finding her way to lucrative celebrity
by twisting, turning, and pinching the flesh of credulous persons,
afflicted with nervous disorders; and she has already paid a few medical
visits to old Mr. Dunboyne. He persists in poring over his books while
Mrs. Tenbruggen operates, sometimes on his cramped right hand, sometimes
(in the fear that his brain may have something to do with it) on the
back of his neck. One of them frowns over her rubbing, and the other
frowns over his reading. It would be delightfully ridiculous, but for a
drawback; Mr. Philip Dunboyne's first impressions of Mrs. Tenbruggen do
not incline him to look at that lady from a humorous point of view.

Helena's remarks follow, as usual. She has seen Mrs. Tenbruggen's name
on the address of a letter written by Miss Jillgall--which is quite
enough to condemn Mrs. Tenbruggen. As for Philip himself, she feels not
quite sure of him, even yet. No more do I. Third Extract.

The letter that follows must be permitted to speak for itself:

I have flown into a passion, dearest Helena; and I am afraid I shall
make you fly into a passion, too. Blame Mrs. Tenbruggen; don't blame me.

On the first occasion when I found my father under the hands of the
Medical Rubber, she took no notice of me. On the second occasion--when
she had been in daily attendance on him for a week, at an exorbitant
fee--she said in the coolest manner: "Who is this young gentleman?" My
father laid down his book, for a moment only: "Don't interrupt me again,
ma'am. The young gentleman is my son Philip." Mrs. Tenbruggen eyed me
with an appearance of interest which I was at a loss to account for. I
hate an impudent woman. My visit came suddenly to an end.

The next time I saw my father, he was alone.

I asked him how he got on with Mrs. Tenbruggen. As badly as possible,
it appeared. "She takes liberties with my neck; she interrupts me in
my reading; and she does me no good. I shall end, Philip, in applying a
medical rubbing to Mrs. Tenbruggen."

A few days later, I found the masterful "Masseuse" torturing the poor
old gentleman's muscles again. She had the audacity to say to me: "Well,
Mr. Philip, when are you going to marry Miss Eunice Gracedieu?" My
father looked up. "Eunice?" he repeated. "When my son told me he was
engaged to Miss Gracedieu, he said 'Helena'! Philip, what does this
mean?" Mrs. Tenbruggen was so obliging as to answer for me. "Some
mistake, sir; it's Eunice he is engaged to." I confess I forgot myself.
"How the devil do you know that?" I burst out. Mrs. Tenbruggen ignored
me and my language. "I am sorry to see, sir, that your son's education
has been neglected; he seems to be grossly ignorant of the laws of
politeness." "Never mind the laws of politeness," says my father. "You
appear to be better acquainted with my son's matrimonial prospects than
he is himself. How is that?" Mrs. Tenbruggen favored him with another
ready reply: "My authority is a letter, addressed to me by a relative of
Mr. Gracedieu--my dear and intimate friend, Miss Jillgall." My father's
keen eyes traveled backward and forward between his female surgeon and
his son. "Which am I to believe?" he inquired. "I am surprised at your
asking the question," I said. Mrs. Tenbruggen pointed to me. "Look at
Mr. Philip, sir--and you will allow him one merit. He is capable of
showing it, when he knows he has disgraced himself." Without intending
it, I am sure, my father infuriated me; he looked as if he believed her.
Out came one of the smallest and strongest words in the English language
before I could stop it: "Mrs. Tenbruggen, you lie!" The illustrious
Rubber dropped my father's hand--she had been operating on him all the
time--and showed us that she could assert her dignity when circumstances
called for the exertion: "Either your son or I, sir, must leave the
room. Which is it to be?" She met her match in my father. Walking
quietly to the door, he opened it for Mrs. Tenbruggen with a low bow.
She stopped on her way out, and delivered her parting words: "Messieurs
Dunboyne, father and son, I keep my temper, and merely regard you as a
couple of blackguards." With that pretty assertion of her opinion, she
left us.

When we were alone, there was but one course to take; I made my
confession. It is impossible to tell you how my father received it--for
he sat down at his library table with his back to me. The first thing he
did was to ask me to help his memory.

"Did you say that the father of these girls was a parson?"

"Yes--a Congregational Minister."

"What does the Minister think of you?"

"I don't know, sir."

"Find out."

That was all; not another word could I extract from him. I don't pretend
to have discovered what he really has in his mind. I only venture on
a suggestion. If there is any old friend in your town, who has some
influence over your father, leave no means untried of getting that
friend to say a kind word for us. And then ask your father to write to
mine. This is, as I see it, our only chance.

.......

There the letter ends. Helena's notes on it show that her pride is
fiercely interested in securing Philip as a husband. Her victory over
poor Eunice will, as she plainly intimates, be only complete when she is
married to young Dunboyne. For the rest, her desperate resolution to win
her way to my good graces is sufficiently intelligible, now.

My own impressions vary. Philip rather gains upon me; he appears to
have some capacity for feeling ashamed of himself. On the other hand,
I regard the discovery of an intimate friendship existing between
Mrs. Tenbruggen and Miss Jillgall with the gloomiest views. Is this
formidable Masseuse likely to ply her trade in the country towns? And is
it possible that she may come to this town? God forbid!


Of the other letters in the collection, I need take no special notice.
I returned the whole correspondence to Helena, and waited to hear from
her.

The one recent event in Mr. Gracedieu's family, worthy of record, is of
a melancholy nature. After paying his visit to-day, the doctor has left
word that nobody but the nurse is to go near the Minister. This seems to
indicate, but too surely, a change for the worse.

Helena has been away all the evening at the Girls' School. She left a
little note, informing me of her wishes: "I shall expect to be favored
with your decision to-morrow morning, in my housekeeping room."

At breakfast time, the report of the poor Minister was still
discouraging. I noticed that Helena was absent from the table. Miss
Jillgall suspected that the cause was bad news from Mr. Philip Dunboyne,
arriving by that morning's post. "If you will excuse the use of strong
language by a lady," she said, "Helena looked perfectly devilish when
she opened the letter. She rushed away, and locked herself up in her
own shabby room. A serious obstacle, as I suspect, in the way of her
marriage. Cheering, isn't it?" As usual, good Selina expressed her
sentiments without reserve.

I had to keep my appointment; and the sooner Helena Gracedieu and I
understood each other the better.

I knocked at the door. It was loudly unlocked, and violently thrown
open. Helena's temper had risen to boiling heat; she stammered with rage
when she spoke to me.

"I mean to come to the point at once," she said.

"I am glad to hear it, Miss Helena."

"May I count on your influence to help me? I want a positive answer."

I gave her what she wanted. I said: "Certainly not."

She took a crumpled letter from her pocket, opened it, and smoothed it
out on the table with a blow of her open hand.

"Look at that," she said.

I looked. It was the letter addressed to Mr. Dunboyne the elder, which
I had written for Mr. Gracedieu--with the one object of preventing
Helena's marriage.

"Of course, I can depend on you to tell me the truth?" she continued.

"Without fear or favor," I answered, "you may depend on _that_."

"The signature to the letter, Mr. Governor, is written by my father.
But the letter itself is in a different hand. Do you, by any chance,
recognize the writing?"

"I do."

"Whose writing is it?"

"Mine."



CHAPTER XLIV. THE RESURRECTION OF THE PAST.

After having identified my handwriting, I waited with some curiosity to
see whether Helena would let her anger honestly show itself, or whether
she would keep it down. She kept it down.

"Allow me to return good for evil." (The evil was uppermost,
nevertheless, when Miss Gracedieu expressed herself in these
self-denying terms.) "You are no doubt anxious to know if Philip's
father has been won over to serve your purpose. Here is Philip's own
account of it: the last of his letters that I shall trouble you to
read."

I looked it over. The memorandum follows which I made for my own use:

An eccentric philosopher is as capable as the most commonplace human
being in existence of behaving like an honorable man. Mr. Dunboyne read
the letter which bore the Minister's signature, and handed it to his
son. "Can you answer that?" was all he said. Philip's silence confessed
that he was unable to answer it--and Philip himself, I may add, rose
accordingly in my estimation. His father pointed to the writing-desk. "I
must spare my cramped hand," the philosopher resumed, "and I must answer
Mr. Gracedieu's letter. Write, and leave a place for my signature." He
began to dictate his reply. "Sir--My son Philip has seen your letter,
and has no defense to make. In this respect he has set an example of
candor which I propose to follow. There is no excuse for him. What I can
do to show that I feel for you, and agree with you, shall be done. At
the age which this young man has reached, the laws of England abolish
the authority of his father. If he is sufficiently infatuated to place
his honor and his happiness at the mercy of a lady, who has behaved
to her sister as your daughter has behaved to Miss Eunice, I warn the
married couple not to expect a farthing of my money, either during my
lifetime or after my death. Your faithful servant, DUNBOYNE, SENIOR."
Having performed his duty as secretary, Philip received his dismissal:
"You may send my reply to the post," his father said; "and you may keep
Mr. Gracedieu's letter. Morally speaking, I regard that last document
as a species of mirror, in which a young gentleman like yourself may
see how ugly he looks." This, Philip declared, was his father's form of
farewell. I handed back the letter to Helena. Not a word passed between
us. In sinister silence she opened the door and left me alone in the
room.

That Mrs. Gracedieu and I had met in the bygone time, and--this was the
only serious part of it--had met in secret, would now be made known to
the Minister. Was I to blame for having shrunk from distressing my good
friend, by telling him that his wife had privately consulted me on the
means of removing his adopted child from his house? And, even if I
had been cruel enough to do this, would he have believed my statement
against the positive denial with which the woman whom he loved and
trusted would have certainly met it? No! let the consequences of the
coming disclosure be what they might, I failed to see any valid reason
for regretting my conduct in the past time.

I found Miss Jillgall waiting in the passage to see me come out.

Before I could tell her what had happened, there was a ring at the
house-bell. The visitor proved to be Mr. Wellwood, the doctor. I was
anxious to speak to him on the subject of Mr. Gracedieu's health. Miss
Jillgall introduced me, as an old and dear friend of the Minister, and
left us together in the dining-room.

"What do I think of Mr. Gracedieu?" he said, repeating the first
question that I put. "Well, sir, I think badly of him."

Entering into details, after that ominous reply, Mr. Wellwood did not
hesitate to say that his patient's nerves were completely shattered.
Disease of the brain had, as he feared, been already set up. "As to
the causes which have produced this lamentable break-down," the doctor
continued, "Mr. Gracedieu has been in the habit of preaching extempore
twice a day on Sundays, and sometimes in the week as well--and has
uniformly refused to spare himself when he was in most urgent need of
rest. If you have ever attended his chapel, you have seen a man in a
state of fiery enthusiasm, feeling intensely every word that he utters.
Think of such exhaustion as that implies going on for years together,
and accumulating its wasting influences on a sensitively organized
constitution. Add that he is tormented by personal anxieties, which he
confesses to no one, not even to his own children and the sum of it
all is that a worse case of its kind, I am grieved to say, has never
occurred in my experience."

Before the doctor left me to go to his patient, I asked leave to occupy
a minute more of his time. My object was, of course, to speak about
Eunice.

The change of subject seemed to be agreeable to Mr. Wellwood. He smiled
good-humoredly.

"You need feel no alarm about the health of that interesting girl,"
he said. "When she complained to me--at her age!--of not being able to
sleep, I should have taken it more seriously if I had been told that she
too had her troubles, poor little soul. Love-troubles, most likely--but
don't forget that my professional limits keep me in the dark! Have you
heard that she took some composing medicine, which I had prescribed for
her father? The effect (certain, in any case, to be injurious to a young
girl) was considerably aggravated by the state of her mind at the time.
A dream that frightened her, and something resembling delirium, seems to
have followed. And she made matters worse, poor child, by writing in her
diary about the visions and supernatural appearances that had terrified
her. I was afraid of fever, on the day when they first sent for me. We
escaped that complication, and I was at liberty to try the best of all
remedies--quiet and change of air. I have no fears for Miss Eunice."

With that cheering reply he went up to the Minister's room.

All that I had found perplexing in Eunice was now made clear. I
understood how her agony at the loss of her lover, and her keen sense
of the wrong that she had suffered, had been strengthened in their
disastrous influence by her experiment on the sleeping draught intended
for her father. In mind and body, both, the poor girl was in the
condition which offered its opportunity to the lurking hereditary
taint. It was terrible to think of what might have happened, if the
all-powerful counter-influence had not been present to save her.

Before I had been long alone the servant-maid came in, and said the
doctor wanted to see me.

Mr. Wellwood was waiting in the passage, outside the Minister's
bedchamber. He asked if he could speak to me without interruption, and
without the fear of being overheard. I led him at once to the room which
I occupied as a guest.

"At the very time when it is most important to keep Mr. Gracedieu
quiet," he said, "something has happened to excite--I might almost say
to infuriate him. He has left his bed, and is walking up and down the
room; and, I don't scruple to say, he is on the verge of madness. He
insists on seeing you. Being wholly unable to control him in any
other way, I have consented to this. But I must not allow you to place
yourself in what may be a disagreeable position, without a word of
warning. Judging by his tones and his looks, he seems to have no very
friendly motive for wishing to see you."

Knowing perfectly well what had happened, and being one of those
impatient people who can never endure suspense--I offered to go at once
to Mr. Gracedieu's room. The doctor asked leave to say one word more.

"Pray be careful that you neither say nor do anything to thwart him,"
Mr. Wellwood resumed. "If he expresses an opinion, agree with him. If
he is insolent and overbearing, don't answer him. In the state of his
brain, the one hopeful course to take is to let him have his own way.
Pray remember that. I will be within call, in case of your wanting me."



CHAPTER XLV. THE FATAL PORTRAIT.

I knocked at the bedroom door.

"Who's there?"

Only two words--but the voice that uttered them, hoarse and peremptory,
was altered almost beyond recognition. If I had not known whose room it
was, I might have doubted whether the Minister had really spoken to me.

At the instant when I answered him, I was allowed to pass in. Having
admitted me, he closed the door, and placed himself with his back
against it. The customary pallor of his face had darkened to a deep
red; there was an expression of ferocious mockery in his eyes. Helena's
vengeance had hurt her unhappy father far more severely than it seemed
likely to hurt me. The doctor had said he was on the verge of madness.
To my thinking, he had already passed the boundary line.

He received me with a boisterous affectation of cordiality.

"My excellent friend! My admirable, honorable, welcome guest, you don't
know how glad I am to see you. Stand a little nearer to the light; I
want to admire you."

Remembering the doctor's advice, I obeyed him in silence.

"Ah, you were a handsome fellow when I first knew you," he said, "and
you have some remains of it still left. Do you remember the time when
you were a favorite with the ladies? Oh, don't pretend to be modest;
don't turn your back, now you are old, on what you were in the prime of
your life. Do you own that I am right?"

What his object might be in saying this--if, indeed, he had an
object--it was impossible to guess. The doctor's advice left me no
alternative; I hastened to own that he was right. As I made that answer,
I observed that he held something in his hand which was half hidden up
the sleeve of his dressing-gown. What the nature of the object was I
failed to discover.

"And when I happened to speak of you somewhere," he went on, "I forget
where--a member of my congregation--I don't recollect who it was--told
me you were connected with the aristocracy. How were you connected?"

He surprised me; but, however he had got his information, he had not
been deceived. I told him that I was connected, through my mother, with
the family to which he had alluded.

"The aristocracy!" he repeated. "A race of people who are rich without
earning their money, and noble because their great-grandfathers were
noble before them. They live in idleness and luxury--profligates who
gratify their passions without shame and without remorse. Deny, if you
dare, that this is a true description of them."

It was really pitiable. Heartily sorry for him, I pacified him again.

"And don't suppose I forget that you are one of them. Do you hear me, my
noble friend?"

There was no help for it--I made another conciliatory reply.

"So far," he resumed, "I don't complain of you. You have not attempted
to deceive me--yet. Absolute silence is what I require next. Though you
may not suspect it, my mind is in a ferment; I must try to think."

To some extent at least, his thoughts betrayed themselves in his
actions. He put the object that I had half seen in his hand into the
pocket of his dressing-gown, and moved to the toilet-table. Opening one
of the drawers, he took from it a folded sheet of paper, and came back
to me.

"A minister of the Gospel," he said, "is a sacred man, and has a horror
of crime. You are safe, so far--provided you obey me. I have a solemn
and terrible duty to perform. This is not the right place for it. Follow
me downstairs."

He led the way out. The doctor, waiting in the passage, was not near the
stairs, and so escaped notice. "What is it?" Mr. Wellwood whispered.
In the same guarded way, I said: "He has not told me yet; I have been
careful not to irritate him." When we descended the stairs, the doctor
followed us at a safe distance. He mended his pace when the Minister
opened the door of the study, and when he saw us both pass in. Before he
could follow, the door was closed and locked in his face. Mr. Gracedieu
took out the key and threw it through the open window, into the garden
below.

Turning back into the room, he laid the folded sheet of paper on the
table. That done, he spoke to me.

"I distrust my own weakness," he said. "A dreadful necessity confronts
me--I might shrink from the horrid idea, and, if I could open the
door, might try to get away. Escape is impossible now. We are prisoners
together. But don't suppose that we are alone. There is a third person
present, who will judge between you and me. Look there!"

He pointed solemnly to the portrait of his wife. It was a small picture,
very simply framed; representing the face in a "three-quarter" view, and
part of the figure only. As a work of art it was contemptible; but, as a
likeness, it answered its purpose. My unhappy friend stood before it, in
an attitude of dejection, covering his face with his hands.

In the interval of silence that followed, I was reminded that an unseen
friend was keeping watch outside.

Alarmed by having heard the key turned in the lock, and realizing the
embarrassment of the position in which I was placed, the doctor had
discovered a discreet way of communicating with me. He slipped one of
his visiting-cards under the door, with these words written on it: "How
can I help you?"

I took the pencil from my pocketbook, and wrote on the blank side of
the card: "He has thrown the key into the garden; look for it under the
window." A glance at the Minister, before I returned my reply, showed
that his attitude was unchanged. Without being seen or suspected, I, in
my turn, slipped the card under the door.

The slow minutes followed each other--and still nothing happened.

My anxiety to see how the doctor's search for the key was succeeding,
tempted me to approach the window. On my way to it, the tail of my coat
threw down a little tray containing pens and pencils, which had been
left close to the edge of the table. Slight as the noise of the fall
was, it disturbed Mr. Gracedieu. He looked round vacantly.

"I have been comforted by prayer," he told me. "The weakness of poor
humanity has found strength in the Lord." He pointed to the portrait
once more: "My hands must not presume to touch it, while I am still in
doubt. Take it down."

I removed the picture and placed it, by his directions, on a chair that
stood midway between us. To my surprise his tones faltered; I saw tears
rising in his eyes. "You may think you see a picture there," he said.
"You are wrong. You see my wife herself. Stand here, and look at my wife
with me."

We stood together, with our eyes fixed on the portrait.

Without anything said or done on my part to irritate him, he suddenly
turned to me in a state of furious rage. "Not a sign of sorrow!" he
burst out. "Not a blush of shame! Wretch, you stand condemned by the
atrocious composure that I see in your face!"

A first discovery of the odious suspicion of which I was the object,
dawned on my mind at that moment. My capacity for restraining myself
completely failed me. I spoke to him as if he had been an accountable
being. "Once for all," I said, "tell me what I have a right to know. You
suspect me of something. What is it?"

Instead of directly replying, he seized my arm and led me to the table.
"Take up that paper," he said. "There is writing on it. Read--and let
Her judge between us. Your life depends on how you answer me."

Was there a weapon concealed in the room? or had he got it in the pocket
of his dressing-gown? I listened for the sound of the doctor's returning
footsteps in the passage outside, and heard nothing. My life had once
depended, years since, on my success in heading the arrest of an escaped
prisoner. I was not conscious, then, of feeling my energies weakened by
fear. But _that_ man was not mad; and I was younger, in those days, by a
good twenty years or more. At my later time of life, I could show my old
friend that I was not afraid of him--but I was conscious of an effort in
doing it.

I opened the paper. "Am I to read this to myself?" I asked. "Or am I to
read it aloud?"

"Read it aloud!"

In these terms, his daughter addressed him:


"I have been so unfortunate, dearest father, as to displease you, and I
dare not hope that you will consent to receive me. What it is my painful
duty to tell you, must be told in writing.

"Grieved as I am to distress you, in your present state of health, I
must not hesitate to reveal what it has been my misfortune--I may even
say my misery, when I think of my mother--to discover.

"But let me make sure, in such a serious matter as this is, that I am
not mistaken.

"In those happy past days, when I was still dear to my father, you said
you thought of writing to invite a dearly-valued friend to pay a visit
to this house. You had first known him, as I understood, when my mother
was still living. Many interesting things you told me about this old
friend, but you never mentioned that he knew, or that he had even seen,
my mother. I was left to suppose that those two had remained strangers
to each other to the day of her death.

"If there is any misinterpretation here of what you said, or perhaps of
what you meant to say, pray destroy what I have written without turning
to the next page; and forgive me for having innocently startled you by a
false alarm."


Mr. Gracedieu interrupted me.

"Put it down!" he cried; "I won't wait till you have got to the end--I
shall question you now. Give me the paper; it will help me to keep this
mystery of iniquity clear in my own mind."

I gave him the paper.

He hesitated--and looked at the portrait once more. "Turn her away from
me," he said; "I can't face my wife."

I placed the picture with its back to him.

He consulted the paper, reading it with but little of the confusion and
hesitation which my experience of him had induced me to anticipate. Had
the mad excitement that possessed him exercised an influence in clearing
his mind, resembling in some degree the influence exercised by a storm
in clearing the air? Whatever the right explanation may be, I can only
report what I saw. I could hardly have mastered what his daughter had
written more readily, if I had been reading it myself.

"Helena tells me," he began, "that you said you knew her by her likeness
to her mother. Is that true?"

"Quite true."

"And you made an excuse for leaving her--see! here it is, written down.
You made an excuse, and left her when she asked for an explanation."

"I did."

He consulted the paper again.

"My daughter says--No! I won't be hurried and I won't be
interrupted--she says you were confused. Is that so?"

"It is so. Let your questions wait for a moment. I wish to tell you why
I was confused."

"Haven't I said I won't be interrupted? Do you think you can shake _my_
resolution?" He referred to the paper again. "I have lost the place.
It's your fault--find it for me."

The evidence which was intended to convict me was the evidence which I
was expected to find! I pointed it out to him.

His natural courtesy asserted itself in spite of his anger. He said
"Thank you," and questioned me the moment after as fiercely as ever. "Go
back to the time, sir, when we met in your rooms at the prison. Did you
know my wife then?"

"Certainly not."

"Did you and she see each other--ha! I've got it now--did you see each
other after I had left the town? No prevarication! You own to telling
Helena that you knew her by her likeness to her mother. You must have
seen her mother. Where?"

I made another effort to defend myself. He again refused furiously to
hear me. It was useless to persist. Whatever the danger that threatened
me might be, the sooner it showed itself the easier I should feel. I
told him that Mrs. Gracedieu had called on me, after he and his wife had
left the town.

"Do you mean to tell me," he cried, "that she came to you?"

"I do."

After that answer, he no longer required the paper to help him. He threw
it from him on the floor.

"And you received her," he said, "without inquiring whether I knew of
her visit or not? Guilty deception on your part--guilty deception on her
part. Oh, the hideous wickedness of it!"

When his mad suspicion that I had been his wife's lover betrayed itself
in this way, I made a last attempt, in the face of my own conviction
that it was hopeless, to place my conduct and his wife's conduct before
him in the true light.

"Mrs. Gracedieu's object was to consult me--" Before I could say the
next words, I saw him put his hand into the pocket of his dressing-gown.

"An innocent man," he sternly declared, "would have told me that my wife
had been to see him--you kept it a secret. An innocent woman would have
given me a reason for wishing to go to you--she kept it a secret, when
she left my house; she kept it a secret when she came back."

"Mr. Gracedieu, I insist on being heard! Your wife's motive--"

He drew from his pocket the thing that he had hidden from me. This time,
there was no concealment; he let me see that he was opening a razor. It
was no time for asserting my innocence; I had to think of preserving my
life. When a man is without firearms, what defense can avail against a
razor in the hands of a madman? A chair was at my side; it offered the
one poor means of guarding myself that I could see. I laid my hand on
it, and kept my eye on him.

He paused, looking backward and forward between the picture and me.

"Which of them shall I kill first?" he said to himself. "The man who
was my trusted friend? Or the woman whom I believed to be an angel on
earth?" He stopped once more, in a state of fierce self-concentration,
debating what he should do. "The woman," he decided. "Wretch! Fiend!
Harlot! How I loved her!!!"

With a yell of fury, he pounced on the picture--ripped the canvas out of
the frame--and cut it malignantly into fragments. As they dropped from
the razor on the floor, he stamped on them, and ground them under his
foot. "Go, wife of my bosom," he cried, with a dreadful mockery of voice
and look--"go, and burn everlastingly in the place of torment!" His eyes
glared at me. "Your turn now," he said--and rushed at me with his
weapon ready in his hand. I hurled the chair at his right arm. The razor
dropped on the floor. I caught him by the wrist. Like a wild animal he
tried to bite me. With my free hand--if I had known how to defend myself
in any other way, I would have taken that way--with my free hand I
seized him by the throat; forced him back; and held him against the
wall. My grasp on his throat kept him quiet. But the dread of seriously
injuring him so completely overcame me, that I forgot I was a prisoner
in the room, and was on the point of alarming the household by a cry for
help.

I was still struggling to preserve my self-control, when the sound of
footsteps broke the silence outside. I heard the key turn in the lock,
and saw the doctor at the open door.



CHAPTER XLVI. THE CUMBERSOME LADIES.

I cannot prevail upon myself to dwell at any length on the events that
followed.

We secured my unhappy friend, and carried him to his bed. It was
necessary to have men in attendance who could perform the duty of
watching him. The doctor sent for them, while I went downstairs to make
the best I could of the miserable news which it was impossible entirely
to conceal. All that I could do to spare Miss Jillgall, I did. I was
obliged to acknowledge that there had been an outbreak of violence,
and that the portrait of the Minister's wife had been destroyed by the
Minister himself. Of Helena's revenge on me I said nothing. It had
led to consequences which even her merciless malice could not have
contemplated. There were no obstacles in the way of keeping secret the
attempt on my life. But I was compelled to own that Mr. Gracedieu had
taken a dislike to me, which rendered it necessary that my visit should
be brought to an end. I hastened to add that I should go to the hotel,
and should wait there until the next day, in the hope of hearing better
news.

Of the multitude of questions with which poor Miss Jillgall overwhelmed
me--of the wild words of sorrow and alarm that escaped her--of the
desperate manner in which she held by my arm, and implored me not to
go away, when I must see for myself that "she was a person entirely
destitute of presence of mind"--I shall say nothing. The undeserved
suffering that is inflicted on innocent persons by the sins of others
demands silent sympathy; and, to that extent at least, I can say that I
honestly felt for my quaint and pleasant little friend.

In the evening the doctor called on me at the hotel. The medical
treatment of his patient had succeeded in calming the maddened brain
under the influence of sleep. If the night passed quietly, better news
might be hoped for in the morning.

On the next day I had arranged to drive to the farm, being resolved
not to disappoint Eunice. But I shrank from the prospect of having
to distress her as I had already distressed Miss Jillgall. The only
alternative left was to repeat the sad story in writing, subject to
the concealments which I had already observed. This I did, and sent the
letter by messenger, overnight, so that Eunice might know when to expect
me.

The medical report, in the morning, justified some hope. Mr. Gracedieu
had slept well, and there had been no reappearance of insane violence
on his waking. But the doctor's opinion was far from encouraging when
we spoke of the future. He did not anticipate the cruel necessity of
placing the Minister under restraint--unless some new provocation led to
a new outbreak. The misfortune to be feared was imbecility.

I was just leaving the hotel to keep my appointment with Eunice, when
the waiter announced the arrival of a young lady who wished to speak
with me. Before I could ask if she had mentioned her name, the young
lady herself walked in--Helena Gracedieu.

She explained her object in calling on me, with the exasperating
composure which was peculiarly her own. No parallel to it occurs to me
in my official experience of shameless women.

"I don't wish to speak of what happened yesterday, so far as I know
anything about it," she began. "It is quite enough for me that you have
been obliged to leave the house and to take refuge in this hotel. I
have come to say a word about the future. Are you honoring me with your
attention?"

I signed to her to go on. If I had answered in words, I should have told
her to leave the room.

"At first," she resumed, "I thought of writing; but it occurred to me
that you might keep my letter, and show it to Philip, by way of lowering
me in his good opinion, as you have lowered me in the good opinion of
his father. My object in coming here is to give you a word of warning.
If you attempt to make mischief next between Philip and myself, I shall
hear of it--and you know what to expect, when you have me for an enemy.
It is not worth while to say any more. We understand each other, I
hope?"

She was determined to have a reply--and she got it.

"Not quite yet," I said. "I have been hitherto, as becomes a gentleman,
always mindful of a woman's claims to forbearance. You will do well not
to tempt me into forgetting that _you_ are a woman, by prolonging your
visit. Now, Miss Helena Gracedieu, we understand each other." She made
me a low curtsey, and answered in her finest tone of irony: "I only
desire to wish you a pleasant journey home."

I rang for the waiter. "Show this lady out," I said.

Even this failed to have the slightest effect on her. She sauntered to
the door, as perfectly at her ease as if the room had been hers--not
mine.

I had thought of driving to the farm. Shall I confess it? My temper was
so completely upset that active movement of some kind offered the one
means of relief in which I could find refuge. The farm was not more
than five miles distant, and I had been a good walker all my life. After
making the needful inquiries, I set forth to visit Eunice on foot.

My way through the town led me past the Minister's house. I had left the
door some fifty yards behind me, when I saw two ladies approaching.
They were walking, in the friendliest manner, arm in arm. As they came
nearer, I discovered Miss Jillgall. Her companion was the middle-aged
lady who had declined to give her name, when we met accidentally at Mr.
Gracedieu's door.

Hysterically impulsive, Miss Jillgall seized both my hands, and
overwhelmed me with entreaties that I would go back with her to the
house. I listened rather absently. The middle-aged lady happened to be
nearer to me now than on either of the former occasions on which I had
seen her. There was something in the expression of her eyes which seemed
to be familiar to me. But the effort of my memory was not helped by what
I observed in the other parts of her face. The iron-gray hair, the baggy
lower eyelids, the fat cheeks, the coarse complexion, and the double
chin, were features, and very disagreeable features, too, which I had
never seen at any former time.

"Do pray come back with us," Miss Jillgall pleaded. "We were just
talking of you. I and my friend--" There she stopped, evidently on the
point of blurting out the name which she had been forbidden to utter in
my hearing.

The lady smiled; her provokingly familiar eyes rested on me with a
humorous enjoyment of the scene.

"My dear," she said to Miss Jillgall, "caution ceases to be a virtue
when it ceases to be of any use. The Governor is beginning to
remember me, and the inevitable recognition--with _his_ quickness of
perception--is likely to be a matter of minutes now." She turned to me.
"In more ways than one, sir, women are hardly used by Nature. As they
advance in years they lose more in personal appearance than the men do.
You are white-haired, and (pray excuse me) you are too fat; and (allow
me to take another liberty) you stoop at the shoulders--but you have not
entirely lost your good looks. _I_ am no longer recognizable. Allow me
to prompt you, as they say on the stage. I am Mrs. Tenbruggen."

As a man of the world, I ought to have been capable of concealing my
astonishment and dismay. She struck me dumb.

Mrs. Tenbruggen in the town! The one woman whose appearance Mr.
Gracedieu had dreaded, and justly dreaded, stood before me--free, as a
friend of his kinswoman, to enter his house, at the very time when he
was a helpless man, guarded by watchers at his bedside. My first clear
idea was to get away from both the women, and consider what was to be
done next. I bowed--and begged to be excused--and said I was in a hurry,
all in a breath.

Hearing this, the best of genial old maids was unable to restrain her
curiosity. "Where are you going?" she asked.

Too confused to think of an excuse, I said I was going to the farm.

"To see my dear Euneece?" Miss Jillgall burst out. "Oh, we will go with
you!" Mrs. Tenbruggen's politeness added immediately, "With the greatest
pleasure."



CHAPTER XLVII. THE JOURNEY TO THE FARM.

My first ungrateful impulse was to get rid of the two cumbersome ladies
who had offered to be my companions. It was needless to call upon my
invention for an excuse; the truth, as I gladly perceived, would serve
my purpose. I had only to tell them that I had arranged to walk to the
farm.

Lean, wiry, and impetuous, Miss Jillgall received my excuse with
the sincerest approval of it, as a new idea. "Nothing could be more
agreeable to me," she declared; "I have been a wonderful walker all my
life." She turned to her friend. "We will go with him, my dear, won't
we?"

Mrs. Tenbruggen's reception of this proposal inspired me with hope; she
asked how far it was to the farm. "Five miles!" she repeated. "And five
miles back again, unless the farmer lends us a cart. My dear Selina, you
might as well ask me to walk to the North Pole. You have got rid of one
of us, Mr. Governor," she added, pleasantly; "and the other, if you only
walk fast enough, you will leave behind you on the road. If I believed
in luck--which I don't--I should call you a fortunate man."

But companionable Selina would not hear of a separation. She asked,
in her most irresistible manner, if I objected to driving instead of
walking. Her heart's dearest wish, she said, was to make her bosom
friend and myself better acquainted with each other. To conclude, she
reminded me that there was a cab-stand in the next street.

Perhaps I might have been influenced by my distrust of Mrs. Tenbruggen,
or perhaps by my anxiety to protect Eunice. It struck me that I might
warn the defenseless girl to be on her guard with Mrs. Tenbruggen to
better purpose, if Eunice was in a position to recognize her in any
future emergency that might occur. To my mind, this dangerous woman was
doubly formidable--and for a good reason; she was the bosom friend of
that innocent and unwary person, Miss Jillgall. So I amiably consented
to forego my walk, yielding to the superior attraction of Mrs.
Tenbruggen's company. On that day the sunshine was tempered by a
delightful breeze. If we had been in the biggest and worst-governed city
on the civilised earth, we should have found no public vehicle, open to
the air, which could offer accommodation to three people. Being only in
a country town, we had a light four-wheeled chaise at our disposal, as a
matter of course.

No wise man expects to be mercifully treated, when he is shut into a
carriage with a mature single lady, inflamed by curiosity. I was not
unprepared for Miss Jillgall when she alluded, for the second time, to
the sad events which had happened in the house on the previous day--and
especially to the destruction by Mr. Gracedieu of the portrait of his
wife.

"Why didn't he destroy something else?" she pleaded, piteously. "It
is such a disappointment to Me. I never liked that picture myself.
Of course I ought to have admired the portrait of the wife of my
benefactor. But no--that disagreeable painted face was too much for me.
I should have felt inexpressibly relieved, if I could have shown it to
Elizabeth, and heard her say that she agreed with me."

"Perhaps I saw it when I called on you," Mrs. Tenbruggen suggested.
"Where did the picture hang?"

"My dear! I received you in the dining-room, and the portrait hung in
Mr. Gracedieu's study."

What they said to each other next escaped my attention. Quite
unconsciously, Miss Jillgall had revealed to me a danger which
neither the Minister nor I had discovered, though it had conspicuously
threatened us both on the wall of the study. The act of mad destruction
which, if I had possessed the means of safely interfering, I should
certainly have endeavored to prevent, now assumed a new and startling
aspect. If Mrs. Tenbruggen really had some motive of her own for
endeavoring to identify the adopted child, the preservation of the
picture must have led her straight to the end in view. The most casual
opportunity of comparing Helena with the portrait of Mrs. Gracedieu
would have revealed the likeness between mother and daughter--and, that
result attained, the identification of Eunice with the infant whom the
"Miss Chance" of those days had brought to the prison must inevitably
have followed. It was perhaps natural that Mr. Gracedieu's infatuated
devotion to the memory of his wife should have blinded him to the
betrayal of Helena's parentage, which met his eyes every time he entered
his study. But that I should have been too stupid to discover what he
had failed to see, was a wound dealt to my self-esteem which I was vain
enough to feel acutely.

Mrs. Tenbruggen's voice, cheery and humorous, broke in on my
reflections, with an odd question:

"Mr. Governor, do you ever condescend to read novels?"

"It's not easy to say, Mrs. Tenbruggen, how grateful I am to the writers
of novels."

"Ah! I read novels, too. But I blush to confess--do I blush?--that I
never thought of feeling grateful till you mentioned it. Selina and I
don't complain of your preferring your own reflections to our company.
On the contrary, you have reminded us agreeably of the heroes of
fiction, when the author describes them as being 'absorbed in thought.'
For some minutes, Mr. Governor, you have been a hero; absorbed, as I
venture to guess, in unpleasant remembrances of the time when I was
a single lady. You have not forgotten how badly I behaved, and what
shocking things I said, in those bygone days. Am I right?"

"You are entirely wrong."

It is possible that I may have spoken a little too sharply. Anyway,
faithful Selina interceded for her friend. "Oh, dear sir, don't be hard
on Elizabeth! She always means well." Mrs. Tenbruggen, as facetious as
ever, made a grateful return for a small compliment. She chucked Miss
Jillgall under the chin, with the air of an amorous old gentleman
expressing his approval of a pretty servant-girl. It was impossible to
look at the two, in their relative situations, without laughing. But
Mrs. Tenbruggen failed to cheat me into altering my opinion of her.
Innocent Miss Jillgall clapped her ugly hands, and said: "Isn't she good
company?"

Mrs. Tenbruggen's social resources were not exhausted yet. She suddenly
shifted to the serious side of her character.

"Perhaps I have improved a little," she said, "as I have advanced in
years. The sorrows of an unhappy married life may have had a purifying
influence on my nature. My husband and I began badly. Mr. Tenbruggen
thought I had money; and I thought Mr. Tenbruggen had money. He was
taken in by me; and I was taken in by him. When he repeated the words
of the marriage service (most impressively read by your friend the
Chaplain): 'With all my worldly goods I thee endow'--his eloquent voice
suggested one of the largest incomes in Europe. When I promised and
vowed, in my turn, the delightful prospect of squandering my rich
husband's money made quite a new woman of me. I declare solemnly, when I
said I would love, honor, and obey Mr. T., I looked as if I really
meant it. Wherever he is now, poor dear, he is cheating somebody. Such
a handsome, gentleman-like man, Selina! And, oh, Mr. Governor, such a
blackguard!"

Having described her husband in those terms, she got tired of the
subject. We were now favored with another view of this many-sided woman.
She appeared in her professional character.

"Ah, what a delicious breeze is blowing, out here in the country!" she
said. "Will you excuse me if I take off my gloves? I want to air my
hands." She held up her hands to the breeze; firm, muscular, deadly
white hands. "In my professional occupation," she explained, "I am
always rubbing, tickling, squeezing, tapping, kneading, rolling,
striking the muscles of patients. Selina, do you know the movements of
your own joints? Flexion, extension, abduction, adduction, rotation,
circumduction, pronation, supination, and the lateral movements. Be
proud of those accomplishments, my dear, but beware of attempting
to become a Masseuse. There are drawbacks in that vocation--and I am
conscious of one of them at this moment." She lifted her hands to
her nose. "Pah! my hands smell of other people's flesh. The delicious
country air will blow it away--the luxury of purification!" Her fingers
twisted and quivered, and got crooked at one moment and straight again
at another, and showed themselves in succession singly, and flew into
each other fiercely interlaced, and then spread out again like the
sticks of a fan, until it really made me giddy to look at them. As for
Miss Jillgall, she lifted her poor little sunken eyes rapturously to the
sky, as if she called the homiest sunlight to witness that this was the
most lovable woman on the face of the earth.

But elderly female fascination offers its allurements in vain to
the rough animal, man. Suspicion of Mrs. Tenbruggen's motives had
established itself firmly in my mind. Why had the Popular Masseuse
abandoned her brilliant career in London, and plunged into the obscurity
of a country town? An opportunity of clearing up the doubt thus
suggested seemed to have presented itself now. "Is it indiscreet to
ask," I said, "if you are here in your professional capacity?"

Her cunning seized its advantage and put a sly question to me. "Do you
wish to be one of my patients yourself?"

"That is, unfortunately, impossible," I replied "I have arranged to
return to London."

"Immediately?"

"To-morrow at the latest."

Artful as she was, Mrs. Tenbruggen failed to conceal a momentary
expression of relief which betrayed itself, partly in her manner, partly
in her face. She had ascertained, to her own complete satisfaction, that
my speedy departure was an event which might be relied on.

"But I have not yet answered you," she resumed. "To tell the truth, I am
eager to try my hands on you. Massage, as I practice it, would lighten
your weight, and restore your figure; I may even say would lengthen
your life. You will think of me, one of these days, won't you? In
the meanwhile--yes! I am here in my professional capacity. Several
interesting cases; and one very remarkable person, brought to death's
door by the doctors; a rich man who is liberal in paying his fees. There
is my quarrel with London and Londoners. Some of their papers, medical
newspapers, of course, declare that my fees are exorbitant; and there
is a tendency among the patients--I mean the patients who are rolling in
riches--to follow the lead of the newspapers. I am no worm to be trodden
on, in that way. The London people shall wait for me, until they miss
me--and, when I do go back, they will find the fees increased. _My_
fingers and thumbs, Mr. Governor, are not to be insulted with impunity."

Miss Jillgall nodded her head at me. It was an eloquent nod. "Admire my
spirited friend," was the interpretation I put on it.

At the same time, my private sentiments suggested that Mrs. Tenbruggen's
reply was too perfectly satisfactory, viewed as an explanation. My
suspicions were by no means set at rest; and I was resolved not to let
the subject drop yet. "Speaking of Mr. Gracedieu, and of the chances of
his partial recovery," I said, "do you think the Minister would benefit
by Massage?"

"I haven't a doubt of it, if you can get rid of the doctor."

"You think he would be an obstacle in the way?"

"There are some medical men who are honorable exceptions to the general
rule; and he may be one of them," Mrs. Tenbruggen admitted. "Don't be
too hopeful. As a doctor, he belongs to the most tyrannical trades-union
in existence. May I make a personal remark?"

"Certainly."

"I find something in your manner--pray don't suppose that I am
angry--which looks like distrust; I mean, distrust of me."

Miss Jillgall's ever ready kindness interfered in my defense: "Oh, no,
Elizabeth! You are not often mistaken; but indeed you are wrong now.
Look at my distinguished friend. I remember my copy book, when I was
a small creature learning to write, in England. There were first lines
that we copied, in big letters, and one of them said, 'Distrust Is
Mean.' I know a young person, whose name begins with H, who is one mass
of meanness. But"--excellent Selina paused, and pointed to me with a
gesture of triumph--"no meanness there!"

Mrs. Tenbruggen waited to hear what I had to say, scornfully insensible
to Miss Jillgall's well-meant interruption.

"You are not altogether mistaken," I told her. "I can't say that my mind
is in a state of distrust, but I own that you puzzle me."

"How, if you please?"

"May I presume that you remember the occasion when we met at Mr.
Gracedieu's house-door? You saw that I failed to recognize you, and
you refused to give your name when the servant asked for it. A few days
afterward, I heard you (quite accidentally) forbid Miss Jillgall to
mention your name in my hearing. I am at a loss to understand it."

Before she could answer me, the chaise drew up at the gate of the
farmhouse. Mrs. Tenbruggen carefully promised to explain what had
puzzled me, at the first opportunity. "If it escapes my memory," she
said, "pray remind me of it."

I determined to remind her of it. Whether I could depend on her to tell
me the truth, might be quite another thing.



CHAPTER XLVIII. THE DECISION OF EUNICE.

Eunice ran out to meet us, and opened the gate. She was instantly folded
in Miss Jillgall's arms. On her release, she came to me, eager for news
of her father's health. When I had communicated all that I thought
it right to tell her of the doctor's last report, she noticed Mrs.
Tenbruggen. The appearance of a stranger seemed to embarrass her. I left
Miss Jillgall to introduce them to each other.

"Darling Euneece, you remember Mrs. Tenbruggen's name, I am sure?
Elizabeth, this is my sweet girl; I mentioned her in my letters to you."

"I hope she will be _my_ sweet girl, when we know each other a little
better. May I kiss you, dear? You have lovely eyes; but I am sorry to
see that they don't look like happy eyes. You want Mamma Tenbruggen to
cheer you. What a charming old house!"

She put her arm round Eunice's waist and led her to the house door. Her
enjoyment of the creepers that twined their way up the pillars of the
porch was simply perfection as a piece of acting. When the farmer's wife
presented herself, Mrs. Tenbruggen was so irresistibly amiable, and took
such flattering notice of the children, that the harmless British matron
actually blushed with pleasure. "I'm sure, ma'am, you must have children
of your own," she said. Mrs. Tenbruggen cast her eyes on the floor, and
sighed with pathetic resignation. A sweet little family, and all cruelly
swept away by death. If the performance meant anything, it did most
assuredly mean that.

"What wonderful self-possession!" somebody whispered in my ear. The
children in the room were healthy, well-behaved little creatures--but
the name of the innocent one among them was Selina.

Before dinner we were shown over the farm.

The good woman of the house led the way, and Miss Jillgall and I
accompanied her. The children ran on in front of us. Still keeping
possession of Eunice, Mrs. Tenbruggen followed at some distance behind.
I looked back, after no very long interval, and saw that a separation
had taken place. Mrs. Tenbruggen passed me, not looking so pleasantly as
usual, joined the children, and walked with two of them, hand in hand, a
pattern of maternal amiability. I dropped back a little, and gave Eunice
an opportunity of joining me; having purposely left her to form her own
opinion, without any adverse influence exercised on my part.

"Is that lady a friend of yours?" she asked. "No; only an acquaintance.
What do you think of her?"

"I thought I should like her at first; she was so kind, and seemed to
take such an interest in me. But she said such strange things--asked if
I was reckoned like my mother, and which of us was the eldest, my sister
or myself, and whether we were my father's only two children, and if one
of us was more his favorite than the other. What I could tell her, I did
tell. But when I said I didn't know which of us was the oldest, she gave
me an impudent tap on the cheek, and said, 'I don't believe you, child,'
and left me. How can Selina be so fond of her? Don't mention it to any
one else; I hope I shall never see her again."

"I will keep your secret, Eunice; and you must keep mine. I entirely
agree with you."

"You agree with me in disliking her?"

"Heartily."

We could say no more at that time. Our friends in advance were waiting
for us. We joined them at once.

If I had felt any doubt of the purpose which had really induced Mrs.
Tenbruggen to leave London, all further uncertainty on my part was at an
end. She had some vile interest of her own to serve by identifying Mr.
Gracedieu's adopted child--but what the nature of that interest might
be, it was impossible to guess. The future, when I thought of it now,
filled me with dismay. A more utterly helpless position than mine it
was not easy to conceive. To warn the Minister, in his present critical
state of health, was simply impossible. My relations with Helena forbade
me even to approach her. And, as for Selina, she was little less than a
mere tool in the hands of her well-beloved friend. What, in God's name,
was I to do?

At dinner-time we found the master of the house waiting to bid us
welcome.

Personally speaking, he presented a remarkable contrast to the typical
British farmer. He was neither big nor burly; he spoke English as well
as I did; and there was nothing in his dress which would have made him a
fit subject for a picture of rustic life. When he spoke, he was able to
talk on subjects unconnected with agricultural pursuits; nor did I hear
him grumble about the weather and the crops. It was pleasant to see that
his wife was proud of him, and that he was, what all fathers ought to
be, his children's best and dearest friend. Why do I dwell on these
details, relating to a man whom I was not destined to see again? Only
because I had reason to feel grateful to him. When my spirits were
depressed by anxiety, he made my mind easy about Eunice, as long as she
remained in his house.

The social arrangements, when our meal was over, fell of themselves into
the right train.

Miss Jillgall went upstairs, with the mother and the children, to see
the nursery and the bedrooms. Mrs. Tenbruggen discovered a bond of
union between the farmer and herself; they were both skilled players at
backgammon, and they sat down to try conclusions at their favorite game.
Without any wearisome necessity for excuses or stratagems, Eunice took
my arm and led me to the welcome retirement of her own sitting-room.

I could honestly congratulate her, when I heard that she was established
at the farm as a member of the family. While she was governess to the
children, she was safe from dangers that might have threatened her,
if she had been compelled by circumstances to return to the Minister's
house.

The entry in her Journal, which she was anxious that I should read, was
placed before me next.

I followed the poor child's account of the fearful night that she had
passed, with an interest that held me breathless to the end. A terrible
dream, which had impressed a sense of its reality on the sleeper by
reaching its climax in somnambulism--this was the obvious explanation,
no doubt; and a rational mind would not hesitate to accept it. But a
rational mind is not a universal gift, even in a country which prides
itself on the idol-worship of Fact. Those good friends who are always
better acquainted with our faults, failings, and weaknesses than we can
pretend to be ourselves, had long since discovered that my nature was
superstitious, and my imagination likely to mislead me in the presence
of events which encouraged it. Well! I was weak enough to recoil from
the purely rational view of all that Eunice had suffered, and heard, and
seen, on the fateful night recorded in her Journal. Good and Evil walk
the ways of this unintelligible world, on the same free conditions.
If we cling, as many of us do, to the comforting belief that departed
spirits can minister to earthly creatures for good--can be felt moving
in us, in a train of thought, and seen as visible manifestations, in a
dream--with what pretense of reason can we deny that the same freedom of
supernatural influence which is conceded to the departed spirit, working
for good, is also permitted to the departed spirit, working for evil?
If the grave cannot wholly part mother and child, when the mother's
life has been good, does eternal annihilation separate them, when the
mother's life has been wicked? No! If the departed spirit can bring with
it a blessing, the departed spirit can bring with it a curse. I dared
not confess to Eunice that the influence of her murderess-mother might,
as I thought possible, have been supernaturally present when she heard
temptation whispering in her ear; but I dared not deny it to myself.
All that I could say to satisfy and sustain her, I did say. And when I
declared--with my whole heart declared--that the noble passion which had
elevated her whole being, and had triumphed over the sorest trials that
desertion could inflict, would still triumph to the end, I saw hope, in
that brave and true heart, showing its bright promise for the future in
Eunice's eyes.

She closed and locked her Journal. By common consent we sought the
relief of changing the subject. Eunice asked me if it was really
necessary that I should return to London.

I shrank from telling her that I could be of no further use to her
father, while he regarded me with an enmity which I had not deserved.
But I saw no reason for concealing that it was my purpose to see Philip
Dunboyne.

"You told me yesterday," I reminded her, "that I was to say you had
forgiven him. Do you still wish me to do that?"

"Indeed I do!"

"Have you thought of it seriously? Are you sure of not having been
hurried by a generous impulse into saying more than you mean?"

"I have been thinking of it," she said, "through the wakeful hours of
last night--and many things are plain to me, which I was not sure of in
the time when I was so happy. He has caused me the bitterest sorrow of
my life, but he can't undo the good that I owe to him. He has made a
better girl of me, in the time when his love was mine. I don't forget
that. Miserably as it has ended, I don't forget that."

Her voice trembled; the tears rose in her eyes. It was impossible for
me to conceal the distress that I felt. The noble creature saw it. "No,"
she said faintly; "I am not going to cry. Don't look so sorry for me."
Her hand pressed my hand gently--_she_ pitied _me_. When I saw how she
struggled to control herself, and did control herself, I declare to God
I could have gone down on my knees before her.

She asked to be allowed to speak of Philip again, and for the last time.

"When you meet with him in London, he may perhaps ask if you have seen
Eunice."

"My child! he is sure to ask."

"Break it to him gently--but don't let him deceive himself. In this
world, he must never hope to see me again."

I tried--very gently--to remonstrate. "At your age, and at his age," I
said, "surely there is hope?"

"There is no hope." She pressed her hand on her heart. "I know it, I
feel it, here."

"Oh, Eunice, it's hard for me to say that!"

"I will try to make it easier for you. Say that I have forgiven him--and
say no more."



CHAPTER XLIX. THE GOVERNOR ON HIS GUARD.

After leaving Eunice, my one desire was to be alone. I had much to think
of, and I wanted an opportunity of recovering myself. On my way out of
the house, in search of the first solitary place that I could discover,
I passed the room in which we had dined. The door was ajar. Before I
could get by it, Mrs. Tenbruggen stepped out and stopped me.

"Will you come in here for a moment?" she said. "The farmer has been
called away, and I want to speak to you."

Very unwillingly--but how could I have refused without giving
offense?--I entered the room.

"When you noticed my keeping my name from you," Mrs. Tenbruggen began,
"while Selina was with us, you placed me in an awkward position. Our
little friend is an excellent creature, but her tongue runs away with
her sometimes; I am obliged to be careful of taking her too readily
into my confidence. For instance, I have never told her what my name was
before I married. Won't you sit down?"

I had purposely remained standing as a hint to her not to prolong the
interview. The hint was thrown away; I took a chair.

"Selina's letters had informed me," she resumed, "that Mr. Gracedieu
was a nervous invalid. When I came to England, I had hoped to try what
massage might do to relieve him. The cure of their popular preacher
might have advertised me through the whole of the Congregational
sect. It was essential to my success that I should present myself as a
stranger. I could trust time and change, and my married name (certainly
not known to Mr. Gracedieu) to keep up my incognito. He would have
refused to see me if he had known that I was once Miss Chance."

I began to be interested.

Here was an opportunity, perhaps, of discovering what the Minister had
failed to remember when he had been speaking of this woman, and when
I had asked if he had ever offended her. I was especially careful in
making my inquiries.

"I remember how you spoke to Mr. Gracedieu," I said, "when you and he
met, long ago, in my rooms. But surely you don't think him capable
of vindictively remembering some thoughtless words, which escaped you
sixteen or seventeen years since?"

"I am not quite such a fool as that, Mr. Governor. What I was thinking
of was an unpleasant correspondence between the Minister and myself.
Before I was so unfortunate as to meet with Mr. Tenbruggen, I obtained
a chance of employment in a public Institution, on condition that I
included a clergyman among my references. Knowing nobody else whom I
could apply to, I rashly wrote to Mr. Gracedieu, and received one
of those cold and cruel refusals which only the strictest religious
principle can produce. I was mortally offended at the time; and if your
friend the Minister had been within my reach--" She paused, and finished
the sentence by a significant gesture.

"Well," I said, "he is within your reach now."

"And out of his mind," she added. "Besides, one's sense of injury
doesn't last (except in novels and plays) through a series of years. I
don't pity him--and if an opportunity of shaking his high position among
his admiring congregation presented itself, I daresay I might make a
mischievous return for his letter to me. In the meanwhile, we may drop
the subject. I suppose you understand, now, why I concealed my name from
you, and why I kept out of the house while you were in it."

It was plain enough, of course. If I had known her again, or had heard
her name, I might have told the Minister that Mrs. Tenbruggen and Miss
Chance were one and the same. And if I had seen her and talked with her
in the house, my memory might have shown itself capable of improvement.
Having politely presented the expression of my thanks, I rose to go.

She stopped me at the door.

"One word more," she said, "while Selina is out of the way. I need
hardly tell you that I have not trusted her with the Minister's secret.
You and I are, as I take it, the only people now living who know the
truth about these two girls. And we keep our advantage."

"What advantage?" I asked.

"Don't you know?"

"I don't indeed."

"No more do I. Female folly, and a slip of the tongue; I am old and
ugly, but I am still a woman. About Miss Eunice. Somebody has told the
pretty little fool never to trust strangers. You would have been amused,
if you had heard that sly young person prevaricating with me. In one
respect, her appearance strikes me. She is not like either the wretch
who was hanged, or the poor victim who was murdered. Can she be the
adopted child? Or is it the other sister, whom I have not seen yet? Oh,
come! come! Don't try to look as if you didn't know. That is really too
ridiculous."

"You alluded just now," I answered, "to our 'advantage' in being
the only persons who know the truth about the two girls. Well, Mrs.
Tenbruggen, I keep _my_ advantage."

"In other words," she rejoined, "you leave me to make the discovery
myself. Well, my friend, I mean to do it!"

.......

In the evening, my hotel offered to me the refuge of which I stood in
need. I could think, for the first time that day, without interruption.

Being resolved to see Philip, I prepared myself for the interview by
consulting my extracts once more. The letter, in which Mrs. Tenbruggen
figures, inspired me with the hope of protection for Mr. Gracedieu,
attainable through no less a person than Helena herself.

To begin with, she would certainly share Philip's aversion to the
Masseuse, and her dislike of Miss Jillgall would, just as possibly,
extend to Miss Jillgall's friend. The hostile feeling thus set up
might be trusted to keep watch on Mrs. Tenbruggen's proceedings, with
a vigilance not attainable by the coarser observation of a man. In the
event, of an improvement in the Minister's health, I should hear of it
both from the doctor and from Miss Jillgall, and in that case I should
instantly return to my unhappy friend and put him on his guard.

I started for London by the early train in the morning.

My way home from the terminus took me past the hotel at which the
elder Mr. Dunboyne was staying. I called on him. He was reported to be
engaged; that is to say, immersed in his books. The address on one of
Philip's letters had informed me that he was staying at another
hotel. Pursuing my inquiries in this direction, I met with a severe
disappointment. Mr. Philip Dunboyne had left the hotel that morning; for
what destination neither the landlord nor the waiter could tell me.

The next day's post brought with it the information which I had failed
to obtain. Miss Jillgall wrote, informing me in her strongest language
that Philip Dunboyne had returned to Helena. Indignant Selina added:
"Helena means to make him marry her; and I promise you she shall fail,
if I can stop it."

In taking leave of Eunice, I had given her my address; had warned her to
be careful, if she and Mrs. Tenbruggen happened to meet again, and had
begged her to write to me, or to come to me, if anything happened to
alarm her in my absence.

In two days more, I received a line from Eunice, written evidently in
the greatest agitation.

"Philip has discovered me. He has been here, and has insisted on seeing
me. I have refused. The good farmer has so kindly taken my part. I can
write no more."



CHAPTER L. THE NEWS FROM THE FARM.

When I next heard from Miss Jillgall, the introductory part of her
letter merely reminded me that Philip Dunboyne was established in the
town, and that Helena was in daily communication with him. I shall do
Selina no injustice if my extract begins with her second page.

"You will sympathize, I am sure" (she writes), "with the indignation
which urged me to call on Philip, and tell him the way to the farmhouse.
Think of Helena being determined to marry him, whether he wants to or
not! I am afraid this is bad grammar. But there are occasions when even
a cultivated lady fails in her grammar, and almost envies the men their
privilege of swearing when they are in a rage. My state of mind is truly
indescribable. Grief mingles with anger, when I tell you that my
sweet Euneece has disappointed me, for the first time since I had the
happiness of knowing and admiring her. What can have been the motive of
her refusal to receive her penitent lover? Is it pride? We are told that
Satan fell through pride. Euneece satanic? Impossible! I feel inclined
to go and ask her what has hardened her heart against a poor young man
who bitterly regrets his own folly. Do you think it was bad advice from
the farmer or his wife? In that case, I shall exert my influence, and
take her away. You would do the same, wouldn't you?

"I am ashamed to mention the poor dear Minister in a postscript. The
truth is, I don't very well know what I am about. Mr. Gracedieu is
quiet, sleeps better than he did, eats with a keener appetite, gives no
trouble. But, alas, that glorious intellect is in a state of eclipse! Do
not suppose, because I write figuratively, that I am not sorry for him.
He understands nothing; he remembers nothing; he has my prayers.

"You might come to us again, if you would only be so kind. It would make
no difference now; the poor man is so sadly altered. I must add, most
reluctantly, that the doctor recommends your staying at home. Between
ourselves, he is little better than a coward. Fancy his saying; 'No; we
must not run that risk yet.' I am barely civil to him, and no more.

"In any other affair (excuse me for troubling you with a second
postscript), my sympathy with Euneece would have penetrated her motives;
I should have felt with her feelings. But I have never been in love;
no gentleman gave me the opportunity when I was young. Now I am
middle-aged, neglect has done its dreary work--my heart is an extinct
crater. Figurative again! I had better put my pen away, and say farewell
for the present."

Miss Jillgall may now give place to Eunice. The same day's post brought
me both letters.

I should be unworthy indeed of the trust which this affectionate girl
has placed in me, if I failed to receive her explanation of her conduct
toward Philip Dunboyne, as a sacred secret confided to my fatherly
regard. In those later portions of her letter, which are not addressed
to me confidentially, Eunice writes as follows:


"I get news--and what heartbreaking news!--of my father, by sending
a messenger to Selina. It is more than ever impossible that I can put
myself in the way of seeing Helena again. She has written to me
about Philip, in a tone so shockingly insolent and cruel, that I have
destroyed her letter. Philip's visit to the farm, discovered I don't
know how, seems to have infuriated her. She accuses me of doing all
that she might herself have done in my place, and threatens me--No! I am
afraid of the wicked whisperings of that second self of mine if I think
of it. They were near to tempting me when I read Helena's letter. But
I thought of what you said, after I had shown you my Journal; and your
words took my memory back to the days when I was happy with Philip. The
trial and the terror passed away.

"Consolation has come to me from the best of good women. Mrs. Staveley
writes as lovingly as my mother might have written, if death had spared
her. I have replied with all the gratitude that I really feel, but
without taking advantage of the services which she offers. Mrs. Staveley
has it in her mind, as you had it in your mind, to bring Philip back to
me. Does she forget, do you forget, that Helena claims him? But you both
mean kindly, and I love you both for the interest that you feel in me.

"The farmer's wife--dear good soul!--hardly understands me so well as
her husband does. She confesses to pitying Philip. 'He is so wretched,'
she says. 'And, dear heart, how handsome, and what nice, winning
manners! I don't think I should have had your courage, in your place. To
tell the truth, I should have jumped for joy when I saw him at the door;
and I should have run down to let him in--and perhaps been sorry for it
afterward. If you really wish to forget him, my dear, I will do all I
can to help you.'

"These are trifling things to mention, but I am afraid you may think I
am unhappy--and I want to prevent that.

"I have so much to be thankful for, and the children are so fond of me.
Whether I teach them as well as I might have done, if I had been a more
learned girl, may perhaps be doubtful. They do more for their governess,
I am afraid, than their governess does for them. When they come into my
room in the morning, and rouse me with their kisses, the hour of waking,
which used to be so hard to endure after Philip left me, is now the
happiest hour of my day."


With that reassuring view of her life as a governess, the poor child's
letter comes to an end.



CHAPTER LI. THE TRIUMPH OF MRS. TENBRUGGEN.

Miss Jillgall appears again, after an interval, on the field of my
extracts. My pleasant friend deserves this time a serious reception. She
informs me that Mrs. Tenbruggen has begun the inquiries which I have the
best reason to dread--for I alone know the end which they are designed
to reach.

The arrival of this news affected me in two different ways.

It was discouraging to find that circumstances had not justified my
reliance on Helena's enmity as a counter-influence to Mrs. Tenbruggen.
On the other hand, it was a relief to be assured that my return to
London would serve, rather than compromise, the interests which it was
my chief anxiety to defend. I had foreseen that Mrs. Tenbruggen would
wait to set her enterprise on foot, until I was out of her way; and I
had calculated on my absence as an event which would at least put an end
to suspense by encouraging her to begin.

The first sentences in Miss Jillgall's letter explain the nature of her
interest in the proceedings of her friend, and are, on that account,
worth reading.

"Things are sadly changed for the worse" (Selina writes); "but I don't
forget that Philip was once engaged to Euneece, and that Mr. Gracedieu's
extraordinary conduct toward him puzzled us all. The mode of discovery
which dear Elizabeth suggested by letter, at that time, appears to be
the mode which she is following now. When I asked why, she said: 'Philip
may return to Euneece; the Minister may recover--and will be all the
more likely to do so if he tries Massage. In that case, he will probably
repeat the conduct which surprised you; and your natural curiosity will
ask me again to find out what it means. Am I your friend, Selina, or am
I not?' This was so delightfully kind, and so irresistibly conclusive,
that I kissed her in a transport of gratitude. With what breathless
interest I have watched her progress toward penetrating the mystery of
the girls' ages, it is quite needless to tell you."

.......

Mrs. Tenbruggen's method of keeping Miss Jillgall in ignorance of what
she was really about, and Miss Jillgall's admirable confidence in the
integrity of Mrs. Tenbruggen, being now set forth on the best authority,
an exact presentation of the state of affairs will be completed if I
add a word more, relating to the positions actually occupied toward Mrs.
Tenbruggen's enterprise, by my correspondent and myself.

On her side, Miss Jillgall was entirely ignorant that one of the two
girls was not Mr. Gracedieu's daughter, but his adopted child. On
my side, I was entirely ignorant of Mrs. Tenbruggen's purpose in
endeavoring to identify the daughter of the murderess. Speaking of
myself, individually, let me add that I only waited the event to protect
the helpless ones--my poor demented friend, and the orphan whom his
mercy received into his heart and his home.

Miss Jillgall goes on with her curious story, as follows:

.......

"Always desirous of making myself useful, I thought I would give my dear
Elizabeth a hint which might save time and trouble. 'Why not begin,' I
suggested, 'by asking the Governor to help you?' That wonderful woman
never forgets anything. She had already applied to you, without success.

"In my next attempt to be useful, I did violence to my most cherished
convictions, by presenting the wretch Helena to the admirable Elizabeth.
That the former would be cold as ice, in her reception of any friend
of mine, was nothing wonderful. Mrs. Tenbruggen passed it over with
the graceful composure of a woman of the world. In the course of
conversation with Helena, she slipped in a question: 'Might I ask if you
are older than your sister?' The answer was, of course: 'I don't know.'
And here, for once, the most deceitful girl in existence spoke the
truth.

"When we were alone again, Elizabeth made a remark: 'If personal
appearance could decide the question,' she said, 'the disagreeable young
woman is the oldest of the two. The next thing to be done is to discover
if looks are to be trusted in this case.'

"My friend's lawyer received confidential instructions (not shown to me,
which seems rather hard) to trace the two Miss Gracedieus' registers of
birth. Elizabeth described this proceeding (not very intelligibly to my
mind) as a means of finding out which of the girls could be identified
by name as the elder of the two.

"The report arrived this morning. I was only informed that the result,
in one case, had entirely defeated the inquiries. In the other case,
Elizabeth had helped her agent by referring him to a Birth, advertised
in the customary columns of the _Times_ newspaper. Even here, there
was a fatal obstacle. The name of the place in which Mr. Gracedieu's
daughter had been born was not added, as usual. I still tried to be
useful. Had my friend known the Minister's wife? My friend had never
even seen the Minister's wife. And, as if by a fatality, her portrait
was no longer in existence. I could only mention that Helena was like
her mother. But Elizabeth seemed to attach very little importance to my
evidence, if I may call it by so grand a name. 'People have such strange
ideas about likenesses,' she said, 'and arrive at such contradictory
conclusions. One can only trust one's own eyes in a matter of that
kind.'

"My friend next asked me about our domestic establishment. We had only a
cook and a housemaid. If they were old servants who had known the girls
as children, they might be made of some use. Our luck was as steadily
against us as ever. They had both been engaged when Mr. Gracedieu
assumed his new pastoral duties, after having resided with his wife at
her native place.

"I asked Elizabeth what she proposed to do next.

"She deferred her answer, until I had first told her whether the visit
of the doctor might be expected on that day. I could reply to this in
the negative. Elizabeth, thereupon, made a startling request; she begged
me to introduce her to Mr. Gracedieu.

"I said: 'Surely, you have forgotten the sad state of his mind?' No;
she knew perfectly well that he was imbecile. 'I want to try,' she
explained, 'if I can rouse him for a few minutes.'

"'By Massage?' I inquired.

"She burst out laughing. 'Massage, my dear, doesn't act in that way. It
is an elaborate process, pursued patiently for weeks together. But my
hands have more than one accomplishment at their finger-ends. Oh, make
your mind easy! I shall do no harm, if I do no good. Take me, Selina, to
the Minister.'

"We went to his room. Don't blame me for giving way; I am too fond of
Elizabeth to be able to disappoint her.

"It was a sad sight when we went in. He was quite happy, playing like
a child, at cup-and-ball. The attendant retired at my request. I
introduced Mrs. Tenbruggen. He smiled and shook hands with her. He said:
'Are you a Christian or a Pagan? You are very pretty. How many times can
you catch the ball in the cup?' The effort to talk to her ended there.
He went on with his game, and seemed to forget that there was anybody in
the room. It made my heart ache to remember what he was--and to see him
now.

"Elizabeth whispered: 'Leave me alone with him.'

"I don't know why I did such a rude thing--I hesitated.

"Elizabeth asked me if I had no confidence in her. I was ashamed of
myself; I left them together.

"A long half-hour passed. Feeling a little uneasy, I went upstairs
again and looked into the room. He was leaning back in his chair; his
plaything was on the floor, and he was looking vacantly at the light
that came in through the window. I found Mrs. Tenbruggen at the other
end of the room, in the act of ringing the bell. Nothing in the least
out of the ordinary way seemed to have happened. When the attendant
had answered the bell, we left the room together. Mr. Gracedieu took no
notice of us.

"'Well,' I said, 'how has it ended?'

"Quite calmly my noble Elizabeth answered: 'In total failure.'

"'What did you say to him after you sent me away?'

"'I tried, in every possible way, to get him to tell me which of his two
daughters was the oldest.'

"'Did he refuse to answer?'

"'He was only too ready to answer. First, he said Helena was the
oldest--then he corrected himself, and declared that Eunice was the
oldest--then he said they were twins--then he went back to Helena and
Eunice. Now one was the oldest, and now the other. He rang the changes
on those two names, I can't tell you how often, and seemed to think it a
better game than cup-and-ball.'

"'What is to be done?'

"'Nothing is to be done, Selina.'

"'What!' I cried, 'you give it up?'

"My heroic friend answered: 'I know when I am beaten, my dear--I give it
up.' She looked at her watch; it was time to operate on the muscles of
one of her patients. Away she went, on her glorious mission of Massage,
without a murmur of regret. What strength of mind! But, oh, dear, what
a disappointment for poor little me! On one thing I am determined. If
I find myself getting puzzled or frightened, I shall instantly write to
you."

With that expression of confidence in me, Selina's narrative came to an
end. I wish I could have believed, as she did, that the object of her
admiration had been telling her the truth.

A few days later, Mrs. Tenbruggen honored me with a visit at my house
in the neighborhood of London. Thanks to this circumstance, I am able to
add a postscript which will complete the revelations in Miss Jillgall's
letter.

The illustrious Masseuse, having much to conceal from her faithful
Selina, was well aware that she had only one thing to keep hidden from
me; namely, the advantage which she would have gained if her inquiries
had met with success.

"I thought I might have got at what I wanted," she told me, "by
mesmerizing our reverend friend. He is as weak as a woman; I threw him
into hysterics, and had to give it up, and quiet him, or he would have
alarmed the house. You look as if you don't believe in mesmerism."

"My looks, Mrs. Tenbruggen, exactly express my opinion. Mesmerism is a
humbug!"

"You amusing old Tory! Shall I throw you into a state of trance? No!
I'll give you a shock of another kind--a shock of surprise. I know as
much as you do about Mr. Gracedieu's daughters. What do you think of
that?"

"I think I should like to hear you tell me, which is the adopted child."

"Helena, to be sure!"

Her manner was defiant, her tone was positive; I doubted both. Under the
surface of her assumed confidence, I saw something which told me that
she was trying to read my thoughts in my face. Many other women had
tried to do that. They succeeded when I was young. When I had reached
the wrong side of fifty, my face had learned discretion, and they
failed.

"How did you arrive at your discovery?" I asked. "I know of nobody who
could have helped you."

"I helped myself, sir! I reasoned it out. A wonderful thing for a woman
to do, isn't it? I wonder whether you could follow the process?"

My reply to this was made by a bow. I was sure of my command over my
face; but perfect control of the voice is a rare power. Here and there,
a great actor or a great criminal possesses it.

Mrs. Tenbruggen's vanity took me into her confidence. "In the first
place," she said, "Helena is plainly the wicked one of the two. I was
not prejudiced by what Selina had told me of her: I saw it, and felt
it, before I had been five minutes in her company. If lying tongues ever
provoke her as lying tongues provoked her mother, she will follow her
mother's example. Very well. Now--in the second place--though it is
very slight, there is a certain something in her hair and her complexion
which reminds me of the murderess: there is no other resemblance,
I admit. In the third place, the girls' names point to the same
conclusion. Mr. Gracedieu is a Protestant and a Dissenter. Would he call
a child of his own by the name of a Roman Catholic saint? No! he would
prefer a name in the Bible; Eunice is _his_ child. And Helena was once
the baby whom I carried into the prison. Do you deny that?"

"I don't deny it."

Only four words! But they were deceitfully spoken, and the
deceit--practiced in Eunice's interest, it is needless to
say--succeeded. Mrs. Tenbruggen's object in visiting me was attained;
I had confirmed her belief in the delusion that Helena was the adopted
child.

She got up to take her leave. I asked if she proposed remaining in
London. No; she was returning to her country patients that night.

As I attended her to the house-door, she turned to me with her
mischievous smile. "I have taken some trouble in finding the clew to the
Minister's mystery," she said. "Don't you wonder why?"

"If I did wonder," I answered, "would you tell me why?"

She laughed at the bare idea of it. "Another lesson," she said, "to
assist a helpless man in studying the weaker sex. I have already shown
you that a woman can reason. Learn next that a woman can keep a secret.
Good-by. God bless you!"

Of the events which followed Mrs. Tenbruggen's visit it is not possible
for me, I am thankful to say, to speak from personal experience. Ought I
to conclude with an expression of repentance for the act of deception
to which I have already pleaded guilty? I don't know. Yes! the force of
circumstances does really compel me to say it, and say it seriously--I
declare, on my word of honor, I don't know.




Third period: 1876. _HELENA'S DIARY RESUMED._



CHAPTER LII. HELENA'S DIARY RESUMED.

While my father remains in his present helpless condition, somebody must
assume a position of command in this house. There cannot be a moment's
doubt that I am the person to do it.

In my agitated state of mind, sometimes doubtful of Philip, sometimes
hopeful of him, I find Mrs. Tenbruggen simply unendurable. A female
doctor is, under any circumstances, a creature whom I detest. She is,
at her very best, a bad imitation of a man. The Medical Rubber is
worse than this; she is a bad imitation of a mountebank. Her grinning
good-humor, adopted no doubt to please the fools who are her patients,
and her impudent enjoyment of hearing herself talk, make me regret for
the first time in my life that I am a young lady. If I belonged to the
lowest order of the population, I might take the first stick I could
find, and enjoy the luxury of giving Mrs. Tenbruggen a good beating.

She literally haunts the house, encouraged, of course, by her wretched
little dupe, Miss Jillgall. Only this morning, I tried what a broad hint
would do toward suggesting that her visits had better come to an end.

"Really, Mrs. Tenbruggen," I said, "I must request Miss Jillgall to
moderate her selfish enjoyment of your company, for your own sake. Your
time is too valuable, in a professional sense, to be wasted on an
idle woman who has no sympathy with your patients, waiting for relief
perhaps, and waiting in vain."

She listened to this, all smiles and good-humor: "My dear, do you know
how I might answer you, if I was an ill-natured woman?"

"I have no curiosity to hear it, Mrs. Tenbruggen."

"I might ask you," she persisted, "to allow me to mind my own business.
But I am incapable of making an ungrateful return for the interest which
you take in my medical welfare. Let me venture to ask if you understand
the value of time."

"Are you going to say much more, Mrs. Tenbruggen?"

"I am going to make a sensible remark, my child. If you feel tired,
permit me--here is a chair. Father Time, dear Miss Gracedieu, has always
been a good friend of mine, because I know how to make the best use
of him. The author of the famous saying _Tempus fugit_ (you understand
Latin, of course) was, I take leave to think, an idle man. The more I
have to do, the readier Time is to wait for me. Let me impress this on
your mind by some interesting examples. The greatest conqueror of the
century--Napoleon--had time enough for everything. The greatest novelist
of the century--Sir Walter Scott--had time enough for everything. At my
humble distance, I imitate those illustrious men, and my patients never
complain of me."

"Have you done?" I asked.

"Yes, dear--for the present."

"You are a clever woman, Mrs. Tenbruggen and you know it. You have an
eloquent tongue, and you know it. But you are something else, which you
don't seem to be aware of. You are a Bore."

She burst out laughing, with the air of a woman who thoroughly enjoyed
a good joke. I looked back when I left the room, and saw the friend of
Father Time in the easy chair opening our newspaper.

This is a specimen of the customary encounter of our wits. I place it on
record in my Journal, to excuse myself _to_ myself. When she left us
at last, later in the day, I sent a letter after her to the hotel. Not
having kept a copy of it, let me present the substance, like a sermon,
under three heads: I begged to be excused for speaking plainly; I
declared that there was a total want of sympathy between us, on my side;
and I proposed that she should deprive me of future opportunities of
receiving her in this house. The reply arrived immediately in these
terms: "Your letter received, dear girl. I am not in the least angry;
partly because I am very fond of you, partly because I know that you
will ask me to come back again. P. S.: Philip sends his love."

This last piece of insolence was unquestionably a lie. Philip detests
her. They are both staying at the same hotel. But I happen to know that
he won't even look at her, if they meet by accident on the stairs.

People who can enjoy the melancholy spectacle of human nature in a state
of degradation would be at a loss which exhibition to prefer--an
ugly old maid in a rage, or an ugly old maid in tears. Miss Jillgall
presented herself in both characters when she heard what had happened.
To my mind, Mrs. Tenbruggen's bosom-friend is a creature not fit to be
seen or heard when she loses her temper. I only told her to leave
the room. To my great amusement, she shook her bony fist at me, and
expressed a frantic wish: "Oh, if I was rich enough to leave this wicked
house!" I wonder whether there is insanity (as well as poverty) in Miss
Jillgall's family?


Last night my mind was in a harassed state. Philip was, as usual, the
cause of it.

Perhaps I acted indiscreetly when I insisted on his leaving London, and
returning to this place. But what else could I have done? It was not
merely my interest, it was an act of downright necessity, to withdraw
him from the influence of his hateful father--whom I now regard as the
one serious obstacle to my marriage. There is no prospect of being rid
of Mr. Dunboyne the elder by his returning to Ireland. He is trying a
new remedy for his crippled hand--electricity. I wish it was lightning,
to kill him! If I had given that wicked old man the chance, I am firmly
convinced he would not have let a day pass without doing his best to
depreciate me in his son's estimation. Besides, there was the risk, if
I had allowed Philip to remain long away from me, of losing--no, while
I keep my beauty I cannot be in such danger as that--let me say, of
permitting time and absence to weaken my hold on him. However sullen and
silent he may be, when we meet--and I find him in that condition far too
often--I can, sooner or later, recall him to his brighter self. My eyes
preserve their charm, my talk can still amuse him, and, better even than
that, I feel the answering thrill in him, which tells me how precious my
kisses are--not too lavishly bestowed! But the time when I am obliged
to leave him to himself is the time that I dread. How do I know that
his thoughts are not wandering away to Eunice? He denies it; he declares
that he only went to the farmhouse to express his regret for his own
thoughtless conduct, and to offer her the brotherly regard due to the
sister of his promised wife. Can I believe it? Oh, what would I not give
to be able to believe it! How can I feel sure that her refusal to see
him was not a cunning device to make him long for another interview, and
plan perhaps in private to go back and try again. Marriage! Nothing will
quiet these frightful doubts of mine, nothing will reward me for all
that I have suffered, nothing will warm my heart with the delightful
sense of triumph over Eunice, but my marriage to Philip. And what does
he say, when I urge it on him?--yes, I have fallen as low as that, in
the despair which sometimes possesses me. He has his answer, always the
same, and always ready: "How are we to live? where is the money?" The
maddening part of it is that I cannot accuse him of raising objections
that don't exist. We are poorer than ever here, since my father's
illness--and Philip's allowance is barely enough to suffice him as a
single man. Oh, how I hate the rich!

It was useless to think of going to bed. How could I hope to sleep, with
my head throbbing, and my thoughts in this disturbed state? I put on my
comfortable dressing-gown, and sat down to try what reading would do to
quiet my mind.

I had borrowed the book from the Library, to which I have been a
subscriber in secret for some time past. It was an old volume, full
of what we should now call Gossip; relating strange adventures, and
scandalous incidents in family history which had been concealed from
public notice.

One of these last romances in real life caught a strong hold on my
interest.

It was a strange case of intended poisoning, which had never been
carried out. A young married lady of rank, whose name was concealed
under an initial letter, had suffered some unendurable wrong (which
was not mentioned) at the hands of her husband's mother. The wife
was described as a woman of strong passions, who had determined on a
terrible revenge by taking the life of her mother-in-law. There
were difficulties in the way of her committing the crime without an
accomplice to help her; and she decided on taking her maid, an elderly
woman, into her confidence. The poison was secretly obtained by this
person; and the safest manner of administering it was under discussion
between the mistress and the maid, when the door of the room was
suddenly opened. The husband, accompanied by his brother, rushed in, and
charged his wife with plotting the murder of his mother. The young lady
(she was only twenty-three) must have been a person of extraordinary
courage and resolution. She saw at once that her maid had betrayed her,
and, with astonishing presence of mind, she turned on the traitress,
and said to her husband: "There is the wretch who has been trying to
persuade me to poison your mother!" As it happened, the old lady's
temper was violent and overbearing; and the maid had complained of
being ill-treated by her, in the hearing of the other servants. The
circumstances made it impossible to decide which of the two was really
the guilty woman. The servant was sent away, and the husband and wife
separated soon afterward, under the excuse of incompatibility of
temper. Years passed; and the truth was only discovered by the death-bed
confession of the wife. A remarkable story, which has made such an
impression on me that I have written it in my Journal. I am not rich
enough to buy the book.


For the last two days, I have been confined to my room with a bad
feverish cold--caught, as I suppose, by sitting at an open window
reading my book till nearly three o'clock in the morning. I sent a note
to Philip, telling him of my illness. On the first day, he called to
inquire after me. On the second day, no visit, and no letter. Here is
the third day--and no news of him as yet. I am better, but not fit to go
out. Let me wait another hour, and, if that exertion of patience meets
with no reward, I shall send a note to the hotel. No news of Philip. I
have sent to the hotel. The servant has just returned, bringing me back
my note. The waiter informed her that Mr. Dunboyne had gone away to
London by the morning train. No apology or explanation left for me.

_Can_ he have deserted me? I am in such a frenzy of doubt and rage that
I can hardly write that horrible question. Is it possible--oh, I feel it
_is_ possible that he has gone away with Eunice. Do I know where to find
them? if I did know, what could I do? I feel as if I could kill them
both!



CHAPTER LIII. HELENA'S DIARY RESUMED.

After the heat of my anger had cooled, I made two discoveries. One cost
me a fee to a messenger, and the other exposed me to the insolence of
a servant. I pay willingly in my purse and my pride, when the gain is
peace of mind. Through my messenger I ascertained that Eunice had never
left the farm. Through my own inquiries, answered by the waiter with an
impudent grin, I heard that Philip had left orders to have his room kept
for him. What misery our stupid housemaid might have spared me, if she
had thought of putting that question when I sent her to the hotel!

The rest of the day passed in vain speculations on Philip's motive for
this sudden departure. What poor weak creatures we are! I persuaded
myself to hope that anxiety for our marriage had urged him to make an
effort to touch the heart of his mean father. Shall I see him to-morrow?
And shall I have reason to be fonder of him than ever?


We met again to-day as usual. He has behaved infamously.

When I asked what had been his object in going to London, I was told
that it was "a matter of business." He made that idiotic excuse as
coolly as if he really thought I should believe it. I submitted in
silence, rather than mar his return to me by the disaster of a quarrel.
But this was an unlucky day. A harder trial of my self-control was still
to come. Without the slightest appearance of shame, Philip informed me
that he was charged with a message from Mrs. Tenbruggen! She wanted some
Irish lace, and would I be so good as to tell her which was the best
shop at which she could buy it?

Was he really in earnest? "You," I said, "who distrusted and detested
her--you are on friendly terms with that woman?"

He remonstrated with me. "My dear Helena, don't speak in that way
of Mrs. Tenbruggen. We have both been mistaken about her. That good
creature has forgiven the brutal manner in which I spoke to her, when
she was in attendance on my father. She was the first to propose that
we should shake hands and forget it. My darling, don't let all the good
feeling be on one side. You have no idea how kindly she speaks of you,
and how anxious she is to help us to be married. Come! come! meet her
half-way. Write down the name of the shop on my card, and I will take it
back to her."

Sheer amazement kept me silent: I let him go on. He was a mere child in
the hands of Mrs. Tenbruggen: she had only to determine to make a fool
of him, and she could do it.

But why did she do it? What advantage had she to gain by insinuating
herself in this way into his good opinion, evidently with the intention
of urging him to reconcile us to each other? How could we two poor young
people be of the smallest use to the fashionable Masseuse?

My silence began to irritate Philip. "I never knew before how obstinate
you could be," he said; "you seem to be doing your best--I can't imagine
why--to lower yourself in my estimation."

I held my tongue; I assumed my smile. It is all very well for men to
talk about the deceitfulness of women. What chance (I should like to ask
somebody who knows about it) do the men give us of making our lives with
them endurable, except by deceit! I gave way, of course, and wrote down
the address of the shop.

He was so pleased that he kissed me. Yes! the most fondly affectionate
kiss that he had given me, for weeks past, was my reward for submitting
to Mrs. Tenbruggen. She is old enough to be his mother, and almost as
ugly as Miss Jillgall--and she has made her interests his interests
already!


On the next day, I fully expected to receive a visit from Mrs.
Tenbruggen. She knew better than that. I only got a polite little note,
thanking me for the address, and adding an artless concession: "I earn
more money than I know what to do with; and I adore Irish lace."

The next day came, and still she was careful not to show herself too
eager for a personal reconciliation. A splendid nosegay was sent to me,
with another little note: "A tribute, dear Helena, offered by one of my
grateful patients. Too beautiful a present for an old woman like me.
I agree with the poet: 'Sweets to the sweet.' A charming thought of
Shakespeare's, is it not? I should like to verify the quotation. Would
you mind leaving the volume for me in the hall, if I call to-morrow?"

Well done, Mrs. Tenbruggen! She doesn't venture to intrude on Miss
Gracedieu in the drawing-room; she only wants to verify a quotation
in the hall. Oh, goddess of Humility (if there is such a person), how
becomingly you are dressed when your milliner is an artful old woman!

While this reflection was passing through my mind, Miss Jillgall came
in--saw the nosegay on the table--and instantly pounced on it. "Oh, for
me! for me!" she cried. "I noticed it this morning on Elizabeth's table.
How very kind of her!" She plunged her inquisitive nose into the poor
flowers, and looked up sentimentally at the ceiling. "The perfume of
goodness," she remarked, "mingled with the perfume of flowers!" "When
you have quite done with it," I said, "perhaps you will be so good as
to return my nosegay?" "_Your_ nosegay!" she exclaimed. "There is Mrs.
Tenbruggen's letter," I replied, "if you would like to look at it."
She did look at it. All the bile in her body flew up into her eyes, and
turned them green; she looked as if she longed to scratch my face. I
gave the flowers afterward to Maria; Miss Jillgall's nose had completely
spoiled them.


It would have been too ridiculous to have allowed Mrs. Tenbruggen to
consult Shakespeare in the hall. I had the honor of receiving her in my
own room. We accomplished a touching reconciliation, and we quite forgot
Shakespeare.

She troubles me; she does indeed trouble me.

Having set herself entirely right with Philip, she is determined on
performing the same miracle with me. Her reform of herself is already
complete. Her vulgar humor was kept under strict restraint; she was
quiet and well-bred, and readier to listen than to talk. This change was
not presented abruptly. She contrived to express her friendly interests
in Philip and in me by hints dropped here and there, assisted in their
effort by answers on my part, into which I was tempted so skillfully
that I only discovered the snare set for me, on reflection. What is it,
I ask again, that she has in view in taking all this trouble? Where is
her motive for encouraging a love-affair, which Miss Jillgall must have
denounced to her as an abominable wrong inflicted on Eunice? Money (even
if there was a prospect of such a thing, in our case) cannot be her
object; it is quite true that her success sets her above pecuniary
anxiety. Spiteful feeling against Eunice is out of the question. They
have only met once; and her opinion was expressed to me with evident
sincerity: "Your sister is a nice girl, but she is like other nice
girls--she doesn't interest me." There is Eunice's character, drawn from
the life in few words. In what an irritating position do I find myself
placed! Never before have I felt so interested in trying to look into
a person's secret mind; and never before have I been so completely
baffled.

I had written as far as this, and was on the point of closing my
Journal, when a third note arrived from Mrs. Tenbruggen.

She had been thinking about me at intervals (she wrote) all through the
rest of the day; and, kindly as I had received her, she was conscious
of being the object of doubts on my part which her visit had failed to
remove. Might she ask leave to call on me, in the hope of improving her
position in my estimation? An appointment followed for the next day.

What can she have to say to me which she has not already said? Is it
anything about Philip, I wonder?



CHAPTER LIV. HELENA'S DIARY RESUMED.

At our interview of the next day, Mrs. Tenbruggen's capacity for
self-reform appeared under a new aspect. She dropped all familiarity
with me, and she stated the object of her visit without a superfluous
word of explanation or apology.

I thought this a remarkable effort for a woman; and I recognized the
merit of it by leaving the lion's share of the talk to my visitor. In
these terms she opened her business with me:

"Has Mr. Philip Dunboyne told you why he went to London?"

"He made a commonplace excuse," I answered. "Business, he said, took him
to London. I know no more."

"You have a fair prospect of happiness, Miss Helena, when you are
married--your future husband is evidently afraid of you. I am not afraid
of you; and I shall confide to your private ear something which you have
an interest in knowing. The business which took young Mr. Dunboyne
to London was to consult a competent person, on a matter concerning
himself. The competent person is the sagacious (not to say sly) old
gentleman--whom we used to call the Governor. You know him, I believe?"

"Yes. But I am at a loss to imagine why Philip should have consulted
him."

"Have you ever heard or read, Miss Helena, of such a thing as 'an old
man's fancy'?"

"I think I have."

"Well, the Governor has taken an old man's fancy to your sister.
They appeared to understand each other perfectly when I was at the
farmhouse."

"Excuse me, Mrs. Tenbruggen, that is what I know already. Why did Philip
go to the Governor?"

She smiled. "If anybody is acquainted with the true state of your
sister's feelings, the Governor is the man. I sent Mr. Dunboyne to
consult him--and there is the reason for it."

This open avowal of her motives perplexed and offended me. After
declaring herself to be interested in my marriage-engagement had she
changed her mind, and resolved on favoring Philip's return to Eunice?
What right had he to consult anybody about the state of that girl's
feelings? _My_ feelings form the only subject of inquiry that was
properly open to him. I should have said something which I might have
afterward regretted, if Mrs. Tenbruggen had allowed me the opportunity.
Fortunately for both of us, she went on with her narrative of her own
proceedings.

"Philip Dunboyne is an excellent fellow," she continued; "I really like
him--but he has his faults. He sadly wants strength of purpose; and,
like weak men in general, he only knows his own mind when a resolute
friend takes him in hand and guides him. I am his resolute friend. I
saw him veering about between you and Eunice; and I decided for
his sake--may I say for your sake also?--on putting an end to that
mischievous state of indecision. You have the claim on him; you are the
right wife for him, and the Governor was (as I thought likely from what
I had myself observed) the man to make him see it. I am not in anybody's
secrets; it was pure guesswork on my part, and it has succeeded. There
is no more doubt now about Miss Eunice's sentiments. The question is
settled."

"In my favor?"

"Certainly in your favor--or I should not have said a word about it."

"Was Philip's visit kindly received? Or did the old wretch laugh at
him?"

"My dear Miss Gracedieu, the old wretch is a man of the world, and never
makes mistakes of that sort. Before he could open his lips, he had
to satisfy himself that your lover deserved to be taken into his
confidence, on the delicate subject of Eunice's sentiments. He arrived
at a favorable conclusion. I can repeat Philip's questions and
the Governor's answers after putting the young man through a stiff
examination just as they passed: 'May I inquire, sir, if she has spoken
to you about me?' 'She has often spoken about you.' 'Did she seem to be
angry with me?' 'She is too good and too sweet to be angry with you.'
'Do you think she will forgive me?' 'She has forgiven you.' 'Did she say
so herself?' 'Yes, of her own free will.' 'Why did she refuse to see
me when I called at the farm?' 'She had her own reasons--good reasons.'
'Has she regretted it since?' 'Certainly not.' 'Is it likely that she
would consent, if I proposed a reconciliation?' 'I put that question to
her myself.' 'How did she take it, sir?' 'She declined to take it.' 'You
mean that she declined a reconciliation?' 'Yes.' 'Are you sure she was
in earnest?' 'I am positively sure.' That last answer seems, by young
Dunboyne's own confession, to have been enough, and more than enough for
him. He got up to go--and then an odd thing happened. After giving him
the most unfavorable answers, the Governor patted him paternally on
the shoulder, and encouraged him to hope. 'Before we say good-by,
Mr. Philip, one word more. If I was as young as you are, I should not
despair.' There is a sudden change of front! Who can explain it?"

The Governor's mischievous resolution to reconcile Philip and Eunice
explained it, of course. With the best intentions (perhaps) Mrs.
Tenbruggen had helped that design by bringing the two men together. "Go
on," I said; "I am prepared to hear next that Philip has paid another
visit to my sister, and has been received this time."

I must say this for Mrs. Tenbruggen: she kept her temper perfectly.

"He has not been to the farm," she said, "but he has done something
nearly as foolish. He has written to your sister."

"And he has received a favorable reply, of course?"

She put her hand into the pocket of her dress.

"There is your sister's reply," she said.

Any persons who have had a crushing burden lifted, unexpectedly and
instantly, from off their minds, will know what I felt when I read the
reply. In the most positive language, Eunice refused to correspond with
Philip, or to speak with him. The concluding words proved that she was
in earnest. "You are engaged to Helena. Consider me as a stranger until
you are married. After that time you will be my brother-in-law, and then
I may pardon you for writing to me."

Nobody who knows Eunice would have supposed that she possessed those
two valuable qualities--common-sense and proper pride. It is pleasant
to feel that I can now send cards to my sister, when I am Mrs. Philip
Dunboyne.

I returned the letter to Mrs. Tenbruggen, with the sincerest expressions
of regret for having doubted her. "I have been unworthy of your generous
interest in me," I said; "I am almost ashamed to offer you my hand."

She took my hand, and gave it a good, heady shake.

"Are we friends?" she asked, in the simplest and prettiest manner.
"Then let us be easy and pleasant again," she went on. "Will you call
me Elizabeth; and shall I call you Helena? Very well. Now I have got
something else to say; another secret which must be kept from Philip
(I call _him_ by his name now, you see) for a few days more. Your
happiness, my dear, must not depend on his miserly old father. He must
have a little income of his own to marry on. Among the hundreds of
unfortunate wretches whom I have relieved from torture of mind and body,
there is a grateful minority. Small! small! but there they are. I have
influence among powerful people; and I am trying to make Philip private
secretary to a member of Parliament. When I have succeeded, you shall
tell him the good news."

What a vile humor I must have been in, at the time, not to have
appreciated the delightful gayety of this good creature; I went to the
other extreme now, and behaved like a gushing young miss fresh from
school. I kissed her.

She burst out laughing. "What a sacrifice!" she cried. "A kiss for me,
which ought to have been kept for Philip! By-the-by, do you know what I
should do, Helena, in your place? I should take our handsome young man
away from that hotel!"

"I will do anything that you advise," I said.

"And you will do well, my child. In the first place, the hotel is too
expensive for Philip's small means. In the second place, two of the
chambermaids have audaciously presumed to be charming girls; and
the men, my dear--well! well! I will leave you to find that out for
yourself. In the third place, you want to have Philip under your own
wing; domestic familiarity will make him fonder of you than ever. Keep
him out of the sort of company that he meets with in the billiard-room
and the smoking-room. You have got a spare bed here, I know, and your
poor father is in no condition to use his authority. Make Philip one of
the family."

This last piece of advice staggered me. I mentioned the Proprieties.
Mrs. Tenbruggen laughed at the Proprieties.

"Make Selina of some use," she suggested. "While you have got _her_ in
the house, Propriety is rampant. Why condemn poor helpless Philip to
cheap lodgings? Time enough to cast him out to the feather-bed and the
fleas on the night before your marriage. Besides, I shall be in and out
constantly--for I mean to cure your father. The tongue of scandal is
silent in my awful presence; an atmosphere of virtue surrounds Mamma
Tenbruggen. Think of it."



CHAPTER LV. HELENA'S DIARY RESUMED.

I did think of it. Philip came to us, and lived in our house.

Let me hasten to add that the protest of Propriety was duly entered,
on the day before my promised husband arrived. Standing in the
doorway--nothing would induce her to take a chair, or even to enter the
room--Miss Jillgall delivered her opinion on Philip's approaching
visit. Mrs. Tenbruggen reported it in her pocket-book, as if she was
representing a newspaper at a public meeting. Here it is, copied from
her notes:

"Miss Helena Gracedieu, my first impulse under the present disgusting
circumstances was to leave the house, and earn a bare crust in the
cheapest garret I could find in the town. But my grateful heart
remembers Mr. Gracedieu. My poor afflicted cousin was good to me when
I was helpless. I cannot forsake him when _he_ is helpless. At whatever
sacrifice of my own self-respect, I remain under this roof, so dear to
me for the Minister's sake. I notice, miss, that you smile. I see my
once dear Elizabeth, the friend who has so bitterly disappointed
me--" she stopped, and put her handkerchief to her eyes, and went on
again--"the friend who has so bitterly disappointed me, taking satirical
notes of what I say. I am not ashamed of what I say. The virtue which
will not stretch a little, where the motive is good, is feeble virtue
indeed. I shall stay in the house, and witness horrors, and rise
superior to them. Good-morning, Miss Gracedieu. Good-morning,
Elizabeth." She performed a magnificent curtsey, and (as Mrs.
Tenbruggen's experience of the stage informed me) made a very creditable
exit.


A week has passed, and I have not opened my Diary.

My days have glided away in one delicious flow of happiness. Philip has
been delightfully devoted to me. His fervent courtship, far exceeding
any similar attentions which he may once have paid to Eunice, has
shown such variety and such steadfastness of worship, that I despair
of describing it. My enjoyment of my new life is to be felt--not to be
coldly considered, and reduced to an imperfect statement in words.

For the first time I feel capable, if the circumstances encouraged me,
of acts of exalted virtue. For instance, I could save my country if
my country was worth it. I could die a martyr to religion if I had a
religion. In one word, I am exceedingly well satisfied with myself.
The little disappointments of life pass over me harmless. I do not
even regret the failure of good Mrs. Tenbruggen's efforts to find an
employment for Philip, worthy of his abilities and accomplishments.
The member of Parliament to whom she had applied has chosen a secretary
possessed of political influence. That is the excuse put forward in his
letter to Mrs. Tenbruggen. Wretched corrupt creature! If he was worth a
thought I should pity him. He has lost Philip's services.


Three days more have slipped by. The aspect of my heaven on earth is
beginning to alter.

Perhaps the author of that wonderful French novel, "L'Ame Damne'e," is
right when he tells us that human happiness is misery in masquerade. It
would be wrong to say that I am miserable. But I may be on the way to
it; I am anxious.

To-day, when he did not know that I was observing him, I discovered a
preoccupied look in Philip's eyes. He laughed when I asked if anything
had happened to vex him. Was it a natural laugh? He put his arm round
me and kissed me. Was it done mechanically? I daresay I am out of humor
myself. I think I had a little headache. Morbid, probably. I won't think
of it any more.

It has occurred to me this morning that he may dislike being left by
himself, while I am engaged in my household affairs. If this is the
case, intensely as I hate her, utterly as I loathe the idea of putting
her in command over my domestic dominions, I shall ask Miss Jillgall to
take my place as housekeeper.

I was away to-day in the kitchen regions rather longer than usual. When
I had done with my worries, Philip was not to be found. Maria, looking
out of one of the bedroom windows instead of doing her work, had seen
Mr. Dunboyne leave the house. It was possible that he had charged Miss
Jillgall with a message for me. I asked if she was in her room. No; she,
too, had gone out. It was a fine day, and Philip had no doubt taken a
stroll--but he might have waited till I could join him. There were some
orders to be given to the butcher and the green-grocer. I, too, left the
house, hoping to get rid of some little discontent, caused by thinking
of what had happened. Returning by the way of High Street--I declare
I can hardly believe it even now--I did positively see Miss Jillgall
coming out of a pawnbroker's shop!

The direction in which she turned prevented her from seeing me. She was
quite unaware that I had discovered her; and I have said nothing about
it since. But I noticed something unusual in the manner in which her
watch-chain was hanging, and I asked her what o'clock it was. She said,
"You have got your own watch." I told her my watch had stopped. "So
has mine," she said. There is no doubt about it now; she has pawned her
watch. What for? She lives here for nothing, and she has not had a new
dress since I have known her. Why does she want money?

Philip had not returned when I got home. Another mysterious journey to
London? No. After an absence of more than two hours, he came back.

Naturally enough, I asked what he had been about. He had been taking a
long walk. For his health's sake? No: to think. To think of what? Well,
I might be surprised to hear it, but his idle life was beginning
to weigh on his spirits; he wanted employment. Had he thought of an
employment? Not yet. Which way had he walked? Anyway: he had not noticed
where he went. These replies were all made in a tone that offended me.
Besides, I observed there was no dust on his boots (after a week of dry
weather), and his walk of two hours did not appear to have heated or
tired him. I took an opportunity of consulting Mrs. Tenbruggen.

She had anticipated that I should appeal to her opinion, as a woman of
the world.

I shall not set down in detail what she said. Some of it humiliated me;
and from some of it I recoiled. The expression of her opinion came to
this. In the absence of experience, a certain fervor of temperament
was essential to success in the art of fascinating men. Either my
temperament was deficient, or my intellect overpowered it. It was
natural that I should suppose myself to be as susceptible to the tender
passion as the most excitable woman living. Delusion, my Helena, amiable
delusion! Had I ever observed or had any friend told me that my pretty
hands were cold hands? I had beautiful eyes, expressive of vivacity,
of intelligence, of every feminine charm, except the one inviting
charm that finds favor in the eyes of a man. She then entered into
particulars, which I don't deny showed a true interest in helping me.
I was ungrateful, sulky, self-opinionated. Dating from that day's talk
with Mrs. Tenbruggen, my new friendship began to show signs of having
caught a chill. But I did my best to follow her instructions--and
failed.

It is perhaps true that my temperament is overpowered by my intellect.
Or it is possibly truer still that the fire in my heart, when it warms
to love, is a fire that burns low. My belief is that I surprised Philip
instead of charming him. He responded to my advances, but I felt that it
was not done in earnest, not spontaneously. Had I any right to complain?
Was I in earnest? Was I spontaneous? We were making love to each
other under false pretenses. Oh, what a fool I was to ask for Mrs.
Tenbruggen's advice!

A humiliating doubt has come to me suddenly. Has his heart been
inclining to Eunice again? After such a letter as she has written to
him? Impossible!


Three events since yesterday, which I consider, trifling as they may be,
intimations of something wrong.

First, Miss Jillgall, who at one time was eager to take my place, has
refused to relieve me of my housekeeping duties. Secondly, Philip has
been absent again, on another long walk. Thirdly, when Philip returned,
depressed and sulky, I caught Miss Jillgall looking at him with interest
and pity visible in her skinny face. What do these things mean?


I am beginning to doubt everybody. Not one of them, Philip included,
cares for me--but I can frighten them, at any rate. Yesterday evening,
I dropped on the floor as suddenly as if I had been shot: a fit of some
sort. The doctor honestly declared that he was at a loss to account for
it. He would have laid me under an eternal obligation if he had failed
to bring me back to life again.

As it is, I am more clever than the doctor. What brought the fit on
is well known to me. Rage--furious, overpowering, deadly rage--was the
cause. I am now in the cold-blooded state, which can look back at the
event as composedly as if it had happened to some other girl. Suppose
that girl had let her sweetheart know how she loved him as she had never
let him know it before. Suppose she opened the door again the instant
after she had left the room, eager, poor wretch, to say once more, for
the fiftieth time, "My angel, I love you!" Suppose she found her angel
standing with his back toward her, so that his face was reflected in the
glass. And suppose she discovered in that face, so smiling and so sweet
when his head had rested on her bosom only the moment before, the most
hideous expression of disgust that features can betray. There could
be no doubt of it; I had made my poor offering of love to a man who
secretly loathed me. I wonder that I survived my sense of my own
degradation. Well! I am alive; and I know him in his true character at
last. Am I a woman who submits when an outrage is offered to her? What
will happen next? Who knows? I am in a fine humor. What I have just
written has set me laughing at myself. Helena Gracedieu has one merit at
least--she is a very amusing person.


I slept last night.

This morning, I am strong again, calm, wickedly capable of deceiving
Mr. Philip Dunboyne, as he has deceived me. He has not the faintest
suspicion that I have discovered him. I wish he had courage enough
to kill somebody. How I should enjoy hiring the nearest window to the
scaffold, and seeing him hanged!

Miss Jillgall is in better spirits than ever. She is going to take
a little holiday; and the cunning creature makes a mystery of it.
"Good-by, Miss Helena. I am going to stay for a day or two with a
friend." What friend? Who cares?


Last night, I was wakeful. In the darkness a daring idea came to me.
To-day, I have carried out the idea. Something has followed which is
well worth entering in my Diary.

I left the room at the usual hour for attending to my domestic affairs.
The obstinate cook did me a service; she was insolent; she wanted to
have her own way. I gave her her own way. In less than five minutes I
was on the watch in the pantry, which has a view of the house door. My
hat and my parasol were waiting for me on the table, in case of my going
out, too.

In a few minutes more, I heard the door opened. Mr. Philip Dunboyne
stepped out. He was going to take another of his long walks.

I followed him to the street in which the cabs stand. He hired the first
one on the rank, an open chaise; while I kept myself hidden in a shop
door.

The moment he started on his drive, I hired a closed cab. "Double your
fare," I said to the driver, "whatever it may be, if you follow that
chaise cleverly, and do what I tell you."

He nodded and winked at me. A wicked-looking old fellow; just the man I
wanted.

We followed the chaise.



CHAPTER LVI. HELENA'S DIARY RESUMED.

When we had left the town behind us, the coachman began to drive more
slowly. In my ignorance, I asked what this change in the pace meant.
He pointed with his whip to the open road and to the chaise in the
distance.

"If we keep too near the gentleman, miss, he has only got to look back,
and he'll see we are following him. The safe thing to do is to let the
chaise get on a bit. We can't lose sight of it, out here."

I had felt inclined to trust in the driver's experience, and he had
already justified my confidence in him. This encouraged me to consult
his opinion on a matter of some importance to my present interests. I
could see the necessity of avoiding discovery when we had followed the
chaise to its destination; but I was totally at a loss to know how it
could be done. My wily old man was ready with his advice the moment I
asked for it.

"Wherever the chaise stops, miss, we must drive past it as if we were
going somewhere else. I shall notice the place while we go by; and you
will please sit back in the corner of the cab so that the gentleman
can't see you."

"Well," I said, "and what next?"

"Next, miss, I shall pull up, wherever it may be, out of sight of the
driver of the chaise. He bears an excellent character, I don't deny it;
but I've known him for years--and we had better not trust him. I shall
tell you where the gentleman stopped; and you will go back to the place
(on foot, of course), and see for yourself what's to be done, specially
if there happens to be a lady in the case. No offense, miss; it's in my
experience that there's generally a lady in the case. Anyhow, you can
judge for yourself, and you'll know where to find me waiting when you
want me again."

"Suppose something happens," I suggested, "that we don't expect?"

"I shan't lose my head, miss, whatever happens."

"All very well, coachman; but I have only your word for it." In the
irritable state of my mind, the man's confident way of thinking annoyed
me.

"Begging your pardon, my young lady, you've got (if I may say so) what
they call a guarantee. When I was a young man, I drove a cab in London
for ten years. Will that do?"

"I suppose you mean," I answered, "that you have learned deceit in the
wicked ways of the great city."

He took this as a compliment. "Thank you, miss. That's it exactly."

After a long drive, or so it seemed to my impatience, we passed the
chaise drawn up at a lonely house, separated by a front garden from the
road. In two or three minutes more, we stopped where the road took a
turn, and descended to lower ground. The farmhouse which we had left
behind us was known to the driver. He led the way to a gate at the side
of the road, and opened it for me.

"In your place, miss," he said slyly, "the private way back is the way
I should wish to take. Try it by the fields. Turn to the right when
you have passed the barn, and you'll find yourself at the back of the
house." He stopped, and looked at his big silver watch. "Half-past
twelve," he said, "the Chawbacons--I mean the farmhouse servants,
miss--will be at their dinner. All in your favor, so far. If the dog
happens to be loose, don't forget that his name's Grinder; call him by
his name, and pat him before he has time enough to think, and he'll let
you be. When you want me, here you'll find me waiting for orders."

I looked back as I crossed the field. The driver was sitting on the
gate, smoking his pipe, and the horse was nibbling the grass at the
roadside. Two happy animals, without a burden on their minds!

After passing the barn, I saw nothing of the dog. Far or near, no
living creature appeared; the servants must have been at dinner, as the
coachman had foreseen. Arriving at a wooden fence, I opened a gate in
it, and found myself on a bit of waste ground. On my left, there was
a large duck-pond. On my right, I saw the fowl-house and the pigstyes.
Before me was a high impenetrable hedge; and at some distance behind
it--an orchard or a garden, as I supposed, filling the intermediate
space--rose the back of the house. I made for the shelter of the hedge,
in the fear that some one might approach a window and see me. Once
sheltered from observation, I might consider what I should do next.
It was impossible to doubt that this was the house in which Eunice
was living. Neither could I fail to conclude that Philip had tried to
persuade her to see him, on those former occasions when he told me he
had taken a long walk.

As I crouched behind the hedge, I heard voices approaching on the other
side of it. At last fortune had befriended me. The person speaking
at the moment was Miss Jillgall; and the person who answered her was
Philip.

"I am afraid, dear Mr. Philip, you don't quite understand my sweet
Euneece. Honorable, high minded, delicate in her feelings, and, oh, so
unselfish! I don't want to alarm you, but when she hears you have been
deceiving Helena--"

"Upon my word, Miss Jillgall, you are so provoking! I have not been
deceiving Helena. Haven't I told you what discouraging answers I got,
when I went to see the Governor? Haven't I shown you Eunice's reply to
my letter? You can't have forgotten it already?"

"Oh, yes, I have. Why should I remember it? Don't I know poor Euneece
was in your mind, all the time?"

"You're wrong again! Eunice was not in my mind all the time. I was
hurt--I was offended by the cruel manner in which she had treated me.
And what was the consequence? So far was I from deceiving Helena--she
rose in my estimation by comparison with her sister."

"Oh, come, come, Mr. Philip! that won't do. Helena rising in anybody's
estimation? Ha! ha! ha!"

"Laugh as much as you like, Miss Jillgall, you won't laugh away the
facts. Helena loved me; Helena was true to me. Don't be hard on a poor
fellow who is half distracted. What a man finds he can do on one day,
he finds he can't do on another. Try to understand that a change does
sometimes come over one's feelings."

"Bless my soul, Mr. Philip, that's just what I have been understanding
all the time! I know your mind as well as you know it yourself. You
can't forget my sweet Euneece."

"I tell you I tried to forget her! On my word of honor as a gentleman, I
tried to forget her, in justice to Helena. Is it my fault that I failed?
Eunice was in my mind, as you said just now. Oh, my friend--for you
are my friend, I am sure--persuade her to see me, if it's only for a
minute!"

(Was there ever a man's mind in such a state of confusion as this!
First, I rise in his precious estimation, and Eunice drops. Then Eunice
rises, and I drop. Idiot! Mischievous idiot! Even Selina seemed to be
disgusted with him, when she spoke next.)

"Mr. Philip, you are hard and unreasonable. I have tried to persuade
her, and I have made my darling cry. Nothing you can say will induce me
to distress her again. Go back, you very undetermined man--go back to
your Helena."

"Too late."

"Nonsense!"

"I say too late. If I could have married Helena when I first went to
stay in the house, I might have faced the sacrifice. As it is, I can't
endure her; and (I tell you this in confidence) she has herself to thank
for what has happened."

"Is that really true?"

"Quite true."

"Tell me what she did.

"Oh, don't talk of her! Persuade Eunice to see me. I shall come back
again, and again, and again till you bring her to me."

"Please don't talk nonsense. If she changes her mind, I will bring her
with pleasure. If she still shrinks from it, I regard Euneece's feelings
as sacred. Take my advice; don't press her. Leave her time to think of
you, and to pity you--and that true heart may be yours again, if you are
worthy of it."

"Worthy of it? What do you mean?"

"Are you quite sure, my young friend, that you won't go back to Helena?"

"Go back to _her_? I would cut my throat if I thought myself capable of
doing it!"

"How did she set you against her? Did the wretch quarrel with you?"

"It might have been better for both of us if she had done that. Oh, her
fulsome endearments! What a contrast to the charming modesty of Eunice!
If I was rich, I would make it worth the while of the first poor fellow
I could find to rid me of Helena by marrying her. I don't like saying
such a thing of a woman, but if you will have the truth--"

"Well, Mr. Philip--and what is the truth?"

"Helena disgusts me."



CHAPTER LVII. HELENA'S DIARY RESUMED.

So it was all settled between them. Philip is to throw me away, like one
of his bad cigars, for this unanswerable reason: "Helena disgusts me."
And he is to persuade Eunice to take my place, and be his wife. Yes! if
I let him do it.

I heard no more of their talk. With that last, worst outrage burning in
my memory, I left the place.

On my way back to the carriage, the dog met me. Truly, a grand creature.
I called him by his name, and patted him. He licked my hand. Something
made me speak to him. I said: "If I was to tell you to tear Mr. Philip
Dunboyne to pieces, would you do it?" The great good-natured brute held
out his paw to shake hands. Well! well! I was not an object of disgust
to the dog.

But the coachman was startled, when he saw me again. He said something,
I did not know what it was; and he produced a pocket-flask, containing
some spirits, I suppose. Perhaps he thought I was going to faint. He
little knew me. I told him to drive back to the place at which I had
hired the cab, and earn his money. He earned it.

On getting home, I found Mrs. Tenbruggen walking up and down the
dining-room, deep in thought. She was startled when we first confronted
each other. "You look dreadfully ill," she said.

I answered that I had been out for a little exercise, and had
over-fatigued myself; and then changed the subject. "Does my father seem
to improve under your treatment?" I asked.

"Very far from it, my dear. I promised that I would try what Massage
would do for him, and I find myself compelled to give it up."

"Why?"

"It excites him dreadfully."

"In what way?"

"He has been talking wildly of events in his past life. His brain is in
some condition which is beyond my powers of investigation. He pointed
to a cabinet in his room, and said his past life was locked up there.
I asked if I should unlock it. He shook with fear; he said I should let
out the ghost of his dead brother-in-law. Have you any idea of what he
meant?"

The cabinet was full of old letters. I could tell her that--and could
tell her no more. I had never heard of his brother-in-law. Another of
his delusions, no doubt. "Did you ever hear him speak," Mrs. Tenbruggen
went on, "of a place called Low Lanes?"

She waited for my reply to this last inquiry with an appearance of
anxiety that surprised me. I had never heard him speak of Low Lanes.

"Have you any particular interest in the place?" I asked.

"None whatever."

She went away to attend on a patient. I retired to my bedroom, and
opened my Diary. Again and again, I read that remarkable story of the
intended poisoning, and of the manner in which it had ended. I sat
thinking over this romance in real life till I was interrupted by the
announcement of dinner.

Mr. Philip Dunboyne had returned. In Miss Jillgall's absence we were
alone at the table. My appetite was gone. I made a pretense of eating,
and another pretense of being glad to see my devoted lover. I talked to
him in the prettiest manner. As a hypocrite, he thoroughly matched
me; he was gallant, he was amusing. If baseness like ours had been
punishable by the law, a prison was the right place for both of us.

Mrs. Tenbruggen came in again after dinner, still not quite easy about
my health. "How flushed you are!" she said. "Let me feel your pulse." I
laughed, and left her with Mr. Philip Dunboyne.

Passing my father's door, I looked in, anxious to see if he was in the
excitable state which Mrs. Tenbruggen had described. Yes; the effect
which she had produced on him--how, she knows best--had not passed away
yet: he was still talking. The attendant told me it had gone on for
hours together. On my approaching his chair, he called out: "Which are
you? Eunice or Helena?" When I had answered him, he beckoned me to
come nearer. "I am getting stronger every minute," he said. "We will go
traveling to-morrow, and see the place where you were born."

Where had I been born? He had never told me where. Had he mentioned the
place in Mrs. Tenbruggen's hearing? I asked the attendant if he had been
present while she was in the room. Yes; he had remained at his post;
he had also heard the allusion to the place with the odd name. Had Mr.
Gracedieu said anything more about that place? Nothing more; the poor
Minister's mind had wandered off to other things. He was wandering now.
Sometimes, he was addressing his congregation; sometimes, he wondered
what they would give him for supper; sometimes, he talked of the
flowers in the garden. And then he looked at me, and frowned, and said I
prevented him from thinking.

I went back to my bedroom, and opened my Diary, and read the story
again.

Was the poison of which that resolute young wife proposed to make use
something that acted slowly, and told the doctors nothing if they looked
for it after death?

Would it be running too great a risk to show the story to the doctor,
and try to get a little valuable information in that way? It would be
useless. He would make some feeble joke; he would say, girls and poisons
are not fit company for each other.

But I might discover what I want to know in another way. I might call on
the doctor, after he has gone out on his afternoon round of visits,
and might tell the servant I would wait for his master's return.
Nobody would be in my way; I might get at the medical literature in the
consulting-room, and find the information for myself.

A knock at my door interrupted me in the midst of my plans. Mrs.
Tenbruggen again!--still in a fidgety state of feeling on the subject of
my health. "Which is it?" she said. "Pain of body, my dear, or pain of
mind? I am anxious about you."

"My dear Elizabeth, your sympathy is thrown away on me. As I have told
you already, I am over-tired--nothing more."

She was relieved to hear that I had no mental troubles to complain of.
"Fatigue," she remarked, "sets itself right with rest. Did you take a
very long walk?"

"Yes."

"Beyond the limits of the town, of course? Philip has been taking a walk
in the country, too. He doesn't say that he met you."

These clever people sometimes overreach themselves. How she suggested it
to me, I cannot pretend to have discovered. But I did certainly suspect
that she had led Philip, while they were together downstairs, into
saying to her what he had already said to Miss Jillgall. I was so angry
that I tried to pump my excellent friend, as she had been trying to pump
me--a vulgar expression, but vulgar writing is such a convenient way
of writing sometimes. My first attempt to entrap the Masseuse failed
completely. She coolly changed the subject.

"Have I interrupted you in writing?" she asked, pointing to my Diary.

"No; I was idling over what I have written already--an extraordinary
story which I copied from a book."

"May I look at it?"

I pushed the open Diary across the table. If I was the object of any
suspicions which she wanted to confirm, it would be curious to see if
the poisoning story helped her. "It's a piece of family history," I
said; "I think you will agree with me that it is really interesting."

She began to read. As she went on, not all her power of controlling
herself could prevent her from turning pale. This change of color (in
such a woman) a little alarmed me. When a girl is devoured by deadly
hatred of a man, does the feeling show itself to other persons in
her face? I must practice before the glass and train my face into a
trustworthy state of discipline.

"Coarse melodrama!" Mrs. Tenbruggen declared. "Mere sensation. No
analysis of character. A made-up story!"

"Well made up, surely?" I answered.

"I don't agree with you." Her voice was not quite so steady as usual.
She asked suddenly if my clock was right--and declared that she
should be late for an appointment. On taking leave she pressed my
hand strongly--eyed me with distrustful attention and said, very
emphatically: "Take care of yourself, Helena; pray take care of
yourself."

I am afraid I did a very foolish thing when I showed her the poisoning
story. Has it helped the wily old creature to look into my inmost
thoughts?

Impossible!


To-day, Miss Jillgall returned, looking hideously healthy and spitefully
cheerful. Although she tried to conceal it, while I was present, I could
see that Philip had recovered his place in her favor. After what he had
said to her behind the hedge at the farm, she would be relieved from all
fear of my becoming his wife, and would joyfully anticipate his marriage
to Eunice. There are thoughts in me which I don't set down in my book. I
only say: We shall see.

This afternoon, I decided on visiting the doctor. The servant was quite
sorry for me when he answered the door. His master had just left the
house for a round of visits. I said I would wait. The servant was afraid
I should find waiting very tedious. I reminded him that I could go away
if I found it tedious. At last, the polite old man left me.

I went into the consulting-room, and read the backs of the medical books
ranged round the walls, and found a volume that interested me. There was
such curious information in it that I amused myself by making extracts,
using the first sheets of paper that I could find. They had printed
directions at the top, which showed that the doctor was accustomed
to write his prescriptions on them. We had many, too many, of his
prescriptions in our house.

The servant's doubts of my patience proved to have been well founded. I
got tired of waiting, and went home before the doctor returned.

From morning to night, nothing has been seen of Mrs. Tenbruggen to-day.
Nor has any apology for her neglect of us been received, fond as she is
of writing little notes. Has that story in my Diary driven her away? Let
me see what to-morrow may bring forth.


To-day has brought forth--nothing. Mrs. Tenbruggen still keeps away from
us. It looks as if my Diary had something to do with the mystery of her
absence.

I am not in good spirits to-day. My nerves--if I have such things, which
is more than I know by my own experience--have been a little shaken by
a horrid dream. The medical information, which my thirst for knowledge
absorbed in the doctor's consulting-room, turned traitor--armed itself
with the grotesque horrors of nightmare--and so thoroughly frightened me
that I was on the point of being foolish enough to destroy my notes. I
thought better of it, and my notes are safe under lock and key.

Mr. Philip Dunboyne is trying to pave the way for his flight from this
house. He speaks of friends in London, whose interest will help him to
find the employment which is the object of his ambition. "In a few days
more," he said, "I shall ask for leave of absence."

Instead of looking at me, his eyes wandered to the window; his fingers
played restlessly with his watch-chain while he spoke. I thought I would
give him a chance, a last chance, of making the atonement that he owes
to me. This shows shameful weakness, on my part. Does my own resolution
startle me? Or does the wretch appeal--to what? To my pity? It cannot be
my love; I am positively sure that I hate him. Well, I am not the first
girl who had been an unanswerable riddle to herself.

"Is there any other motive for your departure?" I asked.

"What other motive can there be?" he replied. I put what I had to say to
him in plainer words still. "Tell me, Philip, are you beginning to wish
that you were a free man again?"

He still prevaricated. Was this because he is afraid of me, or because
he is not quite brute enough to insult me to my face? I tried again for
the third and last time. I almost put the words into his mouth.

"I fancy you have been out of temper lately," I said. "You have not been
your own kinder and better self. Is this the right interpretation of the
change that I think I see in you?"

He answered: "I have not been very well lately."

"And that is all?"

"Yes--that is all."

There was no more to be said; I turned away to leave the room. He
followed me to the door. After a momentary hesitation, he made the
attempt to kiss me. I only looked at him--he drew back from me in
silence. I left the new Judas, standing alone, while the shades of
evening began to gather over the room.



Third Period _(continued)_.

_EVENTS IN THE FAMILY, RELATED BY MISS JILLGALL._



CHAPTER LVIII. DANGER.

"If anything of importance happens, I trust to you to write an account
of it, and to send the writing to me. I will come to you at once, if
I see reason to believe that my presence is required." Those lines, in
your last kind reply to me, rouse my courage, dear Mr. Governor, and
sharpen the vigilance which has always been one of the strong points in
my character. Every suspicious circumstance which occurs in this house
will be (so to speak) seized on by my pen, and will find itself (so to
speak again) placed on its trial, before your unerring judgment! Let the
wicked tremble! I mention no names.

Taking up my narrative where it came to an end when I last wrote, I
have to say a word first on the subject of my discoveries, in regard to
Philip's movements.

The advertisement of a private inquiry office, which I read in a
newspaper, put the thing into my head. I provided myself with money to
pay the expenses by--I blush while I write it--pawning my watch. This
humiliation of my poor self has been rewarded by success. Skilled
investigation has proved that our young man has come to his senses
again, exactly as I supposed. On each occasion when he was suspiciously
absent from the house, he has been followed to the farm. I have been
staying there myself for a day or two, in the hope of persuading Eunice
to relent. The hope has not yet been realized. But Philip's devotion,
assisted by my influence, will yet prevail. Let me not despair.

Whether Helena knows positively that she has lost her wicked hold on
Philip I cannot say. It seems hardly possible that she could have made
the discovery just yet. The one thing of which I am certain is, that she
looks like a fiend.

Philip has wisely taken my advice, and employed pious fraud. He will get
away from the wretch, who has tempted him once and may tempt him again,
under pretense of using the interest of his friends in London to find
a place under Government. He has not been very well for the last day or
two, and the execution of our project is in consequence delayed.

I have news of Mrs. Tenbruggen which will, I think, surprise you.

She has kept away from us in a most unaccountable manner. I called on
her at the hotel, and heard she was engaged with her lawyer. On the next
day, she suddenly returned to her old habits, and paid the customary
visit. I observed a similar alteration in her state of feeling. She is
now coldly civil to Helena; and she asks after Eunice with a maternal
interest touching to see--I said to her: "Elizabeth, you appear to have
changed your opinion of the two girls, since I saw you." She answered,
with a delightful candor which reminded me of old times: "Completely!"
I said: "A woman of your intellectual caliber, dear, doesn't change her
mind without a good reason for it." Elizabeth cordially agreed with me.
I ventured to be a little more explicit: "You have no doubt made some
interesting discovery." Elizabeth agreed again; and I ventured again: "I
suppose I may not ask what the discovery is?" "No, Selina, you may not
ask."

This is curious; but it is nothing to what I have got to tell you next.
Just as I was longing to take her to my bosom again as my friend and
confidante, Elizabeth has disappeared. And, alas! alas! there is a
reason for it which no sympathetic person can dispute.

I have just received some overwhelming news, in the form of a neat
parcel, addressed to myself.

There has been a scandal at the hotel. That monster in human form,
Elizabeth's husband, is aware of his wife's professional fame, has
heard of the large sums of money which she earns as the greatest living
professor of massage, has been long on the lookout for her, and
has discovered her at last. He has not only forced his way into her
sitting-room at the hotel; he insists on her living with him again; her
money being the attraction, it is needless to say. If she refuses, he
threatens her with the law, the barbarous law, which, to use his own
coarse expression, will "restore his conjugal rights."

All this I gather from the narrative of my unhappy friend, which forms
one of the two inclosures in her parcel. She has already made her
escape. Ha! the man doesn't live who can circumvent Elizabeth. The
English Court of Law isn't built which can catch her when she roams the
free and glorious Continent.

The vastness of this amazing woman's mind is what I must pause to
admire. In the frightful catastrophe that has befallen her, she can
still think of Philip and Euneece. She is eager to hear of their
marriage, and renounces Helena with her whole heart. "I too was deceived
by that cunning young Woman," she writes. "Beware of her, Selina. Unless
I am much mistaken, she is going to end badly. Take care of Philip, take
care of Euneece. If you want help, apply at once to my favorite hero
in real life, The Governor." I don't presume to correct Elizabeth's
language. I should have called you The idol of the Women.

The second inclosure contains, as I suppose, a wedding present. It is
carefully sealed--it feels no bigger than an ordinary letter--and it
contains an inscription which your highly-cultivated intelligence may be
able to explain. I copy it as follows:

"To be inclosed in another envelope, addressed to Mr. Dunboyne the
elder, at Percy's Private Hotel, London, and delivered by a trustworthy
messenger, on the day when Mr. Philip Dunboyne is married to Miss Eunice
Gracedieu. Placed meanwhile under the care of Miss Selina Jillgall."

Why is this mysterious letter to be sent to Philip's father? I wonder
whether that circumstance will puzzle you as it has puzzled me.

I have kept my report back, so as to send you the last news relating to
Philip's state of health. To my great regret, his illness seems to have
made a serious advance since yesterday. When I ask if he is in pain, he
says: "It isn't exactly pain; I feel as if I was sinking. Sometimes I am
giddy; and sometimes I find myself feeling thirsty and sick." I have no
opportunity of looking after him as I could wish; for Helena insists on
nursing him, assisted by the housemaid. Maria is a very good girl in her
way, but too stupid to be of much use. If he is not better to-morrow, I
shall insist on sending for the doctor.


He is no better; and he wishes to have medical help. Helena doesn't
seem to understand his illness. It was not until Philip had insisted on
seeing him that she consented to send for the doctor.

You had some talk with this experienced physician when you were here,
and you know what a clever man he is. When I tell you that he hesitates
to say what is the matter with Philip, you will feel as much alarmed as
I do. I will wait to send this to the post until I can write in a more
definite way.


Two days more have passed. The doctor has put two very strange questions
to me.

He asked, first, if there was anybody staying with us besides the
regular members of the household. I said we had no visitor. He wanted
to know, next, if Mr. Philip Dunboyne had made any enemies since he
has been living in our town. I said none that I knew of--and I took the
liberty of asking what he meant. He answered to this, that he has a
few more inquiries to make, and that he will tell me what he means
to-morrow.


For God's sake come here as soon as you possibly can. The whole burden
is thrown on me--and I am quite unequal to it.

I received the doctor to-day in the drawing-room. To my amazement,
he begged leave to speak with me in the garden. When I asked why, he
answered: "I don't want to have a listener at the door. Come out on the
lawn, where we can be sure that we are alone."

When we were in the garden, he noticed that I was trembling.

"Rouse your courage, Miss Jillgall," he said. "In the Minister's
helpless state there is nobody whom I can speak to but yourself."

I ventured to remind him that he might speak to Helena as well as to
myself.

He looked as black as thunder when I mentioned her name. All he said
was, "No!" But, oh, if you had heard his voice--and he so gentle and
sweet-tempered at other times--you would have felt, as I did, that he
had Helena in his mind!

"Now, listen to this," he went on. "Everything that my art can do for
Mr. Philip Dunboyne, while I am at his bedside, is undone while I am
away by some other person. He is worse to-day than I have seen him yet."

"Oh, sir, do you think he will die?"

"He will certainly die unless the right means are taken to save him, and
taken at once. It is my duty not to flinch from telling you the truth.
I have made a discovery since yesterday which satisfies me that I am
right. Somebody is trying to poison Mr. Dunboyne; and somebody will
succeed unless he is removed from this house."

I am a poor feeble creature. The doctor caught me, or I should have
dropped on the grass. It was not a fainting-fit. I only shook and
shivered so that I was too weak to stand up. Encouraged by the doctor,
I recovered sufficiently to be able to ask him where Philip was to be
taken to. He said: "To the hospital. No poisoner can follow my patient
there. Persuade him to let me take him away, when I call again in an
hour's time."

As soon as I could hold a pen, I sent a telegram to you. Pray, pray come
by the earliest train. I also telegraphed to old Mr. Dunboyne, at the
hotel in London.

It was impossible for me to face Helena; I own I was afraid. The
cook kindly went upstairs to see who was in Philip's room. It was the
housemaid's turn to look after him for a while. I went instantly to his
bedside.

There was no persuading him to allow himself to be taken to the
hospital. "I am dying," he said. "If you have any pity for me, send for
Euneece. Let me see her once more, let me hear her say that she forgives
me, before I die."

I hesitated. It was too terrible to think of Euneece in the same house
with her sister. Her life might be in danger! Philip gave me a look, a
dreadful ghastly look. "If you refuse," he said wildly, "the grave won't
hold me. I'll haunt you for the rest of your life."

"She shall hear that you are ill," I answered--and ran out of the room
before he could speak again.

What I had promised to write, I did write. But, placed between Euneece's
danger and Philip's danger, my heart was all for Euneece. Would Helena
spare her, if she came to Philip's bedside? In such terror as I never
felt before in my life, I added a word more, entreating her not to leave
the farm. I promised to keep her regularly informed on the subject of
Philip's illness; and I mentioned that I expected the Governor to return
to us immediately. "Do nothing," I wrote, "without his advice." My
letter having been completed, I sent the cook away with it, in a chaise.
She belonged to the neighborhood, and she knew the farmhouse well.
Nearly two hours afterward, I heard the chaise stop at the door, and
ran out, impatient to hear how my sweet girl had received my letter.
God help us all! When I opened the door, the first person whom I saw was
Euneece herself.



CHAPTER LIX. DEFENSE.

One surprise followed another, after I had encountered Euneece at the
door.

When my fondness had excused her for setting the well-meant advice in
my letter at defiance, I was conscious of expecting to see her in tears;
eager, distressingly eager, to hear what hope there might be of Philip's
recovery. I saw no tears, I heard no inquiries. She was pale, and quiet,
and silent. Not a word fell from her when we met, not a word when she
kissed me, not a word when she led the way into the nearest room--the
dining-room. It was only when we were shut in together that she spoke.

"Which is Philip's room?" she asked.

Instead of wanting to know how he was, she desired to know where he
was! I pointed toward the back dining-room, which had been made into a
bedroom for Philip. He had chosen it himself, when he first came to stay
with us, because the window opened into the garden, and he could slip
out and smoke at any hour of the day or night, when he pleased.

"Who is with him now?" was the next strange thing this sadly-changed
girl said to me.

"Maria is taking her turn," I answered; "she assists in nursing Philip."

"Where is--?" Euneece got no further than that. Her breath quickened,
her color faded away. I had seen people look as she was looking now,
when they suffered under some sudden pain. Before I could offer to help
her, she rallied, and went on: "Where," she began again, "is the other
nurse?"

"You mean Helena?" I said.

"I mean the Poisoner."

When I remind you, dear Mr. Governor, that my letter had carefully
concealed from her the horrible discovery made by the doctor,
your imagination will picture my state of mind. She saw that I was
overpowered. Her sweet nature, so strangely frozen up thus far, melted
at last. "You don't know what I have heard," she said, "you don't know
what thoughts have been roused in me." She left her chair, and sat on
my knee with the familiarity of the dear old times, and took the letter
that I had written to her from her pocket.

"Look at it yourself," she said, "and tell me if anybody could read it,
and not see that you were concealing something. My dear, I have driven
round by the doctor's house--I have seen him--I have persuaded him, or
perhaps I ought to say surprised him, into telling me the truth. But the
kind old man is obstinate. He wouldn't believe me when I told him I was
on my way here to save Philip's life. He said: 'My child, you will only
put your own life in jeopardy. If I had not seen that danger, I should
never have told you of the dreadful state of things at home. Go back to
the good people at the farm, and leave the saving of Philip to me.'"

"He was right, Euneece, entirely right."

"No, dear, he was wrong. I begged him to come here, and judge for
himself; and I ask you to do the same."

I was obstinate. "Go back!" I persisted. "Go back to the farm!"

"Can I see Philip?" she asked.

I have heard some insolent men say that women are like cats. If they
mean that we do, figuratively speaking, scratch at times, I am afraid
they are not altogether wrong. An irresistible impulse made me say to
poor Euneece: "This is a change indeed, since you refused to receive
Philip."

"Is there no change in the circumstances?" she asked sadly. "Isn't he
ill and in danger?"

I begged her to forgive me; I said I meant no harm.

"I gave him up to my sister," she continued, "when I believed that his
happiness depended, not on me, but on her. I take him back to myself,
when he is at the mercy of a demon who threatens his life. Come, Selina,
let us go to Philip."

She put her arm round me, and made me get up from my chair. I was so
easily persuaded by her, that the fear of what Helena's jealousy and
Helena's anger might do was scarcely present in my thoughts. The door of
communication was locked on the side of the bedchamber. I went into the
hall, to enter Philip's room by the other door. She followed, waiting
behind me. I heard what passed between them when Maria went out to her.

"Where is Miss Gracedieu?"

"Resting upstairs, miss, in her room."

"Look at the clock, and tell me when you expect her to come down here."

"I am to call her, miss, in ten minutes more."

"Wait in the dining-room, Maria, till I come back to you."

She joined me. I held the door open for her to go into Philip's room. It
was not out of curiosity; the feeling that urged me was sympathy, when
I waited a moment to see their first meeting. She bent over the poor,
pallid, trembling, suffering man, and raised him in her arms, and laid
his head on her bosom. "My Philip!" She murmured those words in a kiss.
I closed the door, I had a good cry; and, oh, how it comforted me!

There was only a minute to spare when she came out of the room. Maria
was waiting for her. Euneece said, as quietly as ever: "Go and call Miss
Gracedieu."

The girl looked at her, and saw--I don't know what. Maria became
alarmed. But she went up the stairs, and returned in haste to tell us
that her young mistress was coming down.

The faint rustling of Helena's dress as she left her room reached us in
the silence. I remained at the open door of the dining-room, and Maria
approached and stood near me. We were both frightened. Euneece stepped
forward, and stood on the mat at the foot of the stairs, waiting. Her
back was toward me; I could only see that she was as still as a statue.
The rustling of the dress came nearer. Oh, heavens! what was going to
happen? My teeth chattered in my head; I held by Maria's shoulder. Drops
of perspiration showed themselves on the girl's forehead; she stared in
vacant terror at the slim little figure, posted firm and still on the
mat.

Helena turned the corner of the stairs, and waited a moment on the last
landing, and saw her sister.

"You here?" she said. "What do you want?"

There was no reply. Helena descended, until she reached the last stair
but one. There, she stopped. Her staring eyes grew large and wild;
her hand shook as she stretched it out, feeling for the banister; she
staggered as she caught at it, and held herself up. The silence was
still unbroken. Something in me, stronger than myself, drew my steps
along the hall nearer and nearer to the stair, till I could see the face
which had struck that murderous wretch with terror.

I looked.

No! it was not my sweet girl; it was a horrid transformation of her.
I saw a fearful creature, with glittering eyes that threatened some
unimaginable vengeance. Her lips were drawn back; they showed her
clinched teeth. A burning red flush dyed her face. The hair of her head
rose, little by little, slowly. And, most dreadful sight of all, she
seemed, in the stillness of the house, to be _listening to something_.
If I could have moved, I should have fled to the first place of refuge
I could find. If I could have raised my voice, I should have cried for
help. I could do neither the one nor the other. I could only look, look,
look; held by the horror of it with a hand of iron.

Helena must have roused her courage, and resisted her terror. I heard
her speak:

"Let me by!"

"No."

Slowly, steadily, in a whisper, Euneece made that reply.

Helena tried once more--still fighting against her own terror: I knew it
by the trembling of her voice.

"Let me by," she repeated; "I am on my way to Philip's room."

"You will never enter Philip's room again."

"Who will stop me?"

"I will."

She had spoken in the same steady whisper throughout--but now she moved.
I saw her set her foot on the first stair. I saw the horrid glitter in
her eyes flash close into Helena's face. I heard her say:

"Poisoner, go back to your room."

Silent and shuddering, Helena shrank away from her--daunted by her
glittering eyes; mastered by her lifted hand pointing up the stairs.

Helena slowly ascended till she reached the landing. She turned and
looked down; she tried to speak. The pointing hand struck her dumb, and
drove her up the next flight of stairs. She was lost to view. Only the
small rustling sound of the dress was to be heard, growing fainter and
fainter; then an interval of stillness; then the noise of a door opened
and closed again; then no sound more--but a change to be seen: the
transformed creature was crouching on her knees, still and silent, her
face covered by her hands. I was afraid to approach her; I was afraid to
speak to her. After a time, she rose. Suddenly, swiftly, with her head
turned away from me, she opened the door of Philip's room--and was gone.

I looked round. There was only Maria in the lonely hall. Shall I try
to tell you what my sensations were? It may sound strangely, but it is
true--I felt like a sleeper, who has half-awakened from a dream.



CHAPTER LX. DISCOVERY.

A little later, on that eventful day, when I was most in need of all
that your wisdom and kindness could do to guide me, came the telegram
which announced that you were helpless under an attack of gout. As soon
as I had in some degree got over my disappointment, I remembered having
told Euneece in my letter that I expected her kind old friend to come to
us. With the telegram in my hand I knocked softly at Philip's door.

The voice that bade me come in was the gentle voice that I knew so well.
Philip was sleeping. There, by his bedside, with his hand resting in her
hand, was Euneece, so completely restored to her own sweet self that I
could hardly believe what I had seen, not an hour since. She talked
of you, when I showed her your message, with affectionate interest and
regret. Look back, my admirable friend, at what I have written on
the two or three pages which precede this, and explain the astounding
contrast if you can.

I was left alone to watch by Philip, while Euneece went away to see her
father. Soon afterward, Maria took my place; I had been sent for to the
next room to receive the doctor.

He looked care-worn and grieved. I said I was afraid he had brought bad
news with him.

"The worst possible news," he answered. "A terrible exposure threatens
this family, and I am powerless to prevent it."

He then asked me to remember the day when I had been surprised by the
singular questions which he had put to me, and when he had engaged to
explain himself after he had made some inquiries. Why, and how, he had
set those inquiries on foot was what he had now to tell. I will repeat
what he said, in his own words, as nearly as I can remember them. While
he was in attendance on Philip, he had observed symptoms which made him
suspect that Digitalis had been given to the young man, in doses often
repeated. Cases of attempted poisoning by this medicine were so rare,
that he felt bound to put his suspicions to the test by going round
among the chemists's shops--excepting of course the shop at which his
own prescriptions were made up--and asking if they had lately dispensed
any preparation of Digitalis, ordered perhaps in a larger quantity
than usual. At the second shop he visited, the chemist laughed. "Why,
doctor," he said, "have you forgotten your own prescription?" After
this, the prescription was asked for, and produced. It was on the paper
used by the doctor--paper which had his address printed at the top, and
a notice added, telling patients who came to consult him for the second
time to bring their prescriptions with them. Then, there followed in
writing: "Tincture of Digitalis, one ounce"--with his signature at the
end, not badly imitated, but a forgery nevertheless. The chemist noticed
the effect which this discovery had produced on the doctor, and asked if
that was his signature. He could hardly, as an honest man, have asserted
that a forgery was a signature of his own writing. So he made the true
reply, and asked who had presented the prescription. The chemist called
to his assistant to come forward. "Did you tell me that you knew, by
sight, the young lady who brought this prescription?" The assistant
admitted it. "Did you tell me she was Miss Helena Gracedieu?" "I did."
"Are you sure of not having made any mistake?" "Quite sure." The chemist
then said: "I myself supplied the Tincture of Digitalis, and the young
lady paid for it, and took it away with her. You have had all the
information that I can give you, sir; and I may now ask, if you can
throw any light on the matter." Our good friend thought of the poor
Minister, so sorely afflicted, and of the famous name so sincerely
respected in the town and in the country round, and said he could not
undertake to give an immediate answer. The chemist was excessively
angry. "You know as well as I do," he said, "that Digitalis, given in
certain doses, is a poison, and you cannot deny that I honestly believed
myself to be dispensing your prescription. While you are hesitating to
give me an answer, my character may suffer; I may be suspected myself."
He ended in declaring he should consult his lawyer. The doctor went
home, and questioned his servant. The man remembered the day of Miss
Helena's visit in the afternoon, and the intention that she expressed of
waiting for his master's return. He had shown her into the parlor which
opened into the consulting-room. No other visitor was in the house at
that time, or had arrived during the rest of the day. The doctor's own
experience, when he got home, led him to conclude that Helena had gone
into the consulting-room. He had entered that room, for the purpose of
writing some prescriptions, and had found the leaves of paper that he
used diminished in number. After what he had heard, and what he had
discovered (to say nothing of what he suspected), it occurred to him
to look along the shelves of his medical library. He found a volume
(treating of Poisons) with a slip of paper left between the leaves; the
poison described at the place so marked being Digitalis, and the paper
used being one of his own prescription-papers. "If, as I fear, a legal
investigation into Helena's conduct is a possible event," the doctor
concluded, "there is the evidence that I shall be obliged to give, when
I am called as a witness."

It is my belief that I could have felt no greater dismay, if the long
arm of the Law had laid its hold on me while he was speaking. I asked
what was to be done.

"If she leaves the house at once," the doctor replied, "she may escape
the infamy of being charged with an attempt at murder by poison; and,
in her absence, I can answer for Philip's life. I don't urge you to warn
her, because that might be a dangerous thing to do. It is for you to
decide, as a member of the family, whether you will run the risk."

I tried to speak to him of Euneece, and to tell him what I had already
related to yourself. He was in no humor to listen to me. "Keep it for a
fitter time," he answered; "and think of what I have just said to you."
With that, he left me, on his way to Philip's room.

Mental exertion was completely beyond me. Can you understand a poor
middle-aged spinster being frightened into doing a dangerous thing? That
may seem to be nonsense. But if you ask why I took a morsel of paper,
and wrote the warning which I was afraid to communicate by word of
mouth--why I went upstairs with my knees knocking together, and
opened the door of Helena's room just wide enough to let my hand pass
through--why I threw the paper in, and banged the door to again, and
ran downstairs as I have never run since I was a little girl--I can
only say, in the way of explanation, what I have said already: I was
frightened into doing it.

What I have written, thus far, I shall send to you by to-night's post.

The doctor came back to me, after he had seen Philip, and spoken with
Euneece. He was very angry; and, I must own, not without reason. Philip
had flatly refused to let himself be removed to the hospital; and
Euneece--"a mere girl"--had declared that she would be answerable for
consequences! The doctor warned me that he meant to withdraw from
the case, and to make his declaration before the magistrates. At my
entreaties he consented to return in the evening, and to judge by
results before taking the terrible step that he had threatened.

While I remained at home on the watch, keeping the doors of both
rooms locked, Eunice went out to get Philip's medicine. She came back,
followed by a boy carrying a portable apparatus for cooking. "All that
Philip wants, and all that we want," she explained, "we can provide for
ourselves. Give me a morsel of paper to write on."

Unhooking the little pencil attached to her watch-chain, she paused and
looked toward the door. "Somebody listening," she whispered. "Let them
listen." She wrote a list of necessaries, in the way of things to eat
and things to drink, and asked me to go out and get them myself. "I
don't doubt the servants," she said, speaking distinctly enough to
be heard outside; "but I am afraid of what a Poisoner's cunning and a
Poisoner's desperation may do, in a kitchen which is open to her." I
went away on my errand--discovering no listener outside, I need hardly
say. On my return, I found the door of communication with Philip's room
closed, but no longer locked. "We can now attend on him in turn," she
said, "without opening either of the doors which lead into the hall. At
night we can relieve each other, and each of us can get sleep as we want
it in the large armchair in the dining-room. Philip must be safe under
our charge, or the doctor will insist on taking him to the hospital.
When we want Maria's help, from time to time, we can employ her under
our own superintendence. Have you anything else, Selina, to suggest?"

There was nothing left to suggest. Young and inexperienced as she was,
how (I asked) had she contrived to think of all this? She answered,
simply "I'm sure I don't know; my thoughts came to me while I was
looking at Philip."

Soon afterward I found an opportunity of inquiring if Helena had left
the house. She had just rung her bell; and Maria had found her, quietly
reading, in her room. Hours afterward, when I was on the watch at
night, I heard Philip's door softly tried from the outside. Her dreadful
purpose had not been given up, even yet.

The doctor came in the evening, as he had promised, and found an
improvement in Philip's health. I mentioned what precautions we had
taken, and that they had been devised by Euneece. "Are you going to
withdraw from the case?" I asked. "I am coming back to the case," he
answered, "to-morrow morning."

It had been a disappointment to me to receive no answer to the telegram
which I had sent to Mr. Dunboyne the elder. The next day's post brought
the explanation in a letter to Philip from his father, directed to him
at the hotel here. This showed that my telegram, giving my address at
this house, had not been received. Mr. Dunboyne announced that he had
returned to Ireland, finding the air of London unendurable, after the
sea-breezes at home. If Philip had already married, his father would
leave him to a life of genteel poverty with Helena Gracedieu. If he had
thought better of it, his welcome was waiting for him.

Little did Mr. Dunboyne know what changes had taken place since he and
his son had last met, and what hope might yet present itself of brighter
days for poor Euneece! I thought of writing to him. But how would that
crabbed old man receive a confidential letter from a lady who was a
stranger?

My doubts were set at rest by Philip himself. He asked me to write a few
lines of reply to his father; declaring that his marriage with Helena
was broken off--that he had not given up all hope of being permitted to
offer the sincere expression of his penitence to Euneece--and that
he would gladly claim his welcome, as soon as he was well enough to
undertake the journey to Ireland. When he had signed the letter, I was
so pleased that I made a smart remark. I said: "This is a treaty of
peace between father and son."

When the doctor arrived in the morning, and found the change for the
better in his patient confirmed, he did justice to us at last. He
spoke kindly, and even gratefully, to Euneece. No more allusions to the
hospital as a place of safety escaped him. He asked me cautiously for
news of Helena. I could only tell him that she had gone out at her
customary time, and had returned at her customary time. He did not
attempt to conceal that my reply had made him uneasy.

"Are you still afraid that she may succeed in poisoning Philip?" I
asked.

"I am afraid of her cunning," he said. "If she is charged with
attempting to poison young Dunboyne, she has some system of defense, you
may rely on it, for which we are not prepared. There, in my opinion, is
the true reason for her extraordinary insensibility to her own danger."

Two more days passed, and we were still safe under the protection of
lock and key.

On the evening of the second day (which was a Monday) Maria came to me
in great tribulation. On inquiring what was the matter, I received a
disquieting reply: "Miss Helena is tempting me. She is so miserable at
being prevented from seeing Mr. Philip, and helping to nurse him, that
it is quite distressing to see her. At the same time, miss, it's hard
on a poor servant. She asks me to take the key secretly out of the door,
and lend it to her at night for a few minutes only. I'm really afraid I
shall be led into doing it, if she goes on persuading me much longer."

I commended Maria for feeling scruples which proved her to be the best
of good girls, and promised to relieve her from all fear of future
temptation. This was easily done. Euneece kept the key of Philip's door
in her pocket; and I kept the key of the dining-room door in mine.



CHAPTER LXI. ATROCITY.

On the next day, a Tuesday in the week, an event took place which
Euneece and I viewed with distrust. Early in the afternoon, a young man
called with a note for Helena. It was to be given to her immediately,
and no answer was required.

Maria had just closed the house door, and was on her way upstairs with
the letter, when she was called back by another ring at the bell. Our
visitor was the doctor. He spoke to Maria in the hall:

"I think I see a note in your hand. Was it given to you by the young man
who has just left the house?"

"Yes, sir.

"If he's your sweetheart, my dear, I have nothing more to say."

"Good gracious, doctor, how you do talk! I never saw the young man
before in my life."

"In that case, Maria, I will ask you to let me look at the address. Aha!
Mischief!"

The moment I heard that I threw open the dining-room door. Curiosity is
not easily satisfied. When it hears, it wants to see; when it sees, it
wants to know. Every lady will agree with me in this observation.

"Pray come in," I said.

"One minute, Miss Jillgall. My girl, when you give Miss Helena that
note, try to get a sly look at her when she opens it, and come and tell
me what you have seen." He joined me in the dining-room, and closed
the door. "The other day," he went on, "when I told you what I had
discovered in the chemist's shop, I think I mentioned a young man who
was called to speak to a question of identity--an assistant who knew
Miss Helena Gracedieu by sight."

"Yes, yes!"

"That young man left the note which Maria has just taken upstairs."

"Who wrote it, doctor, and what does it say?"

"Questions naturally asked, Miss Jillgall--and not easily answered.
Where is Eunice? Her quick wit might help us."

She had gone out to buy some fruit and flowers for Philip.

The doctor accepted his disappointment resignedly. "Let us try what
we can do without her," he said. "That young man's master has been in
consultation (you may remember why) with his lawyer, and Helena may
be threatened by an investigation before the magistrates. If this wild
guess of mine turns out to have hit the mark, the poisoner upstairs has
got a warning."

I asked if the chemist had written the note. Foolish enough of me when
I came to think of it. The chemist would scarcely act a friendly part
toward Helena, when she was answerable for the awkward position in which
he had placed himself. Perhaps the young man who had left the warning
was also the writer of the warning. The doctor reminded me that he
was all but a stranger to Helena. "We are not usually interested," he
remarked, "in a person whom we only know by sight."

"Remember that he is a young man," I ventured to say. This was a strong
hint, but the doctor failed to see it. He had evidently forgotten his
own youth. I made another attempt.

"And vile as Helena is," I continued, "we cannot deny that this disgrace
to her sex is a handsome young lady."

He saw it at last. "Woman's wit!" he cried. "You have hit it, Miss
Jillgall. The young fool is smitten with her, and has given her a chance
of making her escape."

"Do you think she will take the chance?"

"For all our sakes, I pray God she may! But I don't feel sure about it."

"Why?"

"Recollect what you and Eunice have done. You have shown your suspicion
of her without an attempt to conceal it. If you had put her in prison
you could not have more completely defeated her infernal design. Do you
think she is a likely person to submit to that, without an effort to be
even with you?"

Just as he said those terrifying words, Maria came back to us. He asked
at once what had kept her so long upstairs.

The girl had evidently something to say, which had inflated her (if I
may use such an expression) with a sense of her own importance.

"Please to let me tell it, sir," she answered, "in my own way. Miss
Helena turned as pale as ashes when she opened the letter, and then she
took a turn in the room, and then she looked at me with a smile--well,
miss, I can only say that I felt that smile in the small of my back.
I tried to get to the door. She stopped me. She says: 'Where's Miss
Eunice?' I says: 'Gone out.' She says: 'Is there anybody in the
drawing-room?' I says: 'No, miss.' She says: 'Tell Miss Jillgall I want
to speak to her, and say I am waiting in the drawing-room.' It's every
word of it true! And, if a poor servant may give an opinion, I don't
like the look of it."

The doctor dismissed Maria. "Whatever it is," he said to me, "you must
go and hear it."

I am not a courageous woman; I expressed myself as being willing to go
to her, if the doctor went with me. He said that was impossible; she
would probably refuse to speak before any witness; and certainly before
him. But he promised to look after Philip in my absence, and to wait
below if it really so happened that I wanted him. I need only ring the
bell, and he would come to me the moment he heard it. Such kindness as
this roused my courage, I suppose. At any rate, I went upstairs.

She was standing by the fire-place, with her elbow on the chimney-piece,
and her head, resting on her hand. I stopped just inside the door,
waiting to hear what she had to say. In this position her side-face only
was presented to me. It was a ghastly face. The eye that I could see
turned wickedly on me when I came in--then turned away again. Otherwise,
she never moved. I confess I trembled, but I did my best to disguise it.

She broke out suddenly with what she had to say: "I won't allow this
state of things to go on any longer. My horror of an exposure which will
disgrace the family has kept me silent, wrongly silent, so far. Philip's
life is in danger. I am forgetting my duty to my affianced husband, if
I allow myself to be kept away from him any longer. Open those locked
doors, and relieve me from the sight of you. Open the doors, I say, or
you will both of you--you the accomplice, she the wretch who directs
you--repent it to the end of your lives."

In my own mind, I asked myself if she had gone mad. But I only answered:
"I don't understand you."

She said again: "You are Eunice's accomplice."

"Accomplice in what?" I asked.

She turned her head slowly and faced me. I shrank from looking at her.

"All the circumstances prove it," she went on. "I have supplanted Eunice
in Philip's affection. She was once engaged to marry him; I am engaged
to marry him now. She is resolved that he shall never make me his wife.
He will die if I delay any longer. He will die if I don't crush her,
like the reptile she is. She comes here--and what does she do? Keeps him
prisoner under her own superintendence. Who gets his medicine? She gets
it. Who cooks his food? She cooks it. The doors are locked. I might be
a witness of what goes on; and I am kept out. The servants who ought to
wait on him are kept out. She can do what she likes with his medicine;
she can do what she likes with his food: she is infuriated with him for
deserting her, and promising to marry me. Give him back to my care; or,
dreadful as it is to denounce my own sister, I shall claim protection
from the magistrates."

I lost all fear of her: I stepped close up to the place at which she
was standing; I cried out: "Of what, in God's name, do you accuse your
sister?"

She answered: "I accuse her of poisoning Philip Dunboyne."

I ran out of the room; I rushed headlong down the stairs. The doctor
heard me, and came running into the hall. I caught hold of him like a
madwoman. "Euneece!" My breath was gone; I could only say: "Euneece!"

He dragged me into the dining-room. There was wine on the side-board,
which he had ordered medically for Philip. He forced me to drink some of
it. It ran through me like fire; it helped me to speak. "Now tell me,"
he said, "what has she done to Eunice?"

"She brings a horrible accusation against her," I answered.

"What is the accusation?" I told him.

He looked me through and through. "Take care!" he said. "No hysterics,
no exaggeration. You may lead to dreadful consequences if you are
not sure of yourself. If it's really true, say it again." I said it
again--quietly this time.

His face startled me; it was white with rage. He snatched his hat off
the hall table.

"What are you going to do?" I asked.

"My duty." He was out of the house before I could speak to him again.



Third Period _(concluded)._

_TROUBLES AND TRIUMPHS OF THE FAMILY, RELATED BY THE GOVERNOR._



CHAPTER LXII. THE SENTENCE PRONOUNCED.

MARTYRS to gout know, by sad experience, that they suffer under one of
the most capricious of maladies. An attack of this disease will shift,
in the most unaccountable manner, from one part of the body to another;
or, it will release the victim when there is every reason to fear that
it is about to strengthen its hold on him; or, having shown the fairest
promise of submitting to medical treatment, it will cruelly lay the
patient prostrate again in a state of relapse. Adverse fortune, in my
case, subjected me to this last and worst trial of endurance. Two months
passed--months of pain aggravated by anxiety--before I was able to help
Eunice and Miss Jillgall personally with my sympathy and advice.

During this interval, I heard regularly from the friendly and faithful
Selina.

Terror and suspense, courageously endured day after day, seem to have
broken down her resistance, poor soul, when Eunice's good name and
Eunice's tranquillity were threatened by the most infamous of false
accusations. From that time, Miss Jillgall's method of expressing
herself betrayed a gradual deterioration. I shall avoid presenting at a
disadvantage a correspondent who has claims on my gratitude, if I give
the substance only of what she wrote--assisted by the newspaper which
she sent to me, while the legal proceedings were in progress.


Honest indignation does sometimes counsel us wisely. When the doctor
left Miss Jillgall, in anger and in haste, he had determined on taking
the course from which, as a humane man and a faithful friend, he had
hitherto recoiled. It was no time, now, to shrink from the prospect of
an exposure. The one hope of successfully encountering the vindictive
wickedness of Helena lay in the resolution to be beforehand with her, in
the appeal to the magistrates with which she had threatened Eunice and
Miss Jillgall. The doctor's sworn information stated the whole terrible
case of the poisoning, ranging from his first suspicions and their
confirmation, to Helena's atrocious attempt to accuse her innocent
sister of her own guilt. So firmly were the magistrates convinced of the
serious nature of the case thus stated, that they did not hesitate
to issue their warrant. Among the witnesses whose attendance was
immediately secured, by the legal adviser to whom the doctor applied,
were the farmer and his wife.

Helena was arrested while she was dressing to go out. Her composure was
not for a moment disturbed. "I was on my way," she said coolly, "to make
a statement before the justices. The sooner they hear what I have to say
the better."

The attempt of this shameless wretch to "turn the tables" on poor
Eunice--suggested, as I afterward discovered, by the record of family
history which she had quoted in her journal--was defeated with ease. The
farmer and his wife proved the date at which Eunice had left her place
of residence under their roof. The doctor's evidence followed. He
proved, by the production of his professional diary, that the discovery
of the attempt to poison his patient had taken place before the day of
Eunice's departure from the farm, and that the first improvement in
Mr. Philip Dunboyne's state of health had shown itself after that young
lady's arrival to perform the duties of a nurse. To the wise precautions
which she had taken--perverted by Helena to the purpose of a false
accusation--the doctor attributed the preservation of the young man's
life.

Having produced the worst possible impression on the minds of the
magistrates, Helena was remanded. Her legal adviser had predicted
this result; but the vindictive obstinacy of his client had set both
experience and remonstrance at defiance.

At the renewed examination, the line of defense adopted by the
prisoner's lawyer proved to be--mistaken identity.

It was asserted that she had never entered the chemist's shop; also,
that the assistant had wrongly identified some other lady as Miss Helena
Gracedieu; also, that there was not an atom of evidence to connect her
with the stealing of the doctor's prescription-paper and the forgery of
his writing. Other assertions to the same purpose followed, on which
it is needless to dwell. The case for the prosecution was, happily, in
competent hands. With the exception of one witness, cross-examination
afforded no material help to the evidence for the defense.

The chemist swore positively to the personal appearance of Helena,
as being the personal appearance of the lady who had presented the
prescription. His assistant, pressed on the question of identity, broke
down under cross-examination--purposely, as it was whispered, serving
the interests of the prisoner. But the victory, so far gained by
the defense, was successfully contested by the statement of the next
witness, a respectable tradesman in the town. He had seen the newspaper
report of the first examination, and had volunteered to present himself
as a witness. A member of Mr. Gracedieu's congregation, his pew in the
chapel was so situated as to give him a view of the minister's daughters
occupying their pew. He had seen the prisoner on every Sunday, for years
past; and he swore that he was passing the door of the chemist's shop,
at the moment when she stepped out into the street, having a bottle
covered with the customary white paper in her hand. The doctor and
his servant were the next witnesses called. They were severely
cross-examined. Some of their statements--questioned technically with
success--received unexpected and powerful support, due to the discovery
and production of the prisoner's diary. The entries, guardedly as some
of them were written, revealed her motive for attempting to poison
Philip Dunboyne; proved that she had purposely called on the doctor when
she knew that he would be out, that she had entered the consulting-room,
and examined the medical books, had found (to use her own written words)
"a volume that interested her," and had used the prescription-papers for
the purpose of making notes. The notes themselves were not to be
found; they had doubtless been destroyed. Enough, and more than enough,
remained to make the case for the prosecution complete. The magistrates
committed Helena Gracedieu for trial at the next assizes.

I arrived in the town, as well as I can remember, about a week after the
trial had taken place.

Found guilty, the prisoner had been recommended to mercy by the
jury--partly in consideration of her youth; partly as an expression
of sympathy and respect for her unhappy father. The judge (a father
himself) passed a lenient sentence. She was condemned to imprisonment
for two years. The careful matron of the jail had provided herself with
a bottle of smelling-salts, in the fear that there might be need for
it when Helena heard her sentence pronounced. Not the slightest sign
of agitation appeared in her face or her manner. She lied to the last;
asserting her innocence in a firm voice, and returning from the dock to
the prison without requiring assistance from anybody.

Relating these particulars to me, in a state of ungovernable excitement,
good Miss Jillgall ended with a little confession of her own, which
operated as a relief to my overburdened mind after what I had just
heard.

"I wouldn't own it," she said, "to anybody but a dear friend. One thing,
in the dreadful disgrace that has fallen on us, I am quite at a loss
to account for. Think of Mr. Gracedieu's daughter being one of those
criminal creatures on whom it was once your terrible duty to turn the
key! Why didn't she commit suicide?"

"My dear lady, no thoroughly wicked creature ever yet committed suicide.
Self-destruction, when it is not an act of madness, implies some
acuteness of feeling--sensibility to remorse or to shame, or perhaps a
distorted idea of making atonement. There is no such thing as remorse or
shame, or hope of making atonement, in Helena's nature."

"But when she comes out of prison, what will she do?"

"Don't alarm yourself, my good friend. She will do very well."

"Oh, hush! hush! Poetical justice, Mr. Governor!"

"Poetical fiddlesticks, Miss Jillgall."



CHAPTER LXIII. THE OBSTACLE REMOVED.

When the subject of the trial was happily dismissed, my first inquiry
related to Eunice. The reply was made with an ominous accompaniment of
sighs and sad looks. Eunice had gone back to her duties as governess at
the farm. Hearing this, I asked naturally what had become of Philip.

Melancholy news, again, was the news that I now heard.

Mr. Dunboyne the elder had died suddenly, at his house in Ireland, while
Philip was on his way home. When the funeral ceremony had come to an
end, the will was read. It had been made only a few days before the
testator's death; and the clause which left all his property to his son
was preceded by expressions of paternal affection, at a time when Philip
was in sore need of consolation. After alluding to a letter, received
from his son, the old man added: "I always loved him, without caring to
confess it; I detest scenes of sentiment, kissings, embracings, tears,
and that sort of thing. But Philip has yielded to my wishes, and has
broken off a marriage which would have made him, as well as me, wretched
for life. After this, I may speak my mind from my grave, and may tell my
boy that I loved him. If the wish is likely to be of any use, I will add
(on the chance)--God bless him."

"Does Philip submit to separation from Eunice?" I asked. "Does he stay
in Ireland?"

"Not he, poor fellow! He will be here to-morrow or next day. When I last
wrote," Miss Jillgall continued, "I told him I hoped to see you again
soon. If you can't help us (I mean with Eunice) that unlucky young man
will do some desperate thing. He will join those madmen at large who
disturb poor savages in Africa, or go nowhere to find nothing in the
Arctic regions.

"Whatever I can do, Miss Jillgall, shall be gladly done. Is it really
possible that Eunice refuses to marry him, after having saved his life?"

"A little patience, please, Mr. Governor; let Philip tell his own
story. If I try to do it, I shall only cry--and we have had tears enough
lately, in this house."

Further consultation being thus deferred, I went upstairs to the
Minister's room.

He was sitting by the window, in his favorite armchair, absorbed in
knitting! The person who attended on him, a good-natured, patient
fellow, had been a sailor in his younger days, and had taught Mr.
Gracedieu how to use the needles. "You see it amuses him," the man said,
kindly. "Don't notice his mistakes, he thinks there isn't such another
in the world for knitting as himself. You can see, sir, how he sticks to
it." He was so absorbed over his employment that I had to speak to him
twice, before I could induce him to look at me. The utter ruin of his
intellect did not appear to have exercised any disastrous influence over
his bodily health. On the contrary, he had grown fatter since I had last
seen him; his complexion had lost the pallor that I remembered--there
was color in his cheeks.

"Don't you remember your old friend?" I said. He smiled, and nodded, and
repeated the words:

"Yes, yes, my old friend." It was only too plain that he had not the
least recollection of me. "His memory is gone," the man said. "When
he puts away his knitting, at night, I have to find it for him in the
morning. But, there! he's happy--enjoys his victuals, likes sitting out
in the garden and watching the birds. There's been a deal of trouble in
the family, sir; and it has all passed over him like a wet sponge over
a slate." The old sailor was right. If that wreck of a man had been
capable of feeling and thinking, his daughter's disgrace would have
broken his heart. In a world of sin and sorrow, is peaceable imbecility
always to be pitied? I have known men who would have answered, without
hesitation: "It is to be envied." And where (some persons might say) was
the poor Minister's reward for the act of mercy which had saved Eunice
in her infancy? Where it ought to be! A man who worthily performs a good
action finds his reward in the action itself.


At breakfast, on the next day, the talk touched on those passages in
Helena's diary, which had been produced in court as evidence against
her.

I expressed a wish to see what revelation of a depraved nature the
entries in the diary might present; and my curiosity was gratified. At
a fitter time, I may find an opportunity of alluding to the impression
produced on me by the diary. In the meanwhile, the event of Philip's
return claims notice in the first place.

The poor fellow was so glad to see me that he shook hands as heartily as
if we had known each other from the time when he was a boy.

"Do you remember how kindly you spoke to me when I called on you in
London?" he asked. "If I have repeated those words once--but perhaps you
don't remember them? You said: 'If I was as young as you are, I should
not despair.' Well! I have said that to myself over and over again, for
a hundred times at least. Eunice will listen to you, sir, when she will
listen to nobody else. This is the first happy moment I have had for
weeks past."

I suppose I must have looked glad to hear that. Anyway, Philip shook
hands with me again.

Miss Jillgall was present. The gentle-hearted old maid was so touched
by our meeting that she abandoned herself to the genial impulse of
the moment, and gave Philip a kiss. The outraged claims of propriety
instantly seized on her. She blushed as if the long-lost days of her
girlhood had been found again, and ran out of the room.

"Now, Mr. Philip," I said, "I have been waiting, at Miss Jillgall's
suggestion, to get my information from you. There is something wrong
between Eunice and yourself. What is it? And who is to blame?"

"Her vile sister is to blame," he answered. "That reptile was determined
to sting us. And she has done it!" he cried, starting to his feet, and
walking up and down the room, urged into action by his own unendurable
sense of wrong. "I say, she has done it, after Eunice has saved me--done
it, when Eunice was ready to be my wife."

"How has she done it?"

Between grief and indignation his reply was involved in a confusion of
vehemently-spoken words, which I shall not attempt to reproduce. Eunice
had reminded him that her sister had been publicly convicted of an
infamous crime, and publicly punished for it by imprisonment. "If I
consent to marry you," she said, "I stain you with my disgrace; that
shall never be." With this resolution, she had left him. "I have tried
to convince her," Philip said, "that she will not be associated with her
sister's disgrace when she bears my name; I have promised to take her
far away from England, among people who have never even heard of her
sister. Miss Jillgall has used her influence to help me. All in vain!
There is no hope for us but in you. I am not thinking selfishly only of
myself. She tries to conceal it--but, oh, she is broken-hearted! Ask the
farmer's wife, if you don't believe me. Judge for yourself, sir. Go--for
God's sake, go to the farm."

I made him sit down and compose himself.

"You may depend on my going to the farm," I answered. "I shall write to
Eunice to-day, and follow my letter to-morrow." He tried to thank me;
but I would not allow it. "Before I consent to accept the expression of
your gratitude," I said, "I must know a little more of you than I know
now. This is only the second occasion on which we have met. Let us look
back a little, Mr. Philip Dunboyne. You were Eunice's affianced husband;
and you broke faith with her. That was a rascally action. How do you
defend it?"

His head sank. "I am ashamed to defend it," he answered.

I pressed him without mercy. "You own yourself," I said, "that it was a
rascally action?"

"Use stronger language against me, even than that, sir--I deserve it."

"In plain words," I went on, "you can find no excuse for your conduct?"

"In the past time," he said, "I might have found excuses."

"But you can't find them now?"

"I must not even look for them now."

"Why not?"

"I owe it to Eunice to leave my conduct at its worst; with nothing
said--by me--to defend it."

"What has Eunice done to have such a claim on you as that?"

"Eunice has forgiven me."

It was gratefully and delicately said. Ought I to have allowed this
circumstance to weigh with me? I ask, in return, had _I_ never committed
any faults? As a fellow-mortal and fellow-sinner, had I any right to
harden my heart against an expression of penitence which I felt to be
sincere in its motive?

But I was bound to think of Eunice. I did think of her, before I
ventured to accept the position--the critical position, as I shall
presently show--of Philip's friend.

After more than an hour of questions put without reserve, and of answers
given without prevarication, I had traveled over the whole ground laid
out by the narratives which appear in these pages, and had arrived at my
conclusion--so far as Philip Dunboyne was concerned.

I found him to be a man with nothing absolutely wicked in him--but with
a nature so perilously weak, in many respects, that it might drift into
wickedness unless a stronger nature was at hand to bold it back. Married
to a wife without force of character, the probabilities would point to
him as likely to yield to examples which might make him a bad husband.
Married to a wife with a will of her own, and with true love to sustain
her--a wife who would know when to take the command and how to take the
command--a wife who, finding him tempted to commit actions unworthy
of his better self, would be far-sighted enough to perceive that her
husband's sense of honor might sometimes lose its balance, without being
on that account hopelessly depraved--then, and, in these cases only, the
probabilities would point to Philip as a man likely to be the better and
the happier for his situation, when the bonds of wedlock had got him.

But the serious question was not answered yet.

Could I feel justified in placing Eunice in the position toward Philip
which I have just endeavored to describe? I dared not allow my mind to
dwell on the generosity which had so nobly pardoned him, or on the force
of character which had bravely endured the bitterest disappointment, the
cruelest humiliation. The one consideration which I was bound to face,
was the sacred consideration of her happiness in her life to come.

Leaving Philip, with a few words of sympathy which might help him to
bear his suspense, I went to my room to think.

The time passed--and I could arrive at no positive conclusion. Either
way--with or without Philip--the contemplation of Eunice's future
harassed me with doubt. Even if I had conquered my own indecision, and
had made up my mind to sanction the union of the two young people, the
difficulties that now beset me would not have been dispersed. Knowing
what I alone knew, I could certainly remove Eunice's one objection to
the marriage. In other words, I had only to relate what had happened on
the day when the Chaplain brought the Minister to the prison, and the
obstacle of their union would be removed. But, without considering
Philip, it was simply out of the question to do this, in mercy to Eunice
herself. What was Helena's disgrace, compared with the infamy which
stained the name of the poor girl's mother! The other alternative of
telling her part of the truth only was before me, if I could persuade
myself to adopt it. I failed to persuade myself; my morbid anxiety for
her welfare made me hesitate again. Human patience could endure no
more. Rashness prevailed and prudence yielded--I left my decision to be
influenced by the coming interview with Eunice.

The next day I drove to the farm. Philip's entreaties persuaded me
to let him be my companion, on one condition--that he waited in the
carriage while I went into the house.

I had carefully arranged my ideas, and had decided on proceeding with
the greatest caution, before I ventured on saying the all-important
words which, once spoken, were not to be recalled. The worst of those
anxieties, under which the delicate health of Mr. Gracedieu had broken
down, was my anxiety now. Could I reconcile it to my conscience to
permit a man, innocent of all knowledge of the truth, to marry the
daughter of a condemned murderess, without honestly telling him what
he was about to do? Did I deserve to be pitied? did I deserve to be
blamed?--my mind was still undecided when I entered the house.

She ran to meet me as if she had been my daughter; she kissed me as if
she had been my daughter; she fondly looked up at me as if she had been
my daughter. At the sight of that sweet young face, so sorrowful, and
so patiently enduring sorrow, all my doubts and hesitations, everything
artificial about me with which I had entered the room, vanished in an
instant.

After she had thanked me for coming to see her, I saw her tremble a
little. The uppermost interest in her heart was forcing its way outward
to expression, try as she might to keep it back. "Have you seen Philip?"
she asked. The tone in which she put that question decided me--I was
resolved to let her marry him. Impulse! Yes, impulse, asserting itself
inexcusably in a man at the end of his life. I ought to have known
better than to have given way. Very likely. But am I the only mortal who
ought to have known better--and did not?

When Eunice asked if I had seen Philip, I owned that he was outside in
the carriage. Before she could reproach me, I went on with what I had
to say: "My child, I know what a sacrifice you have made; and I should
honor your scruples, if you had any reason for feeling them."

"Any reason for feeling them?" She turned pale as she repeated the
words.

An idea came to me. I rang for the servant, and sent her to the carriage
to tell Philip to come in. "My dear, I am not putting you to any unfair
trial," I assured her; "I am going to prove that I love you as truly as
if you were my own child."

When they were both present, I resolved that they should not suffer
a moment of needless suspense. Standing between them, I took Eunice's
hand, and laid my other hand on Philip's shoulder, and spoke out
plainly.

"I am here to make you both happy," I said. "I can remove the only
obstacle to your marriage, and I mean to do it. But I must insist on
one condition. Give me your promise, Philip, that you will ask for no
explanations, and that you will be satisfied with the one true statement
which is all that I can offer to you."

He gave me his promise, without an instant's hesitation.

"Philip grants what I ask," I said to Eunice. "Do you grant it, too?"

Her hand turned cold in mine; but she spoke firmly when she said: "Yes."

I gave her into Philip's care. It was his privilege to console and
support her. It was my duty to say the decisive words:

"Rouse your courage, dear Eunice; you are no more affected by Helena's
disgrace than I am. You are not her sister. Her father is not your
father; her mother was not your mother. I was present, in the time of
your infancy, when Mr. Gracedieu's fatherly kindness received you as his
adopted child. This, I declare to you both, on my word of honor, is the
truth."

How she bore it I am not able to say. My foolish old eyes were filling
with tears. I could just see plainly enough to find my way to the door,
and leave them together.

In my reckless state of mind, I never asked myself if Time would be my
accomplice, and keep the part of the secret which I had not revealed--or
be my enemy, and betray me. The chances, either way, were perhaps equal.
The deed was done.



CHAPTER LXIV. THE TRUTH TRIUMPHANT.

The marriage was deferred, at Eunice's request, as an expression of
respect to the memory of Philip's father.

When the time of delay had passed, it was arranged that the wedding
ceremony should be held--after due publication of Banns--at the parish
church of the London suburb in which my house was situated. Miss
Jillgall was bridesmaid, and I gave away the bride. Before we set out
for the church, Eunice asked leave to speak with me for a moment in
private.

"Don't think," she said, "that I am forgetting my promise to be content
with what you have told me about myself. I am not so ungrateful as that.
But I do want, before I consent to be Philip's wife, to feel sure that I
am not quite unworthy of him. Is it because I am of mean birth that you
told me I was Mr. Gracedieu's adopted child--and told me no more?"

I could honestly satisfy her, so far. "Certainly not!" I said.

She put her arms round my neck. "Do you say that," she asked, "to make
my mind easy? or do you say it on your word of honor?"

"On my word of honor."

We arrived at the church. Let Miss Jillgall describe the marriage, in
her own inimitable way.

"No wedding breakfast, when you don't want to eat it. No wedding
speeches, when nobody wants to make them, and nobody wants to hear
them. And no false sentiment, shedding tears and reddening noses, on the
happiest day in the whole year. A model marriage! I could desire nothing
better, if I had any prospect of being a bride myself."

They went away for their honeymoon to a quiet place by the seaside, not
very far from the town in which Eunice had passed some of the happiest
and the wretchedest days in her life. She persisted in thinking it
possible that Mr. Gracedieu might recover the use of his faculties,
at the last, and might wish to see her on his death-bed. "His adopted
daughter," she gently reminded me, "is his only daughter now." The
doctor shook his head when I told him what Eunice had said to me--and,
the sad truth must be told, the doctor was right.

Miss Jillgall returned, on the wedding-day, to take care of the good man
who had befriended her in her hour of need.

Before the end of the week, I heard from her, and was disagreeably
reminded of an incident which we had both forgotten, absorbed as we were
in other and greater interests, at the time.

Mrs. Tenbruggen had again appeared on the scene! She had written to Miss
Jillgall, from Paris, to say that she had heard of old Mr. Dunboyne's
death, and that she wished to have the letter returned, which she had
left for delivery to Philip's father on the day when Philip and Eunice
were married. I had my own suspicions of what that letter might contain;
and I regretted that Miss Jillgall had sent it back without first
waiting to consult me. My misgivings, thus excited, were increased
by more news of no very welcome kind. Mrs. Tenbruggen had decided on
returning to her professional pursuits in England. Massage, now the
fashion everywhere, had put money into her pocket among the foreigners;
and her husband, finding that she persisted in keeping out of his reach,
had consented to a compromise. He was ready to submit to a judicial
separation; in consideration of a little income which his wife had
consented to settle on him, under the advice of her lawyer.

Some days later, I received a delightful letter from Philip and Eunice;
reminding me that I had engaged to pay them a visit at the seaside. My
room was ready for me, and I was left to choose my own day. I had
just begun to write my reply, gladly accepting the invitation, when
an ominous circumstance occurred. My servant announced "a lady"; and I
found myself face to face with--Mrs. Tenbruggen!

She was as cheerful as ever, and as eminently agreeable as ever.

"I have heard it all from Selina," she said. "Philip's marriage
to Eunice (I shall go and congratulate them, of course), and the
catastrophe (how dramatic!) of Helena Gracedieu. I warned. Selina that
Miss Helena would end badly. To tell the truth, she frightened me. I
don't deny that I am a mischievous woman when I find myself affronted,
quite capable of taking my revenge in my own small spiteful way. But
poison and murder--ah, the frightful subject! let us drop it, and talk
of something that doesn't make my hair (it's really my own hair) stand
on end. Has Selina told you that I have got rid of my charming husband,
on easy pecuniary terms? Oh, you know that? Very well. I will tell you
something that you don't know. Mr. Governor, I have found you out."

"May I venture to ask how?"

"When I guessed which was which of those two girls," she answered, "and
guessed wrong, you deliberately encouraged the mistake. Very clever, but
you overdid it. From that moment, though I kept it to myself, I began
to fear I might be wrong. Do you remember Low Lanes, my dear sir? A
charming old church. I have had another consultation with my lawyer.
His questions led me into mentioning how it happened that I heard of Low
Lanes. After looking again at his memorandum of the birth advertised in
the newspaper without naming the place--he proposed trying the church
register at Low Lanes. Need I tell you the result? I know, as well
as you do, that Philip has married the adopted child. He has had a
mother-in-law who was hanged, and, what is more, he has the honor,
through his late father, of being otherwise connected with the murderess
by marriage--as his aunt!"

Bewilderment and dismay deprived me of my presence of mind. "How did you
discover that?" I was foolish enough to ask.

"Do you remember when I brought the baby to the prison?" she said. "The
father--as I mentioned at the time--had been a dear and valued friend of
mine. No person could be better qualified to tell me who had married his
wife's sister. If that lady had been living, I should never have been
troubled with the charge of the child. Any more questions?"

"Only one. Is Philip to hear of this?"

"Oh, for shame! I don't deny that Philip insulted me grossly, in one
way; and that Philip's late father insulted me grossly, in another way.
But Mamma Tenbruggen is a Christian. She returns good for evil, and
wouldn't for the world disturb the connubial felicity of Mr. and Mrs.
Philip Dunboyne."

The moment the woman was out of my house, I sent a telegram to Philip to
say that he might expect to see me that night. I caught the last train
in the evening; and I sat down to supper with those two harmless young
creatures, knowing I must prepare the husband for what threatened them,
and weakly deferring it, when I found myself in their presence, until
the next day. Eunice was, in some degree, answerable for this hesitation
on my part. No one could look at her husband, and fail to see that he
was a supremely happy man. But I detected signs of care in the wife's
face.

Before breakfast the next morning I was out on the beach, trying to
decide how the inevitable disclosure might be made. Eunice joined me.
Now, when we were alone, I asked if she was really and completely happy.
Quietly and sadly she answered: "Not yet."

I hardly knew what to say. My face must have expressed disappointment
and surprise.

"I shall never be quite happy," she resumed, "till I know what it is
that you kept from me on that memorable day. I don't like having a
secret from my husband--though it is not _my_ secret."

"Remember your promise," I said

"I don't forget it," she answered. "I can only wish that my promise
would keep back the thoughts that come to me in spite of myself."

"What thoughts?"

"There is something, as I fear, in the story of my parents which you are
afraid to confide to me. Why did Mr. Gracedieu allow me to believe and
leave everybody to believe, that I was his own child?"

"My dear, I relieved your mind of those doubts on the morning of your
marriage."

"No. I was only thinking of myself at that time. My mother--the doubt of
_her_ is the doubt that torments me now."

"What do you mean?"

She put her arm in mine, and held by it with both hands.

"The mock-mother!" she whispered. "Do you remember that dreadful Vision,
that horrid whispering temptation in the dead of night? _Was_ it a
mock-mother? Oh, pity me! I don't know who my mother was. One horrid
thought about her is a burden on my mind. If she was a good woman, you
who love me would surely have made me happy by speaking of her?"

Those words decided me at last. Could she suffer more than she had
suffered already, if I trusted her with the truth? I ran the risk. There
was a time of silence that filled me with terror. The interval passed.
She took my hand, and put it to her heart. "Does it beat as if I was
frightened?" she asked.


No! It was beating calmly.

"Does it relieve your anxiety?"

It told me that I had not surprised her. That unforgotten Vision of the
night had prepared her for the worst, after the time when I had told her
that she was an adopted child. "I know," I said, "that those whispered
temptations overpowered you again, when you and Helena met on the
stairs, and you forbade her to enter Philip's room. And I know that love
had conquered once more, when you were next seen sitting by Philip's
bedside. Tell me--have you any misgivings now? Is there fear in your
heart of the return of that tempting spirit in you, in the time to
come?"

"Not while Philip lives!"

There, where her love was--there her safety was. And she knew it! She
suddenly left me. I asked where she was going.

"To tell Philip," was the reply.

She was waiting for me at the door, when I followed her to the house.

"Is it done?" I said.

"It is done," she answered.

"What did he say?"

"He said: 'My darling, if I could be fonder of you than ever, I should
be fonder of you now.'"

I have been blamed for being too ready to confide to Philip the precious
trust of Eunice's happiness. If that reply does not justify me, where is
justification to be found?




POSTSCRIPT.

Later in the day, Mrs. Tenbruggen arrived to offer her congratulations.
She asked for a few minutes with Philip alone. As a cat elaborates
her preparations for killing a mouse, so the human cat elaborated her
preparations for killing Philip's happiness, he remained uninjured
by her teeth and her claws. "Somebody," she said, "has told you of it
already?" And Philip answered: "Yes; my wife."

For some months longer, Mr. Gracedieu lingered. One morning, he said to
Eunice: "I want to teach you to knit. Sit by me, and see me do it."
His hands fell softly on his lap; his head sank little by little on
her shoulder. She could just hear him whisper: "How pleasant it is to
sleep!" Never was Death's dreadful work more gently done.

Our married pair live now on the paternal estate in Ireland; and Miss
Jillgall reigns queen of domestic affairs. I am still strong enough to
pass my autumn holidays in that pleasant house.

At times, my memory reverts to Helena Gracedieu, and to what I
discovered when I had seen her diary.

How little I knew of that terrible creature when I first met with her,
and fancied that she had inherited her mother's character! It was weak
indeed to compare the mean vices of Mrs. Gracedieu with the diabolical
depravity of her daughter. Here the doctrine of hereditary transmission
of moral qualities must own that it has overlooked the fertility (for
growth of good and for growth of evil equally) which is inherent in
human nature. There are virtues that exalt us, and vices that degrade
us, whose mysterious origin is, not in our parents, but in ourselves.
When I think of Helena, I ask myself, where is the trace which reveals
that the first murder in the world was the product of inherited crime?

The criminal left the prison, on the expiration of her sentence, so
secretly that it was impossible to trace her. Some months later, Miss
Jillgall received an illustrated newspaper published in the United
States. She showed me one of the portraits in it.

"Do you recognize the illustrious original?" she asked, with indignant
emphasis on the last two words. I recognized Helena. "Now read her new
title," Miss Jillgall continued.

I read: "The Reverend Miss Gracedieu."

The biographical notice followed. Here is an extract: "This eminent
lady, the victim of a shocking miscarriage of justice in England, is
now the distinguished leader of a new community in the United States. We
hail in her the great intellect which asserts the superiority of woman
over man. In the first French Revolution, the attempt made by men
to found a rational religion met with only temporary success. It was
reserved for the mightier spirit of woman to lay the foundations more
firmly, and to dedicate one of the noblest edifices in this city to the
Worship of Pure Reason. Readers who wish for further information will
do well to provide themselves with the Reverend Miss Gracedieu's
Orations--the tenth edition of which is advertised in our columns."

"I once asked you," Miss Jillgall reminded me, "what Helena would do
when she came out of prison, and you said she would do very well. Oh,
Mr. Governor, Solomon was nothing to You!"

========================================
========================================

THE QUEEN OF HEARTS

By Wilkie Collins




LETTER OF DEDICATION.

TO

EMILE FORGUES.


AT a time when French readers were altogether unaware of the existence
of any books of my writing, a critical examination of my novels appeared
under your signature in the _Revue des Deux Mondes_. I read that
article, at the time of its appearance, with sincere pleasure and
sincere gratitude to the writer, and I have honestly done my best to
profit by it ever since.

At a later period, when arrangements were made for the publication of
my novels in Paris, you kindly undertook, at some sacrifice of your own
convenience, to give the first of the series--"The Dead Secret"--the
great advantage of being rendered into French by your pen. Your
excellent translation of "The Lighthouse" had already taught me how
to appreciate the value of your assistance; and when "The Dead Secret"
appeared in its French form, although I was sensibly gratified, I was by
no means surprised to find my fortunate work of fiction, not translated,
in the mechanical sense of the word, but transformed from a novel that
I had written in my language to a novel that you might have written in
yours.

I am now about to ask you to confer one more literary obligation on me
by accepting the dedication of this book, as the earliest acknowledgment
which it has been in my power to make of the debt I owe to my critic, to
my translator, and to my friend.

The stories which form the principal contents of the following pages
are all, more or less, exercises in that art which I have now studied
anxiously for some years, and which I still hope to cultivate, to
better and better purpose, for many more. Allow me, by inscribing the
collection to you, to secure one reader for it at the outset of its
progress through the world of letters whose capacity for seeing all a
writer's defects may be matched by many other critics, but whose rarer
faculty of seeing all a writer's merits is equaled by very few.

WILKIE COLLINS.




THE QUEEN OF HEARTS.



CHAPTER I. OURSELVES.

WE were three quiet, lonely old men, and SHE was a lively, handsome
young woman, and we were at our wits' end what to do with her.

A word about ourselves, first of all--a necessary word, to explain the
singular situation of our fair young guest.

We are three brothers; and we live in a barbarous, dismal old house
called The Glen Tower. Our place of abode stands in a hilly, lonesome
district of South Wales. No such thing as a line of railway runs
anywhere near us. No gentleman's seat is within an easy drive of us. We
are at an unspeakably inconvenient distance from a town, and the village
to which we send for our letters is three miles off.

My eldest brother, Owen, was brought up to the Church. All the prime of
his life was passed in a populous London parish. For more years than I
now like to reckon up, he worked unremittingly, in defiance of failing
health and adverse fortune, amid the multitudinous misery of the London
poor; and he would, in all probability, have sacrificed his life to his
duty long before the present time if The Glen Tower had not come into
his possession through two unexpected deaths in the elder and richer
branch of our family. This opening to him of a place of rest and refuge
saved his life. No man ever drew breath who better deserved the gifts
of fortune; for no man, I sincerely believe, more tender of others,
more diffident of himself, more gentle, more generous, and more
simple-hearted than Owen, ever walked this earth.

My second brother, Morgan, started in life as a doctor, and learned all
that his profession could teach him at home and abroad. He realized a
moderate independence by his practice, beginning in one of our large
northern towns and ending as a physician in London; but, although he was
well known and appreciated among his brethren, he failed to gain
that sort of reputation with the public which elevates a man into the
position of a great doctor. The ladies never liked him. In the first
place, he was ugly (Morgan will excuse me for mentioning this); in the
second place, he was an inveterate smoker, and he smelled of tobacco
when he felt languid pulses in elegant bedrooms; in the third place,
he was the most formidably outspoken teller of the truth as regarded
himself, his profession, and his patients, that ever imperiled the
social standing of the science of medicine. For these reasons, and for
others which it is not necessary to mention, he never pushed his way,
as a doctor, into the front ranks, and he never cared to do so. About
a year after Owen came into possession of The Glen Tower, Morgan
discovered that he had saved as much money for his old age as a sensible
man could want; that he was tired of the active pursuit--or, as he
termed it, of the dignified quackery of his profession; and that it was
only common charity to give his invalid brother a companion who could
physic him for nothing, and so prevent him from getting rid of his money
in the worst of all possible ways, by wasting it on doctors' bills. In
a week after Morgan had arrived at these conclusions, he was settled at
The Glen Tower; and from that time, opposite as their characters were,
my two elder brothers lived together in their lonely retreat, thoroughly
understanding, and, in their very different ways, heartily loving one
another.

Many years passed before I, the youngest of the three--christened by the
unmelodious name of Griffith--found my way, in my turn, to the dreary
old house, and the sheltering quiet of the Welsh hills. My career in
life had led me away from my brothers; and even now, when we are all
united, I have still ties and interests to connect me with the outer
world which neither Owen nor Morgan possess.

I was brought up to the Bar. After my first year's study of the law,
I wearied of it, and strayed aside idly into the brighter and more
attractive paths of literature. My occasional occupation with my pen was
varied by long traveling excursions in all parts of the Continent; year
by year my circle of gay friends and acquaintances increased, and I bade
fair to sink into the condition of a wandering desultory man, without
a fixed purpose in life of any sort, when I was saved by what has saved
many another in my situation--an attachment to a good and a sensible
woman. By the time I had reached the age of thirty-five, I had done what
neither of my brothers had done before me--I had married.

As a single man, my own small independence, aided by what little
additions to it I could pick up with my pen, had been sufficient for my
wants; but with marriage and its responsibilities came the necessity
for serious exertion. I returned to my neglected studies, and grappled
resolutely, this time, with the intricate difficulties of the law. I was
called to the Bar. My wife's father aided me with his interest, and I
started into practice without difficulty and without delay.

For the next twenty years my married life was a scene of happiness and
prosperity, on which I now look back with a grateful tenderness that
no words of mine can express. The memory of my wife is busy at my heart
while I think of those past times. The forgotten tears rise in my eyes
again, and trouble the course of my pen while it traces these simple
lines.

Let me pass rapidly over the one unspeakable misery of my life; let me
try to remember now, as I tried to remember then, that she lived to see
our only child--our son, who was so good to her, who is still so good to
me--grow up to manhood; that her head lay on my bosom when she died; and
that the last frail movement of her hand in this world was the movement
that brought it closer to her boy's lips.

I bore the blow--with God's help I bore it, and bear it still. But it
struck me away forever from my hold on social life; from the purposes
and pursuits, the companions and the pleasures of twenty years, which
her presence had sanctioned and made dear to me. If my son George had
desired to follow my profession, I should still have struggled against
myself, and have kept my place in the world until I had seen h im
prosperous and settled. But his choice led him to the army; and before
his mother's death he had obtained his commission, and had entered on
his path in life. No other responsibility remained to claim from me the
sacrifice of myself; my brothers had made my place ready for me by
their fireside; my heart yearned, in its desolation, for the friends and
companions of the old boyish days; my good, brave son promised that no
year should pass, as long as he was in England, without his coming
to cheer me; and so it happened that I, in my turn, withdrew from the
world, which had once been a bright and a happy world to me, and retired
to end my days, peacefully, contentedly, and gratefully, as my brothers
are ending theirs, in the solitude of The Glen Tower.

How many years have passed since we have all three been united it is not
necessary to relate. It will be more to the purpose if I briefly record
that we have never been separated since the day which first saw us
assembled together in our hillside retreat; that we have never yet
wearied of the time, of the place, or of ourselves; and that the
influence of solitude on our hearts and minds has not altered them for
the worse, for it has not embittered us toward our fellow-creatures, and
it has not dried up in us the sources from which harmless occupations
and innocent pleasures may flow refreshingly to the last over the
waste places of human life. Thus much for our own story, and for the
circumstances which have withdrawn us from the world for the rest of our
days.

And now imagine us three lonely old men, tall and lean, and
white-headed; dressed, more from past habit than from present
association, in customary suits of solemn black: Brother Owen, yielding,
gentle, and affectionate in look, voice, and manner; brother Morgan,
with a quaint, surface-sourness of address, and a tone of dry sarcasm in
his talk, which single him out, on all occasions, as a character in our
little circle; brother Griffith forming the link between his two elder
companions, capable, at one time, of sympathizing with the quiet,
thoughtful tone of Owen's conversation, and ready, at another, to
exchange brisk severities on life and manners with Morgan--in short,
a pliable, double-sided old lawyer, who stands between the
clergyman-brother and the physician-brother with an ear ready for each,
and with a heart open to both, share and share together.


Imagine the strange old building in which we live to be really what its
name implies--a tower standing in a glen; in past times the fortress of
a fighting Welsh chieftain; in present times a dreary land-lighthouse,
built up in many stories of two rooms each, with a little modern lean-to
of cottage form tacked on quaintly to one of its sides; the great hill,
on whose lowest slope it stands, rising precipitously behind it; a dark,
swift-flowing stream in the valley below; hills on hills all round, and
no way of approach but by one of the loneliest and wildest crossroads in
all South Wales.

Imagine such a place of abode as this, and such inhabitants of it
as ourselves, and them picture the descent among us--as of a goddess
dropping from the clouds--of a lively, handsome, fashionable young
lady--a bright, gay, butterfly creature, used to flutter away its
existence in the broad sunshine of perpetual gayety--a child of the new
generation, with all the modern ideas whirling together in her pretty
head, and all the modern accomplishments at the tips of her delicate
fingers. Imagine such a light-hearted daughter of Eve as this, the
spoiled darling of society, the charming spendthrift of Nature's
choicest treasures of beauty and youth, suddenly flashing into the dim
life of three weary old men--suddenly dropped into the place, of all
others, which is least fit for her--suddenly shut out from the world
in the lonely quiet of the loneliest home in England. Realize, if it
be possible, all that is most whimsical and most anomalous in such a
situation as this, and the startling confession contained in the opening
sentence of these pages will no longer excite the faintest emotion
of surprise. Who can wonder now, when our bright young goddess really
descended on us, that I and my brothers were all three at our wits' end
what to do with her!



CHAPTER II. OUR DILEMMA.

WHO is the young lady? And how did she find her way into The Glen Tower?

Her name (in relation to which I shall have something more to say a
little further on) is Jessie Yelverton. She is an orphan and an only
child. Her mother died while she was an infant; her father was my dear
and valued friend, Major Yelverton. He lived long enough to celebrate
his darling's seventh birthday. When he died he intrusted his authority
over her and his responsibility toward her to his brother and to me.

When I was summoned to the reading of the major's will, I knew perfectly
well that I should hear myself appointed guardian and executor with
his brother; and I had been also made acquainted with my lost friend's
wishes as to his daughter's education, and with his intentions as to the
disposal of all his property in her favor. My own idea, therefore, was,
that the reading of the will would inform me of nothing which I had
not known in the testator's lifetime. When the day came for hearing
it, however, I found that I had been over hasty in arriving at this
conclusion. Toward the end of the document there was a clause inserted
which took me entirely by surprise.

After providing for the education of Miss Yelverton under the direction
of her guardians, and for her residence, under ordinary circumstances,
with the major's sister, Lady Westwick, the clause concluded by saddling
the child's future inheritance with this curious condition:

From the period of her leaving school to the period of her reaching the
age of twenty-one years, Miss Yelverton was to pass not less than six
consecutive weeks out of every year under the roof of one of her two
guardians. During the lives of both of them, it was left to her own
choice to say which of the two she would prefer to live with. In all
other respects the condition was imperative. If she forfeited it,
excepting, of course, the case of the deaths of both her guardians, she
was only to have a life-interest in the property; if she obeyed it,
the money itself was to become her own possession on the day when she
completed her twenty-first year.

This clause in the will, as I have said, took me at first by surprise.
I remembered how devotedly Lady Westwick had soothed her sister-in-law's
death-bed sufferings, and how tenderly she had afterward watched over
the welfare of the little motherless child--I remembered the innumerable
claims she had established in this way on her brother's confidence in
her affection for his orphan daughter, and I was, therefore, naturally
amazed at the appearance of a condition in his will which seemed to
show a positive distrust of Lady Westwick's undivided influence over the
character and conduct of her niece.

A few words from my fellow-guardian, Mr. Richard Yelverton, and a little
after-consideration of some of my deceased friend's peculiarities of
disposition and feeling, to which I had not hitherto attached sufficient
importance, were enough to make me understand the motives by which he
had been influenced in providing for the future of his child.

Major Yelverton had raised himself to a position of affluence and
eminence from a very humble origin. He was the son of a small farmer,
and it was his pride never to forget this circumstance, never to be
ashamed of it, and never to allow the prejudices of society to influence
his own settled opinions on social questions in general.

Acting, in all that related to his intercourse with the world, on such
principles as these, the major, it is hardly necessary to say, held some
strangely heterodox opinions on the modern education of girls, and on
the evil influence of society over the characters of women in general.
Out of the strength of those opinions, and out of the certainty of his
conviction that his sister did not share them, had grown that condition
in his will which removed his daughter from the influence of her aunt
for six consecutive weeks in every year. Lady Westwick was the most
light-hearted, the most generous, the most impulsive of women; capable,
when any serious occasion called it forth, of all that was devoted and
self-sacrificing, but, at other and ordinary times, constitutionally
restless, frivolous, and eager for perpetual gayety. Distrusting the
sort of life which he knew his daughter would lead under her aunt's
roof, and at the same time gratefully remembering his sister's
affectionate devotion toward his dying wife and her helpless infant,
Major Yelverton had attempted to make a compromise, which, while it
allowed Lady Westwick the close domestic intercourse with her niece that
she had earned by innumerable kind offices, should, at the same time,
place the young girl for a fixed period of every year of her minority
under the corrective care of two such quiet old-fashioned guardians as
his brother and myself. Such is the history of the clause in the will.
My friend little thought, when he dictated it, of the extraordinary
result to which it was one day to lead.

For some years, however, events ran on smoothly enough. Little Jessie
was sent to an excellent school, with strict instructions to the
mistress to make a good girl of her, and not a fashionable young lady.
Although she was reported to be anything but a pattern pupil in respect
of attention to her lessons, she became from the first the chosen
favorite of every one about her. The very offenses which she committed
against the discipline of the school were of the sort which provoke a
smile even on the stern countenance of authority itself. One of these
quaint freaks of mischief may not inappropriately be mentioned here,
inasmuch as it gained her the pretty nickname under which she will be
found to appear occasionally in these pages.

On a certain autumn night shortly after the Midsummer vacation, the
mistress of the school fancied she saw a light under the door of the
bedroom occupied by Jessie and three other girls. It was then close
on midnight; and, fearing that some case of sudden illness might
have happened, she hastened into the room. On opening the door, she
discovered, to her horror and amazement, that all four girls were out
of bed--were dressed in brilliantly-fantastic costumes, representing the
four grotesque "Queens" of Hearts, Diamonds, Spades, and Clubs, familiar
to us all on the pack of cards--and were dancing a quadrille, in
which Jessie sustained the character of The Queen of Hearts. The next
morning's investigation disclosed that Miss Yelverton had smuggled the
dresses into the school, and had amused herself by giving an impromptu
fancy ball to her companions, in imitation of an entertainment of the
same kind at which she had figured in a "court-card" quadrille at her
aunt's country house.

The dresses were instantly confiscated and the necessary punishment
promptly administered; but the remembrance of Jessie's extraordinary
outrage on bedroom discipline lasted long enough to become one of
the traditions of the school, and she and her sister-culprits were
thenceforth hailed as the "queens" of the four "suites" by their
class-companions whenever the mistress's back was turned, Whatever might
have become of the nicknames thus employed in relation to the
other three girls, such a mock title as The Queen of Hearts was too
appropriately descriptive of the natural charm of Jessie's character,
as well as of the adventure in which she had taken the lead, not to rise
naturally to the lips of every one who knew her. It followed her to her
aunt's house--it came to be as habitually and familiarly connected with
her, among her friends of all ages, as if it had been formally inscribed
on her baptismal register; and it has stolen its way into these pages
because it falls from my pen naturally and inevitably, exactly as it
often falls from my lips in real life.

When Jessie left school the first difficulty presented itself--in other
words, the necessity arose of fulfilling the conditions of the will. At
that time I was already settled at The Glen Tower, and her living six
weeks in our dismal solitude and our humdrum society was, as she herself
frankly wrote me word, quite out of the question. Fortunately, she had
always got on well with her uncle and his family; so she exerted her
liberty of choice, and, much to her own relief and to mine also, passed
her regular six weeks of probation, year after year, under Mr. Richard
Yelverton's roof.

During this period I heard of her regularly, sometimes from my
fellow-guardian, sometimes from my son George, who, whenever his
military duties allowed him the opportunity, contrived to see her, now
at her aunt's house, and now at Mr. Yelverton's. The particulars of her
character and conduct, which I gleaned in this way, more than sufficed
to convince me that the poor major's plan for the careful training
of his daughter's disposition, though plausible enough in theory, was
little better than a total failure in practice. Miss Jessie, to use the
expressive common phrase, took after her aunt. She was as generous, as
impulsive, as light-hearted, as fond of change, and gayety, and fine
clothes--in short, as complete and genuine a woman as Lady Westwick
herself. It was impossible to reform the "Queen of Hearts," and equally
impossible not to love her. Such, in few words, was my fellow-guardian's
report of his experience of our handsome young ward.

So the time passed till the year came of which I am now writing--the
ever-memorable year, to England, of the Russian war. It happened that
I had heard less than usual at this period, and indeed for many months
before it, of Jessie and her proceedings. My son had been ordered out
with his regiment to the Crimea in 1854, and had other work in hand
now than recording the sayings and doings of a young lady. Mr. Richard
Yelverton, who had been hitherto used to write to me with tolerable
regularity, seemed now, for some reason that I could not conjecture, to
have forgotten my existence. Ultimately I was reminded of my ward by one
of George's own letters, in which he asked for news of her; and I wrote
at once to Mr. Yelverton. The answer that reached me was written by his
wife: he was dangerously ill. The next letter that came informed me of
his death. This happened early in the spring of the year 1855.

I am ashamed to confess it, but the change in my own position was the
first idea that crossed my mind when I read the news of Mr. Yelverton's
death. I was now left sole guardian, and Jessie Yelverton wanted a year
still of coming of age.

By the next day's post I wrote to her about the altered state of the
relations between us. She was then on the Continent with her aunt,
having gone abroad at the very beginning of the year. Consequently,
so far as eighteen hundred and fifty-five was concerned, the condition
exacted by the will yet remained to be performed. She had still six
weeks to pass--her last six weeks, seeing that she was now twenty years
old--under the roof of one of her guardians, and I was now the only
guardian left.

In due course of time I received my answer, written on rose-colored
paper, and expressed throughout in a tone of light, easy, feminine
banter, which amused me in spite of myself. Miss Jessie, according to
her own account, was hesitating, on receipt of my letter, between two
alternatives--the one, of allowing herself to be buried six weeks in The
Glen Tower; the other, of breaking the condition, giving up the money,
and remaining magnanimously contented with nothing but a life-interest
in her father's property. At present she inclined decidedly toward
giving up the money and escaping the clutches of "the three horrid old
men;" but she would let me know again if she happened to change
her mind. And so, with best love, she would beg to remain always
affectionately mine, as long as she was well out of my reach.

The summer passed, the autumn came, and I never heard from her again.
Under ordinary circumstances, this long silence might have made me feel
a little uneasy. But news reached me about this time from the Crimea
that my son was wounded--not dangerously, thank God, but still severely
enough to be la id up--and all my anxieties were now centered in that
direction. By the beginning of September, however, I got better accounts
of him, and my mind was made easy enough to let me think of Jessie
again. Just as I was considering the necessity of writing once more to
my refractory ward, a second letter arrived from her. She had returned
at last from abroad, had suddenly changed her mind, suddenly grown sick
of society, suddenly become enamored of the pleasures of retirement,
and suddenly found out that the three horrid old men were three dear old
men, and that six weeks' solitude at The Glen Tower was the luxury, of
all others, that she languished for most. As a necessary result of this
altered state of things, she would therefore now propose to spend her
allotted six weeks with her guardian. We might certainly expect her on
the twentieth of September, and she would take the greatest care to fit
herself for our society by arriving in the lowest possible spirits, and
bringing her own sackcloth and ashes along with her.

The first ordeal to which this alarming letter forced me to submit was
the breaking of the news it contained to my two brothers. The disclosure
affected them very differently. Poor dear Owen merely turned pale,
lifted his weak, thin hands in a panic-stricken manner, and then sat
staring at me in speechless and motionless bewilderment. Morgan stood
up straight before me, plunged both his hands into his pockets, burst
suddenly into the harshest laugh I ever heard from his lips, and told
me, with an air of triumph, that it was exactly what he expected.

"What you expected?" I repeated, in astonishment.

"Yes," returned Morgan, with his bitterest emphasis. "It doesn't
surprise me in the least. It's the way things go in this world--it's the
regular moral see-saw of good and evil--the old story with the old end
to it. They were too happy in the garden of Eden--down comes the serpent
and turns them out. Solomon was too wise--down comes the Queen of
Sheba, and makes a fool of him. We've been too comfortable at The Glen
Tower--down comes a woman, and sets us all three by the ears together.
All I wonder at is that it hasn't happened before." With those words
Morgan resignedly took out his pipe, put on his old felt hat and turned
to the door.

"You're not going away before she comes?" exclaimed Owen, piteously.
"Don't leave us--please don't leave us!"

"Going!" cried Morgan, with great contempt. "What should I gain by that?
When destiny has found a man out, and heated his gridiron for him, he
has nothing left to do, that I know of, but to get up and sit on it."

I opened my lips to protest against the implied comparison between a
young lady and a hot gridiron, but, before I could speak, Morgan was
gone.

"Well," I said to Owen, "we must make the best of it. We must brush up
our manners, and set the house tidy, and amuse her as well as we can.
The difficulty is where to put her; and, when that is settled, the next
puzzle will be, what to order in to make her comfortable. It's a hard
thing, brother, to say what will or what will not please a young lady's
taste."

Owen looked absently at me, in greater bewilderment than ever--opened
his eyes in perplexed consideration--repeated to himself slowly the word
"tastes"--and then helped me with this suggestion:

"Hadn't we better begin, Griffith, by getting her a plum-cake?"

"My dear Owen," I remonstrated, "it is a grown young woman who is coming
to see us, not a little girl from school."

"Oh!" said Owen, more confused than before. "Yes--I see; we couldn't do
wrong, I suppose--could we?--if we got her a little dog, and a lot of
new gowns."

There was, evidently, no more help in the way of advice to be expected
from Owen than from Morgan himself. As I came to that conclusion, I saw
through the window our old housekeeper on her way, with her basket, to
the kitchen-garden, and left the room to ascertain if she could assist
us.

To my great dismay, the housekeeper took even a more gloomy view
than Morgan of the approaching event. When I had explained all the
circumstances to her, she carefully put down her basket, crossed her
arms, and said to me in slow, deliberate, mysterious tones:

"You want my advice about what's to be done with this young woman? Well,
sir, here's my advice: Don't you trouble your head about her. It won't
be no use. Mind, I tell you, it won't be no use."

"What do you mean?"

"You look at this place, sir--it's more like a prison than a house,
isn't it? You, look at us as lives in it. We've got (saving your
presence) a foot apiece in our graves, haven't we? When you was young
yourself, sir, what would you have done if they had shut you up for six
weeks in such a place as this, among your grandfathers and grandmothers,
with their feet in the grave?"

"I really can't say."

"I can, sir. You'd have run away. _She'll_ run away. Don't you worry
your head about her--she'll save you the trouble. I tell you again,
she'll run away."

With those ominous words the housekeeper took up her basket, sighed
heavily, and left me.

I sat down under a tree quite helpless. Here was the whole
responsibility shifted upon my miserable shoulders. Not a lady in the
neighborhood to whom I could apply for assistance, and the nearest shop
eight miles distant from us. The toughest case I ever had to conduct,
when I was at the Bar, was plain sailing compared with the difficulty of
receiving our fair guest.

It was absolutely necessary, however, to decide at once where she was to
sleep. All the rooms in the tower were of stone--dark, gloomy, and cold
even in the summer-time. Impossible to put her in any one of them. The
only other alternative was to lodge her in the little modern lean-to,
which I have already described as being tacked on to the side of the
old building. It contained three cottage-rooms, and they might be made
barely habitable for a young lady. But then those rooms were occupied
by Morgan. His books were in one, his bed was in another, his pipes and
general lumber were in the third. Could I expect him, after the sour
similitudes he had used in reference to our expected visitor, to turn
out of his habitation and disarrange all his habits for her convenience?
The bare idea of proposing the thing to him seemed ridiculous; and
yet inexorable necessity left me no choice but to make the hopeless
experiment. I walked back to the tower hastily and desperately, to face
the worst that might happen before my courage cooled altogether.

On crossing the threshold of the hall door I was stopped, to my great
amazement, by a procession of three of the farm-servants, followed by
Morgan, all walking after each other, in Indian file, toward the spiral
staircase that led to the top of the tower. The first of the servants
carried the materials for making a fire; the second bore an inverted
arm-chair on his head; the third tottered under a heavy load of books;
while Morgan came last, with his canister of tobacco in his hand, his
dressing-gown over his shoulders, and his whole collection of pipes
hugged up together in a bundle under his arm.

"What on earth does this mean?" I inquired.

"It means taking Time by the forelock," answered Morgan, looking at me
with a smile of sour satisfaction. "I've got the start of your young
woman, Griffith, and I'm making the most of it."

"But where, in Heaven's name, are you going?" I asked, as the head man
of the procession disappeared with his firing up the staircase.

"How high is this tower?" retorted Morgan.

"Seven stories, to be sure," I replied.

"Very good," said my eccentric brother, setting his foot on the first
stair, "I'm going up to the seventh."

"You can't," I shouted.

"_She_ can't, you mean," said Morgan, "and that's exactly why I'm going
there."

"But the room is not furnished."

"It's out of her reach."

"One of the windows has fallen to pieces."

"It's out of her reach."

"There's a crow's nest in the corner."

"It's out of her reach."

By the time this unanswerable argument had attained its third
repetition, Morgan, in his turn, had disappeared up the winding stairs.
I knew him too well to attempt any further protest.

Here was my first difficulty smoothed away most unexpectedly; for here
were the rooms in the lean-to placed by their owner's free act and
deed at my disposal. I wrote on the spot to the one upholsterer of our
distant county town to come immediately and survey the premises,
and sent off a mounted messenger with the letter. This done, and the
necessary order also dispatched to the carpenter and glazier to set them
at work on Morgan's sky-parlor in the seventh story, I began to feel,
for the first time, as if my scattered wits were coming back to me.
By the time the evening had closed in I had hit on no less than three
excellent ideas, all providing for the future comfort and amusement of
our fair guest. The first idea was to get her a Welsh pony; the second
was to hire a piano from the county town; the third was to send for a
boxful of novels from London. I must confess I thought these projects
for pleasing her very happily conceived, and Owen agreed with me.
Morgan, as usual, took the opposite view. He said she would yawn over
the novels, turn up her nose at the piano, and fracture her skull with
the pony. As for the housekeeper, she stuck to her text as stoutly
in the evening as she had stuck to it in the morning. "Pianner or no
pianner, story-book or no story-book, pony or no pony, you mark my
words, sir--that young woman will run away."

Such were the housekeeper's parting words when she wished me good-night.

When the next morning came, and brought with it that terrible waking
time which sets a man's hopes and projects before him, the great as well
as the small, stripped bare of every illusion, it is not to be concealed
that I felt less sanguine of our success in entertaining the coming
guest. So far as external preparations were concerned, there seemed,
indeed, but little to improve; but apart from these, what had we to
offer, in ourselves and our society, to attract her? There lay the
knotty point of the question, and there the grand difficulty of finding
an answer.

I fall into serious reflection while I am dressing on the pursuits and
occupations with which we three brothers have been accustomed, for years
past, to beguile the time. Are they at all likely, in the case of any
one of us, to interest or amuse her?

My chief occupation, to begin with the youngest, consists, in acting as
steward on Owen's property. The routine of my duties has never lost its
sober attraction to my tastes, for it has always employed me in watching
the best interests of my brother, and of my son also, who is one day
to be his heir. But can I expect our fair guest to sympathize with such
family concerns as these? Clearly not.

Morgan's pursuit comes next in order of review--a pursuit of a far more
ambitious nature than mine. It was always part of my second brother's
whimsical, self-contradictory character to view with the profoundest
contempt the learned profession by which he gained his livelihood, and
he is now occupying the long leisure hours of his old age in composing
a voluminous treatise, intended, one of these days, to eject the whole
body corporate of doctors from the position which they have usurped in
the estimation of their fellow-creatures. This daring work is entitled
"An Examination of the Claims of Medicine on the Gratitude of Mankind.
Decided in the Negative by a Retired Physician." So far as I can tell,
the book is likely to extend to the dimensions of an Encyclopedia; for
it is Morgan's plan to treat his comprehensive subject principally
from the historical point of view, and to run down all the doctors of
antiquity, one after another, in regular succession, from the first of
the tribe. When I last heard of his progress he was hard on the heels of
Hippocrates, but had no immediate prospect of tripping up his successor,
Is this the sort of occupation (I ask myself) in which a modern young
lady is likely to feel the slightest interest? Once again, clearly not.

Owen's favorite employment is, in its way, quite as characteristic as
Morgan's, and it has the great additional advantage of appealing to a
much larger variety of tastes. My eldest brother--great at drawing and
painting when he was a lad, always interested in artists and their
works in after life--has resumed, in his declining years, the holiday
occupation of his schoolboy days. As an amateur landscape-painter, he
works with more satisfaction to himself, uses more color, wears out
more brushes, and makes a greater smell of paint in his studio than any
artist by profession, native or foreign, whom I ever met with. In look,
in manner, and in disposition, the gentlest of mankind, Owen, by some
singular anomaly in his character, which he seems to have caught from
Morgan, glories placidly in the wildest and most frightful range of
subjects which his art is capable of representing. Immeasurable ruins,
in howling wildernesses, with blood-red sunsets gleaming over them;
thunder-clouds rent with lightning, hovering over splitting trees on
the verges of awful precipices; hurricanes, shipwrecks, waves, and
whirlpools follow each other on his canvas, without an intervening
glimpse of quiet everyday nature to relieve the succession of pictorial
horrors. When I see him at his easel, so neat and quiet, so unpretending
and modest in himself, with such a composed expression on his attentive
face, with such a weak white hand to guide such bold, big brushes, and
when I look at the frightful canvasful of terrors which he is serenely
aggravating in fierceness and intensity with every successive touch, I
find it difficult to realize the connection between my brother and his
work, though I see them before me not six inches apart. Will this quaint
spectacle possess any humorous attractions for Miss Jessie? Perhaps it
may. There is some slight chance that Owen's employment will be lucky
enough to interest her.

Thus far my morning cogitations advance doubtfully enough, but they
altogether fail in carrying me beyond the narrow circle of The Glen
Tower. I try hard, in our visitor's interest, to look into the resources
of the little world around us, and I find my efforts rewarded by the
prospect of a total blank.

Is there any presentable living soul in the neighborhood whom we can
invite to meet her? Not one. There are, as I have already said, no
country seats near us; and society in the county town has long since
learned to regard us as three misanthropes, strongly suspected, from
our monastic way of life and our dismal black costume, of being popish
priests in disguise. In other parts of England the clergyman of the
parish might help us out of our difficulty; but here in South Wales,
and in this latter half of the nineteenth century, we have the old type
parson of the days of Fielding still in a state of perfect preservation.
Our local clergyman receives a stipend which is too paltry to bear
comparison with the wages of an ordinary mechanic. In dress, manners,
and tastes he is about on a level with the upper class of agricultural
laborer. When attempts have been made by well-meaning gentlefolks to
recognize the claims of his profession by asking him to their houses, he
has been known, on more than one occasion, to leave his plowman's pair
of shoes in the hall, and enter the drawing-room respectfully in his
stockings. Where he preaches, miles and miles away from us and from the
poor cottage in which he lives, if he sees any of the company in the
squire's pew yawn or fidget in their places, he takes it as a hint that
they are tired of listening, and closes his sermon instantly at the end
of the sentence. Can we ask this most irreverend and unclerical of men
to meet a young lady? I doubt, even if we made the attempt, whether we
should succeed, by fair means, in getting him beyond the servants' hall.

Dismissing, therefore, all idea of inviting visitors to entertain our
guest, and feeling, at the same time, more than doubtful of her chance
of discovering any attraction in the sober society of the inmates of the
house, I finish my dressing and go down to breakfast, secretly veering
round to the housekeeper's opinion that Miss Jessie will really bring
matters to an abrupt conclusion by running away. I find Morgan as
bitterly resigned to his destiny as ever, and Owen so affectionately
anxious to make himself of some use, and so lamentably ignorant of how
to begin, that I am driven to disembarrass myself of him at the outset
by a stratagem.

I suggest to him that our visitor is sure to be interested in pictures,
and that it would be a pretty attention, on his part, to paint her a
landscape to hang up in her room. Owen brightens directly, informs me in
his softest tones that he is then at work on the Earthquake at Lisbon,
and inquires whether I think she would like that subject. I preserve
my gravity sufficiently to answer in the affirmative, and my brother
retires meekly to his studio, to depict the engulfing of a city and the
destruction of a population. Morgan withdraws in his turn to the top of
the tower, threatening, when our guest comes, to draw all his meals up
to his new residence by means of a basket and string. I am left alone
for an hour, and then the upholsterer arrives from the county town.

This worthy man, on being informed of our emergency, sees his way,
apparently, to a good stroke of business, and thereupon wins my lasting
gratitude by taking, in opposition to every one else, a bright and
hopeful view of existing circumstances.

"You'll excuse me, sir," he says, confidentially, when I show him the
rooms in the lean-to, "but this is a matter of experience. I'm a family
man myself, with grown-up daughters of my own, and the natures of young
women are well known to me. Make their rooms comfortable, and you make
'em happy. Surround their lives, sir, with a suitable atmosphere of
furniture, and you never hear a word of complaint drop from their lips.
Now, with regard to these rooms, for example, sir--you put a neat French
bedstead in that corner, with curtains conformable--say a tasty chintz;
you put on that bedstead what I will term a sufficiency of bedding; and
you top up with a sweet little eider-down quilt, as light as roses, and
similar the same in color. You do that, and what follows? You please her
eye when she lies down at night, and you please her eye when she gets up
in the morning--and you're all right so far, and so is she. I will not
dwell, sir, on the toilet-table, nor will I seek to detain you about the
glass to show her figure, and the other glass to show her face, because
I have the articles in stock, and will be myself answerable for their
effect on a lady's mind and person."

He led the way into the next room as he spoke, and arranged its future
fittings, and decorations, as he had already planned out the bedroom,
with the strictest reference to the connection which experience had
shown him to exist between comfortable furniture and female happiness.

Thus far, in my helpless state of mind, the man's confidence had
impressed me in spite of myself, and I had listened to him in
superstitious silence. But as he continued to rise, by regular
gradations, from one climax of upholstery to another, warning visions of
his bill disclosed themselves in the remote background of the scene of
luxury and magnificence which my friend was conjuring up. Certain sharp
professional instincts of bygone times resumed their influence over
me; I began to start doubts and ask questions; and as a necessary
consequence the interview between us soon assumed something like a
practical form.

Having ascertained what the probable expense of furnishing would amount
to and having discovered that the process of transforming the lean-to
(allowing for the time required to procure certain articles of
rarity from Bristol) would occupy nearly a fortnight, I dismissed the
upholsterer with the understanding that I should take a day or two for
consideration, and let him know the result. It was then the fifth of
September, and our Queen of Hearts was to arrive on the twentieth. The
work, therefore, if it was begun on the seventh or eighth, would be
begun in time.

In making all my calculations with a reference to the twentieth of
September, I relied implicitly, it will be observed, on a young lady's
punctuality in keeping an appointment which she had herself made. I
can only account for such extraordinary simplicity on my part on the
supposition that my wits had become sadly rusted by long seclusion from
society. Whether it was referable to this cause or not, my innocent
trustfulness was at any rate destined to be practically rebuked before
long in the most surprising manner. Little did I suspect, when I parted
from the upholsterer on the fifth of the month, what the tenth of the
month had in store for me.

On the seventh I made up my mind to have the bedroom furnished at once,
and to postpone the question of the sitting-room for a few days longer.
Having dispatched the necessary order to that effect, I next wrote
to hire the piano and to order the box of novels. This done, I
congratulated myself on the forward state of the preparations, and sat
down to repose in the atmosphere of my own happy delusions.

On the ninth the wagon arrived with the furniture, and the men set to
work on the bedroom. From this moment Morgan retired definitely to
the top of the tower, and Owen became too nervous to lay the necessary
amount of paint on the Earthquake at Lisbon.

On the tenth the work was proceeding bravely. Toward noon Owen and I
strolled to the door to enjoy the fine autumn sunshine. We were sitting
lazily on our favorite bench in front of the tower when we were startled
by a shout from above us. Looking up directly, we saw Morgan half in
and half out of his narrow window in the seventh story, gesticulating
violently with the stem of his long meerschaum pipe in the direction of
the road below us.

We gazed eagerly in the quarter thus indicated, but our low position
prevented us for some time from seeing anything. At last we both
discerned an old yellow post-chaise distinctly and indisputably
approaching us.

Owen and I looked at one another in panic-stricken silence. It was
coming to us--and what did it contain? Do pianos travel in chaises?
Are boxes of novels conveyed to their destination by a postilion?
We expected the piano and expected the novels, but nothing
else--unquestionably nothing else.

The chaise took the turn in the road, passed through the gateless gap
in our rough inclosure-wall of loose stone, and rapidly approached us.
A bonnet appeared at the window and a hand gayly waved a white
handkerchief.

Powers of caprice, confusion, and dismay! It was Jessie Yelverton
herself--arriving, without a word of warning, exactly ten days before
her time.



CHAPTER III. OUR QUEEN OF' HEARTS.

THE chaise stopped in front of us, and before we had recovered from our
bewilderment the gardener had opened the door and let down the steps.

A bright, laughing face, prettily framed round by a black veil passed
over the head and tied under the chin--a traveling-dress of a nankeen
color, studded with blue buttons and trimmed with white braid--a light
brown cloak over it--little neatly-gloved hands, which seized in an
instant on one of mine and on one of Owen's--two dark blue eyes, which
seemed to look us both through and through in a moment--a clear,
full, merrily confident voice--a look and manner gayly and gracefully
self-possessed--such were the characteristics of our fair guest which
first struck me at the moment when she left the postchaise and possessed
herself of my hand.

"Don't begin by scolding me," she said, before I could utter a word of
welcome. "There will be time enough for that in the course of the next
six weeks. I beg pardon, with all possible humility, for the offense of
coming ten days before my time. Don't ask me to account for it, please;
if you do, I shall be obliged to confess the truth. My dear sir, the
fact is, this is an act of impulse."

She paused, and looked us both in the face with a bright confidence in
her own flow of nonsense that was perfectly irresistible.

"I must tell you all about it," she ran on, leading the way to the
bench, and inviting us, by a little mock gesture of supplication, to
seat ourselves on either side of her. "I feel so guilty till I've told
you. Dear me! how nice this is! Here I am quite at home already. Isn't
it odd? Well, and how do you think it happened? The morning before
yesterday Matilda--there is Matilda, picking up my bonnet from the
bottom of that remarkably musty carriage--Matilda came and woke me as
usual, and I hadn't an idea in my head, I assure you, till she began
to brush my hair. Can you account for it?--I can't--but she seemed,
somehow, to brush a sudden fancy for coming here into my head. When
I went down to breakfast, I said to my aunt, 'Darling, I have an
irresistible impulse to go to Wales at once, instead of waiting till
the twentieth.' She made all the necessary objections, poor dear, and
my impulse got stronger and stronger with every one of them. 'I'm quite
certain,' I said, 'I shall never go at all if I don't go now.' 'In that
case,' says my aunt, 'ring the bell, and have your trunks packed. Your
whole future depends on your going; and you terrify me so inexpressibly
that I shall be glad to get rid of you.' You may not think it, to look
at her--but Matilda is a treasure; and in three hours more I was on the
Great Western Railway. I have not the least idea how I got here--except
that the men helped me everywhere. They are always such delightful
creatures! I have been casting myself, and my maid, and my trunks on
their tender mercies at every point in the journey, and their polite
attentions exceed all belief. I slept at your horrid little county town
last night; and the night before I missed a steamer or a train, I forget
which, and slept at Bristol; and that's how I got here. And, now I am
here, I ought to give my guardian a kiss--oughtn't I? Shall I call you
papa? I think I will. And shall I call _you_ uncle, sir, and give you a
kiss too? We shall come to it sooner or later--shan't we?--and we may as
well begin at once, I suppose."

Her fresh young lips touched my old withered cheek first, and then
Owen's; a soft, momentary shadow of tenderness, that was very pretty and
becoming, passing quickly over the sunshine and gayety of her face as
she saluted us. The next moment she was on her feet again, inquiring
"who the wonderful man was who built The Glen Tower," and wanting to go
all over it immediately from top to bottom.

As we took her into the house, I made the necessary apologies for the
miserable condition of the lean-to, and assured her that, ten days
later, she would have found it perfectly ready to receive her.
She whisked into the rooms--looked all round them--whisked out
again--declared she had come to live in the old Tower, and not in any
modern addition to it, and flatly declined to inhabit the lean-to on any
terms whatever. I opened my lips to state certain objections, but she
slipped away in an instant and made straight for the Tower staircase.

"Who lives here?" she asked, calling down to us, eagerly, from the
first-floor landing.

"I do," said Owen; "but, if you would like me to move out--"

She was away up the second flight before he could say any more. The next
sound we heard, as we slowly followed her, was a peremptory drumming
against the room door of the second story.

"Anybody here?" we heard her ask through the door.

I called up to her that, under ordinary circumstances, I was there; but
that, like Owen, I should be happy to move out--

My polite offer was cut short as my brother's had been. We heard more
drumming at the door of the third story. There were two rooms here
also--one perfectly empty, the other stocked with odds and ends of
dismal, old-fashioned furniture for which we had no use, and grimly
ornamented by a life-size basket figure supporting a complete suit of
armor in a sadly rusty condition. When Owen and I got to the third-floor
landing, the door was open; Miss Jessie had taken possession of the
rooms; and we found her on a chair, dusting the man in armor with her
cambric pocket-handkerchief.

"I shall live here," she said, looking round at us briskly over her
shoulder.

We both remonstrated, but it was quite in vain. She told us that she had
an impulse to live with the man in armor, and that she would have
her way, or go back immediately in the post-chaise, which we pleased.
Finding it impossible to move her, we bargained that she should, at
least, allow the new bed and the rest of the comfortable furniture
in the lean-to to be moved up into the empty room for her sleeping
accommodation. She consented to this condition, protesting, however,
to the last against being compelled to sleep in a bed, because it was a
modern conventionality, out of all harmony with her place of residence
and her friend in armor.

Fortunately for the repose of Morgan, who, under other circumstances,
would have discovered on the very first day that his airy retreat was
by no means high enough to place him out of Jessie's reach, the idea of
settling herself instantly in her new habitation excluded every other
idea from the mind of our fair guest. She pinned up the nankeen-colored
traveling dress in festoons all round her on the spot; informed us that
we were now about to make acquaintance with her in the new character
of a woman of business; and darted downstairs in mad high spirits,
screaming for Matilda and the trunks like a child for a set of new toys.
The wholesome protest of Nature against the artificial restraints of
modern life expressed itself in all that she said and in all that she
did. She had never known what it was to be happy before, because she had
never been allowed, until now, to do anything for herself. She was down
on her knees at one moment, blowing the fire, and telling us that she
felt like Cinderella; she was up on a table the next, attacking the
cobwebs with a long broom, and wishing she had been born a housemaid. As
for my unfortunate friend, the upholsterer, he was leveled to the ranks
at the first effort he made to assume the command of the domestic forces
in the furniture department. She laughed at him, pushed him about,
disputed all his conclusions, altered all his arrangements, and ended by
ordering half his bedroom furniture to be taken back again, for the one
unanswerable reason that she meant to do without it.

As evening approached, the scene presented by the two rooms became
eccentric to a pitch of absurdity which is quite indescribable.
The grim, ancient walls of the bedroom had the liveliest modern
dressing-gowns and morning-wrappers hanging all about them. The man in
armor had a collection of smart little boots and shoes dangling by laces
and ribbons round his iron legs. A worm-eaten, steel-clasped casket,
dragged out of a corner, frowned on the upholsterer's brand-new
toilet-table, and held a miscellaneous assortment of combs, hairpins,
and brushes. Here stood a gloomy antique chair, the patriarch of its
tribe, whose arms of blackened oak embraced a pair of pert, new deal
bonnet-boxes not a fortnight old. There, thrown down lightly on a rugged
tapestry table-cover, the long labor of centuries past, lay the brief,
delicate work of a week ago in the shape of silk and muslin
dresses turned inside out. In the midst of all these confusions and
contradictions, Miss Jessie ranged to and fro, the active center of the
whole scene of disorder, now singing at the top of her voice, and now
declaring in her lighthearted way that one of us must make up his mind
to marry her immediately, as she was determined to settle for the rest
of her life at The Glen Tower.

She followed up that announcement, when we met at dinner, by inquiring
if we quite understood by this time that she had left her "company
manners" in London, and that she meant to govern us all at her absolute
will and pleasure, throughout the whole period of her stay. Having thus
provided at the outset for the due recognition of her authority by the
household generally and individually having briskly planned out all her
own forthcoming occupations and amusements over the wine and fruit at
dessert, and having positively settled, between her first and second
cups of tea, where our connection with them was to begin and where it
was to end, she had actually succeeded, when the time came to separate
for the night, in setting us as much at our ease, and in making herself
as completely a necessary part of our household as if she had lived
among us for years and years past.


Such was our first day's experience of the formidable guest whose
anticipated visit had so sorely and so absurdly discomposed us all. I
could hardly believe that I had actually wasted hours of precious time
in worrying myself and everybody else in the house about the best
means of laboriously entertaining a lively, high-spirited girl, who
was perfectly capable, without an effort on her own part or on ours, of
entertaining herself.

Having upset every one of our calculations on the first day of her
arrival, she next falsified all our predictions before she had been with
us a week. Instead of fracturing her skull with the pony, as Morgan had
prophesied, she sat the sturdy, sure-footed, mischievous little brute as
if she were part and parcel of himself. With an old water-proof cloak of
mine on her shoulders, with a broad-flapped Spanish hat of Owen's on her
head, with a wild imp of a Welsh boy following her as guide and groom on
a bare-backed pony, and with one of the largest and ugliest cur-dogs
in England (which she had picked up, lost and starved by the wayside)
barking at her heels, she scoured the country in all directions, and
came back to dinner, as she herself expressed it, "with the manners of
an Amazon, the complexion of a dairy-maid, and the appetite of a wolf."

On days when incessant rain kept her indoors, she amused herself with a
new freak. Making friends everywhere, as became The Queen of Hearts,
she even ingratiated herself with the sour old housekeeper, who had
predicted so obstinately that she was certain to run away. To the
amazement of everybody in the house, she spent hours in the kitchen,
learning to make puddings and pies, and trying all sorts of recipes
with very varying success, from an antiquated cookery book which she
had discovered at the back of my bookshelves. At other times, when I
expected her to be upstairs, languidly examining her finery, and idly
polishing her trinkets, I heard of her in the stables, feeding the
rabbits, and talking to the raven, or found her in the conservatory,
fumigating the plants, and half suffocating the gardener, who was trying
to moderate her enthusiasm in the production of smoke.

Instead of finding amusement, as we had expected, in Owen's studio, she
puckered up her pretty face in grimaces of disgust at the smell of paint
in the room, and declared that the horrors of the Earthquake at Lisbon
made her feel hysterical. Instead of showing a total want of interest
in my business occupations on the estate, she destroyed my dignity
as steward by joining me in my rounds on her pony, with her vagabond
retinue at her heels. Instead of devouring the novels I had ordered
for her, she left them in the box, and put her feet on it when she felt
sleepy after a hard day's riding. Instead of practicing for hours every
evening at the piano, which I had hired with such a firm conviction of
her using it, she showed us tricks on the cards, taught us new games,
initiated us into the mystics of dominoes, challenged us with riddles,
and even attempted to stimulate us into acting charades--in short, tried
every evening amusement in the whole category except the amusement of
music. Every new aspect of her character was a new surprise to us, and
every fresh occupation that she chose was a fresh contradiction to
our previous expectations. The value of experience as a guide is
unquestionable in many of the most important affairs of life; but,
speaking for myself personally, I never understood the utter futility of
it, where a woman is concerned, until I was brought into habits of daily
communication with our fair guest.

In her domestic relations with ourselves she showed that exquisite
nicety of discrimination in studying our characters, habits and tastes
which comes by instinct with women, and which even the longest practice
rarely teaches in similar perfection to men. She saw at a glance all the
underlying tenderness and generosity concealed beneath Owen's external
shyness, irresolution, and occasional reserve; and, from first to last,
even in her gayest moments, there was always a certain quietly-implied
consideration--an easy, graceful, delicate deference--in her manner
toward my eldest brother, which won upon me and upon him every hour in
the day.

With me she was freer in her talk, quicker in her actions, readier
and bolder in all the thousand little familiarities of our daily
intercourse. When we met in the morning she always took Owen's hand, and
waited till he kissed her on the forehead. In my case she put both her
hands on my shoulders, raised herself on tiptoe, and saluted me briskly
on both cheeks in the foreign way. She never differed in opinion with
Owen without propitiating him first by some little artful compliment in
the way of excuse. She argued boldly with me on every subject under the
sun, law and politics included; and, when I got the better of her, never
hesitated to stop me by putting her hand on my lips, or by dragging me
out into the garden in the middle of a sentence.

As for Morgan, she abandoned all restraint in his case on the second
day of her sojourn among us. She had asked after him as soon as she was
settled in her two rooms on the third story; had insisted on knowing why
he lived at the top of the tower, and why he had not appeared to welcome
her at the door; had entrapped us into all sorts of damaging admissions,
and had thereupon discovered the true state of the case in less than
five minutes.

From that time my unfortunate second brother became the victim of all
that was mischievous and reckless in her disposition. She forced
him downstairs by a series of maneuvers which rendered his refuge
uninhabitable, and then pretended to fall violently in love with him.
She slipped little pink three-cornered notes under his door, entreating
him to make appointments with her, or tenderly inquiring how he would
like to see her hair dressed at dinner on that day. She followed him
into the garden, sometimes to ask for the privilege of smelling his
tobacco-smoke, sometimes to beg for a lock of his hair, or a fragment of
his ragged old dressing-gown, to put among her keepsakes. She sighed at
him when he was in a passion, and put her handkerchief to her eyes when
he was sulky. In short, she tormented Morgan, whenever she could catch
him, with such ingenious and such relentless malice, that he actually
threatened to go back to London, and prey once more, in the unscrupulous
character of a doctor, on the credulity of mankind.

Thus situated in her relations toward ourselves, and thus occupied by
country diversions of her own choosing, Miss Jessie passed her time at
The Glen Tower, excepting now and then a dull hour in the long evenings,
to her guardian's satisfaction--and, all things considered, not without
pleasure to herself. Day followed day in calm and smooth succession, and
five quiet weeks had elapsed out of the six during which her stay was
to last without any remarkable occurrence to distinguish them, when an
event happened which personally affected me in a very serious manner,
and which suddenly caused our handsome Queen of Hearts to become the
object of my deepest anxiety in the present, and of my dearest hopes for
the future.



CHAPTER IV. OUR GRAND PROJECT.

AT the end of the fifth week of our guest's stay, among the letters
which the morning's post brought to The Glen Tower there was one for me,
from my son George, in the Crimea.

The effect which this letter produced in our little circle renders it
necessary that I should present it here, to speak for itself.

This is what I read alone in my own room:


"MY DEAREST FATHER--After the great public news of the fall of
Sebastopol, have you any ears left for small items of private
intelligence from insignificant subaltern officers? Prepare, if you
have, for a sudden and a startling announcement. How shall I write the
words? How shall I tell you that I am really coming home?

"I have a private opportunity of sending this letter, and only a short
time to write it in; so I must put many things, if I can, into few
words. The doctor has reported me fit to travel at last, and I leave,
thanks to the privilege of a wounded man, by the next ship. The name of
the vessel and the time of starting are on the list which I inclose. I
have made all my calculations, and, allowing for every possible delay,
I find that I shall be with you, at the latest, on the first of
November--perhaps some days earlier.

"I am far too full of my return, and of something else connected with it
which is equally dear to me, to say anything about public affairs, more
especially as I know that the newspapers must, by this time, have given
you plenty of information. Let me fill the rest of this paper with a
subject which is very near to my heart--nearer, I am almost ashamed
to say, than the great triumph of my countrymen, in which my disabled
condition has prevented me from taking any share.

"I gathered from your last letter that Miss Yelverton was to pay you a
visit this autumn, in your capacity of her guardian. If she is already
with you, pray move heaven and earth to keep her at The Glen Tower till
I come back. Do you anticipate my confession from this entreaty? My
dear, dear father, all my hopes rest on that one darling treasure which
you are guarding perhaps, at this moment, under your own roof--all my
happiness depends on making Jessie Yelverton my wife.

"If I did not sincerely believe that you will heartily approve of my
choice, I should hardly have ventured on this abrupt confession. Now
that I have made it, let me go on and tell you why I have kept my
attachment up to this time a secret from every one--even from Jessie
herself. (You see I call her by her Christian name already!)

"I should have risked everything, father, and have laid my whole heart
open before her more than a year ago, but for the order which sent our
regiment out to take its share in this great struggle of the Russian
war. No ordinary change in my life would have silenced me on the subject
of all others of which I was most anxious to speak; but this change made
me think seriously of the future; and out of those thoughts came the
resolution which I have kept until this time. For her sake, and for her
sake only, I constrained myself to leave the words unspoken which might
have made her my promised wife. I resolved to spare her the dreadful
suspense of waiting for her betrothed husband till the perils of war
might, or might not, give him back to her. I resolved to save her from
the bitter grief of my death if a bullet laid me low. I resolved to
preserve her from the wretched sacrifice of herself if I came back,
as many a brave man will come back from this war, invalided for life.
Leaving her untrammeled by any engagement, unsuspicious perhaps of
my real feelings toward her, I might die, and know that, by keeping
silence, I had spared a pang to the heart that was dearest to me. This
was the thought that stayed the words on my lips when I left England,
uncertain whether I should ever come back. If I had loved her less
dearly, if her happiness had been less precious to me, I might have
given way under the hard restraint I imposed on myself, and might have
spoken selfishly at the last moment.

"And now the time of trial is past; the war is over; and, although I
still walk a little lame, I am, thank God, in as good health and in much
better spirits than when I left home. Oh, father, if I should lose her
now--if I should get no reward for sparing her but the bitterest of all
disappointments! Sometimes I am vain enough to think that I made some
little impression on her; sometimes I doubt if she has a suspicion of
my love. She lives in a gay world--she is the center of perpetual
admiration--men with all the qualities to win a woman's heart are
perpetually about her--can I, dare I hope? Yes, I must! Only keep her,
I entreat you, at The Glen Tower. In that quiet world, in that freedom
from frivolities and temptations, she will listen to me as she might
listen nowhere else. Keep her, my dearest, kindest father--and, above
all things, breathe not a word to her of this letter. I have surely
earned the privilege of being the first to open her eyes to the truth.
She must know nothing, now that I am coming home, till she knows all
from my own lips."


Here the writing hurriedly broke off. I am only giving myself credit for
common feeling, I trust, when I confess that what I read deeply affected
me. I think I never felt so fond of my boy, and so proud of him, as at
the moment when I laid down his letter.

As soon as I could control my spirits, I began to calculate the question
of time with a trembling eagerness, which brought back to my mind my own
young days of love and hope. My son was to come back, at the latest, on
the first of November, and Jessie's allotted six weeks would expire on
the twenty-second of October. Ten days too soon! But for the caprice
which had brought her to us exactly that number of days before her time
she would have been in the house, as a matter of necessity, on George's
return.

I searched back in my memory for a conversation that I had held with
her a week since on her future plans. Toward the middle of November,
her aunt, Lady Westwick, had arranged to go to her house in Paris, and
Jessie was, of course, to accompany her--to accompany her into that very
circle of the best English and the best French society which contained
in it the elements most adverse to George's hopes. Between this time and
that she had no special engagement, and she had only settled to write
and warn her aunt of her return to London a day or two before she left
The Glen Tower.

Under these circumstances, the first, the all-important necessity was to
prevail on her to prolong her stay beyond the allotted six weeks by
ten days. After the caution to be silent impressed on me (and most
naturally, poor boy) in George's letter, I felt that I could only appeal
to her on the ordinary ground of hospitality. Would this be sufficient
to effect the object?

I was sure that the hours of the morning and the afternoon had, thus
far, been fully and happily occupied by her various amusements indoors
and out. She was no more weary of her days now than she had been when
she first came among us. But I was by no means so certain that she was
not tired of her evenings. I had latterly noticed symptoms of weariness
after the lamps were lit, and a suspicious regularity in retiring to
bed the moment the clock struck ten. If I could provide her with a new
amusement for the long evenings, I might leave the days to take care
of themselves, and might then make sure (seeing that she had no
special engagement in London until the middle of November) of her being
sincerely thankful and ready to prolong her stay.

How was this to be done? The piano and the novels had both failed to
attract her. What other amusement was there to offer?

It was useless, at present, to ask myself such questions as these. I was
too much agitated to think collectedly on the most trifling subjects. I
was even too restless to stay in my own room. My son's letter had given
me so fresh an interest in Jessie that I was now as impatient to see her
as if we were about to meet for the first time. I wanted to look at
her with my new eyes, to listen to her with my new ears, to study her
secretly with my new purposes, and my new hopes and fears. To my dismay
(for I wanted the very weather itself to favor George's interests),
it was raining heavily that morning. I knew, therefore, that I should
probably find her in her own sitting-room. When I knocked at her door,
with George's letter crumpled up in my hand, with George's hopes in full
possession of my heart, it is no exaggeration to say that my nerves were
almost as much fluttered, and my ideas almost as much confused, as
they were on a certain memorable day in the far past, when I rose, in
brand-new wig and gown, to set my future prospects at the bar on the
hazard of my first speech.

When I entered the room I found Jessie leaning back languidly in her
largest arm-chair, watching the raindrops dripping down the window-pane.
The unfortunate box of novels was open by her side, and the books were
lying, for the most part, strewed about on the ground at her feet. One
volume lay open, back upward, on her lap, and her hands were crossed
over it listlessly. To my great dismay, she was yawning--palpably and
widely yawning--when I came in.

No sooner did I find myself in her presence than an irresistible anxiety
to make some secret discovery of the real state of her feelings toward
George took possession of me. After the customary condolences on the
imprisonment to which she was subjected by the weather, I said, in as
careless a manner as it was possible to assume:

"I have heard from my son this morning. He talks of being ordered home,
and tells me I may expect to see him before the end of the year."

I was too cautious to mention the exact date of his return, for in that
case she might have detected my motive for asking her to prolong her
visit.

"Oh, indeed?" she said. "How very nice. How glad you must be."

I watched her narrowly. The clear, dark blue eyes met mine as openly as
ever. The smooth, round cheeks kept their fresh color quite unchanged.
The full, good-humored, smiling lips never trembled or altered their
expression in the slightest degree. Her light checked silk dress, with
its pretty trimming of cherry-colored ribbon, lay quite still over the
bosom beneath it. For all the information I could get from her look
and manner, we might as well have been a hundred miles apart from each
other. Is the best woman in the world little better than a fathomless
abyss of duplicity on certain occasions, and where certain feelings of
her own are concerned? I would rather not think that; and yet I don't
know how to account otherwise for the masterly manner in which Miss
Jessie contrived to baffle me.

I was afraid--literally afraid--to broach the subject of prolonging her
sojourn with us on a rainy day, so I changed the topic, in despair, to
the novels that were scattered about her.

"Can you find nothing there," I asked, "to amuse you this wet morning?"

"There are two or three good novels," she said, carelessly, "but I read
them before I left London."

"And the others won't even do for a dull day in the country?" I went on.

"They might do for some people," she answered, "but not for me. I'm
rather peculiar, perhaps, in my tastes. I'm sick to death of novels with
an earnest purpose. I'm sick to death of outbursts of eloquence, and
large-minded philanthropy, and graphic descriptions, and unsparing
anatomy of the human heart, and all that sort of thing. Good gracious
me! isn't it the original intention or purpose, or whatever you call it,
of a work of fiction, to set out distinctly by telling a story? And
how many of these books, I should like to know, do that? Why, so far as
telling a story is concerned, the greater part of them might as well
be sermons as novels. Oh, dear me! what I want is something that seizes
hold of my interest, and makes me forget when it is time to dress
for dinner--something that keeps me reading, reading, reading, in a
breathless state to find out the end. You know what I mean--at least you
ought. Why, there was that little chance story you told me yesterday
in the garden--don't you remember?--about your strange client, whom you
never saw again: I declare it was much more interesting than half these
novels, _because_ it was a story. Tell me another about your young days,
when you were seeing the world, and meeting with all sorts of remarkable
people. Or, no--don't tell it now--keep it till the evening, when we all
want something to stir us up. You old people might amuse us young ones
out of your own resources oftener than you do. It was very kind of you
to get me these books; but, with all respect to them, I would rather
have the rummaging of your memory than the rummaging of this box. What's
the matter? Are you afraid I have found out the window in your bosom
already?"

I had half risen from my chair at her last words, and I felt that my
face must have flushed at the same moment. She had started an idea in my
mind--the very idea of which I had been in search when I was pondering
over the best means of amusing her in the long autumn evenings.

I parried her questions by the best excuses I could offer; changed
the conversation for the next five minutes, and then, making a sudden
remembrance of business my apology for leaving her, hastily withdrew to
devote myself to the new idea in the solitude of my own room.

A little quiet thinking convinced me that I had discovered a means not
only of occupying her idle time, but of decoying her into staying on
with us, evening by evening, until my son's return. The new project
which she had herself unconsciously suggested involved nothing less than
acting forthwith on her own chance hint, and appealing to her interest
and curiosity by the recital of incidents and adventures drawn from my
own personal experience and (if I could get them to help me) from the
experience of my brothers as well. Strange people and startling events
had connected themselves with Owen's past life as a clergyman, with
Morgan's past life as a doctor, and with my past life as a lawyer, which
offered elements of interest of a strong and striking kind ready to our
hands. If these narratives were written plainly and unpretendingly;
if one of them was read every evening, under circumstances that should
pique the curiosity and impress the imagination of our young guest, the
very occupation was found for her weary hours which would gratify her
tastes, appeal to her natural interest in the early lives of my brothers
and myself, and lure her insensibly into prolonging her visit by ten
days without exciting a suspicion of our real motive for detaining her.

I sat down at my desk; I hid my face in my hands to keep out all
impressions of external and present things; and I searched back through
the mysterious labyrinth of the Past, through the dun, ever-deepening
twilight of the years that were gone.

Slowly, out of the awful shadows, the Ghosts of Memory rose about me.
The dead population of a vanished world came back to life round me, a
living man. Men and women whose earthly pilgrimage had ended long since,
returned upon me from the unknown spheres, and fond, familiar voices
burst their way back to my ears through the heavy silence of the grave.
Moving by me in the nameless inner light, which no eye saw but mine,
the dead procession of immaterial scenes and beings unrolled its silent
length. I saw once more the pleading face of a friend of early days,
with the haunting vision that had tortured him through life by his
side again--with the long-forgotten despair in his eyes which had once
touched my heart, and bound me to him, till I had tracked his destiny
through its darkest windings to the end. I saw the figure of an innocent
woman passing to and fro in an ancient country house, with the shadow
of a strange suspicion stealing after her wherever she went. I saw a
man worn by hardship and old age, stretched dreaming on the straw of a
stable, and muttering in his dream the terrible secret of his life.

Other scenes and persons followed these, less vivid in their revival,
but still always recognizable and distinct; a young girl alone by
night, and in peril of her life, in a cottage on a dreary moor--an upper
chamber of an inn, with two beds in it; the curtains of one bed closed,
and a man standing by them, waiting, yet dreading to draw them back--a
husband secretly following the first traces of a mystery which his
wife's anxious love had fatally hidden from him since the day when they
first met; these, and other visions like them, shadowy reflections of
the living beings and the real events that had been once, peopled the
solitude and the emptiness around me. They haunted me still when I tried
to break the chain of thought which my own efforts had wound about my
mind; they followed me to and fro in the room; and they came out with
me when I left it. I had lifted the veil from the Past for myself, and I
was now to rest no more till I had lifted it for others.

I went at once to my eldest brother and showed him my son's letter, and
told him all that I have written here. His kind heart was touched as
mine had been. He felt for my suspense; he shared my anxiety; he laid
aside his own occupation on the spot.

"Only tell me," he said, "how I can help, and I will give every hour in
the day to you and to George."

I had come to him with my mind almost as full of his past life as of
my own; I recalled to his memory events in his experience as a working
clergyman in London; I set him looking among papers which he had
preserved for half his lifetime, and the very existence of which he had
forgotten long since; I recalled to him the names of persons to whose
necessities he had ministered in his sacred office, and whose stories he
had heard from their own lips or received under their own handwriting.
When we parted he was certain of what he was wanted to do, and was
resolute on that very day to begin the work.

I went to Morgan next, and appealed to him as I had already appealed
to Owen. It was only part of his odd character to start all sorts of
eccentric objections in reply; to affect a cynical indifference, which
he was far from really and truly feeling; and to indulge in plenty of
quaint sarcasm on the subject of Jessie and his nephew George. I waited
till these little surface-ebullitions had all expended themselves, and
then pressed my point again with the earnestness and anxiety that I
really felt.

Evidently touched by the manner of my appeal to him even more than
by the language in which it was expressed, Morgan took refuge in his
customary abruptness, spread out his paper violently on the table,
seized his pen and ink, and told me quite fiercely to give him his work
and let him tackle it at once.

I set myself to recall to his memory some very remarkable experiences
of his own in his professional days, but he stopped me before I had half
done.

"I understand," he said, taking a savage dip at the ink, "I'm to make
her flesh creep, and to frighten her out of her wits. I'll do it with a
vengeance!"

Reserving to myself privately an editorial right of supervision over
Morgan's contributions, I returned to my own room to begin my share--by
far the largest one--of the task before us. The stimulus applied to my
mind by my son's letter must have been a strong one indeed, for I had
hardly been more than an hour at my desk before I found the old literary
facility of my youthful days, when I was a writer for the magazines,
returning to me as if by magic. I worked on unremittingly till
dinner-time, and then resumed the pen after we had all separated for
the night. At two o'clock the next morning I found myself--God help
me!--masquerading, as it were, in my own long-lost character of a
hard-writing young man, with the old familiar cup of strong tea by my
side, and the old familiar wet towel tied round my head.

My review of the progress I had made, when I looked back at my pages of
manuscript, yielded all the encouragement I wanted to drive me on. It
is only just, however, to add to the record of this first day's attempt,
that the literary labor which it involved was by no means of the
most trying kind. The great strain on the intellect--the strain of
invention--was spared me by my having real characters and events
ready to my hand. If I had been called on to create, I should, in all
probability, have suffered severely by contrast with the very worst
of those unfortunate novelists whom Jessie had so rashly and so
thoughtlessly condemned. It is not wonderful that the public should
rarely know how to estimate the vast service which is done to them by
the production of a good book, seeing that they are, for the most part,
utterly ignorant of the immense difficulty of writing even a bad one.

The next day was fine, to my great relief; and our visitor, while
we were at work, enjoyed her customary scamper on the pony, and her
customary rambles afterward in the neighborhood of the house. Although
I had interruptions to contend with on the part of Owen and Morgan,
neither of whom possessed my experience in the production of what heavy
people call "light literature," and both of whom consequently wanted
assistance, still I made great progress, and earned my hours of repose
on the evening of the second day.

On that evening I risked the worst, and opened my negotiations for the
future with "The Queen of Hearts."

About an hour after the tea had been removed, and when I happened to be
left alone in the room with her, I noticed that she rose suddenly and
went to the writing-table. My suspicions were aroused directly, and I
entered on the dangerous subject by inquiring if she intended to write
to her aunt.

"Yes," she said. "I promised to write when the last week came. If you
had paid me the compliment of asking me to stay a little longer, I
should have returned it by telling you I was sorry to go. As it is, I
mean to be sulky and say nothing."

With those words she took up her pen to begin the letter.

"Wait a minute," I remonstrated. "I was just on the point of begging you
to stay when I spoke."

"Were you, indeed?" she returned. "I never believed in coincidences of
that sort before, but now, of course, I put the most unlimited faith in
them!"

"Will you believe in plain proofs?" I asked, adopting her humor. "How do
you think I and my brothers have been employing ourselves all day to-day
and all day yesterday? Guess what we have been about."

"Congratulating yourselves in secret on my approaching departure," she
answered, tapping her chin saucily with the feather-end of her pen.

I seized the opportunity of astonishing her, and forthwith told her
the truth. She started up from the table, and approached me with the
eagerness of a child, her eyes sparkling, and her cheeks flushed.

"Do you really mean it?" she said.

I assured her that I was in earnest. She thereupon not only expressed
an interest in our undertaking, which was evidently sincere, but, with
characteristic impatience, wanted to begin the first evening's reading
on that very night. I disappointed her sadly by explaining that we
required time to prepare ourselves, and by assuring her that we should
not be ready for the next five days. On the sixth day, I added, we
should be able to begin, and to go on, without missing an evening, for
probably ten days more.

"The next five days?" she replied. "Why, that will just bring us to
the end of my six weeks' visit. I suppose you are not setting a trap to
catch me? This is not a trick of you three cunning old gentlemen to make
me stay on, is it?"

I quailed inwardly as that dangerously close guess at the truth passed
her lips.

"You forget," I said, "that the idea only occurred to me after what you
said yesterday. If it had struck me earlier, we should have been ready
earlier, and then where would your suspicions have been?"

"I am ashamed of having felt them," she said, in her frank, hearty way.
"I retract the word 'trap,' and I beg pardon for calling you 'three
cunning old gentlemen.' But what am I to say to my aunt?"

She moved back to the writing-table as she spoke.

"Say nothing," I replied, "till you have heard the first story. Shut
up the paper-case till that time, and then decide when you will open it
again to write to your aunt."

She hesitated and smiled. That terribly close guess of hers was not out
of her mind yet.

"I rather fancy," she said, slyly, "that the story will turn out to be
the best of the whole series."

"Wrong again," I retorted. "I have a plan for letting chance decide
which of the stories the first one shall be. They shall be all numbered
as they are done; corresponding numbers shall be written inside folded
pieces of card and well mixed together; you shall pick out any one card
you like; you shall declare the number written within; and, good or bad,
the story that answers to that number shall be the story that is read.
Is that fair?"

"Fair!" she exclaimed; "it's better than fair; it makes _me_ of some
importance; and I must be more or less than woman not to appreciate
that."

"Then you consent to wait patiently for the next five days?"

"As patiently as I can."

"And you engage to decide nothing about writing to your aunt until you
have heard the first story?"

"I do," she said, returning to the writing-table. "Behold the proof
of it." She raised her hand with theatrical solemnity, and closed the
paper-case with an impressive bang.

I leaned back in my chair with my mind at ease for the first time since
the receipt of my son's letter.

"Only let George return by the first of November," I thought to myself,
"and all the aunts in Christendom shall not prevent Jessie Yelverton
from being here to meet him."

THE TEN DAYS.

THE FIRST DAY.

SHOWERY and unsettled. In spite of the weather, Jessie put on my
Mackintosh cloak and rode off over the hills to one of Owen's outlying
farms. She was already too impatient to wait quietly for the evening's
reading in the house, or to enjoy any amusement less exhilarating than a
gallop in the open air.

I was, on my side, as anxious and as uneasy as our guest. Now that the
six weeks of her stay had expired--now that the day had really arrived,
on the evening of which the first story was to be read, I began to
calculate the chances of failure as well as the chances of success. What
if my own estimate of the interest of the stories turned out to be a
false one? What if some unforeseen accident occurred to delay my son's
return beyond ten days?

The arrival of the newspaper had already become an event of the deepest
importance to me. Unreasonable as it was to expect any tidings of George
at so early a date, I began, nevertheless, on this first of our days of
suspense, to look for the name of his ship in the columns of telegraphic
news. The mere mechanical act of looking was some relief to my
overstrained feelings, although I might have known, and did know, that
the search, for the present, could lead to no satisfactory result.

Toward noon I shut myself up with my collection of manuscripts to revise
them for the last time. Our exertions had thus far produced but six of
the necessary ten stories. As they were only, however, to be read, one
by one, on six successive evenings, and as we could therefore count on
plenty of leisure in the daytime, I was in no fear of our failing to
finish the little series.

Of the six completed stories I had written two, and had found a third
in the form of a collection of letters among my papers. Morgan had only
written one, and this solitary contribution of his had given me more
trouble than both my own put together, in consequence of the perpetual
intrusion of my brother's eccentricities in every part of his narrative.
The process of removing these quaint turns and frisks of Morgan's
humor--which, however amusing they might have been in an essay, were
utterly out of place in a story appealing to suspended interest for its
effect--certainly tried my patience and my critical faculty (such as it
is) more severely than any other part of our literary enterprise which
had fallen my share.

Owen's investigations among his papers had supplied us with the two
remaining narratives. One was contained in a letter, and the other in
the form of a diary, and both had been received by him directly from the
writers. Besides these contributions, he had undertaken to help us by
some work of his own, and had been engaged for the last four days in
molding certain events which had happened within his personal knowledge
into the form of a story. His extreme fastidiousness as a writer
interfered, however, so seriously with his progress that he was still
sadly behindhand, and was likely, though less heavily burdened than
Morgan or myself, to be the last to complete his allotted task.

Such was our position, and such the resources at our command, when
the first of the Ten Days dawned upon us. Shortly after four in the
afternoon I completed my work of revision, numbered the manuscripts from
one to six exactly as they happened to lie under my hand, and inclosed
them all in a portfolio, covered with purple morocco, which became known
from that time by the imposing title of The Purple Volume.

Miss Jessie returned from her expedition just as I was tying the strings
of the portfolio, and, womanlike, instantly asked leave to peep inside,
which favor I, manlike, positively declined to grant.

As soon as dinner was over our guest retired to array herself in
magnificent evening costume. It had been arranged that the readings were
to take place in her own sitting-room; and she was so enthusiastically
desirous to do honor to the occasion, that she regretted not having
brought with her from London the dress in which she had been presented
at court the year before, and not having borrowed certain materials for
additional splendor which she briefly described as "aunt's diamonds."

Toward eight o'clock we assembled in the sitting-room, and a strangely
assorted company we were. At the head of the table, radiant in silk
and jewelry, flowers and furbelows, sat The Queen of Hearts, looking so
handsome and so happy that I secretly congratulated my absent son on
the excellent taste he had shown in falling in love with her. Round this
bright young creature (Owen, at the foot of the table, and Morgan and
I on either side) sat her three wrinkled, gray-headed, dingily-attired
hosts, and just behind her, in still more inappropriate companionship,
towered the spectral figure of the man in armor, which had so
unaccountably attracted her on her arrival. This strange scene was
lighted up by candles in high and heavy brass sconces. Before Jessie
stood a mighty china punch-bowl of the olden time, containing the folded
pieces of card, inside which were written the numbers to be drawn, and
before Owen reposed the Purple Volume from which one of us was to read.
The walls of the room were hung all round with faded tapestry; the
clumsy furniture was black with age; and, in spite of the light from the
sconces, the lofty ceiling was almost lost in gloom. If Rembrandt could
have painted our background, Reynolds our guest, and Hogarth ourselves,
the picture of the scene would have been complete.

When the old clock over the tower gateway had chimed eight, I rose
to inaugurate the proceedings by requesting Jessie to take one of the
pieces of card out of the punch-bowl, and to declare the number.

She laughed; then suddenly became frightened and serious; then looked
at me, and said, "It was dreadfully like business;" and then entreated
Morgan not to stare at her, or, in the present state of her nerves, she
should upset the punch-bowl. At last she summoned resolution enough to
take out one of the pieces of card and to unfold it.

"Declare the number, my dear," said Owen.

"Number Four," answered Jessie, making a magnificent courtesy, and
beginning to look like herself again.

Owen opened the Purple Volume, searched through the manuscripts,
and suddenly changed color. The cause of his discomposure was soon
explained. Malicious fate had assigned to the most diffident individual
in the company the trying responsibility of leading the way. Number Four
was one of the two narratives which Owen had found among his own papers.

"I am almost sorry," began my eldest brother, confusedly, "that it has
fallen to my turn to read first. I hardly know which I distrust most,
myself or my story."

"Try and fancy you are in the pulpit again," said Morgan, sarcastically.
"Gentlemen of your cloth, Owen, seldom seem to distrust themselves or
their manuscripts when they get into that position."

"The fact is," continued Owen, mildly impenetrable to his brother's
cynical remark, "that the little thing I am going to try and read is
hardly a story at all. I am afraid it is only an anecdote. I became
possessed of the letter which contains my narrative under these
circumstances. At the time when I was a clergyman in London, my church
was attended for some months by a lady who was the wife of a large
farmer in the country. She had been obliged to come to town, and to
remain there for the sake of one of her children, a little boy, who
required the best medical advice."

At the words "medical advice" Morgan shook his head and growled to
himself contemptuously. Owen went on:

"While she was attending in this way to one child, his share in her love
was unexpectedly disputed by another, who came into the world rather
before his time. I baptized the baby, and was asked to the little
christening party afterward. This was my first introduction to the lady,
and I was very favorably impressed by her; not so much on account of
her personal appearance, for she was but a little woman and had no
pretensions to beauty, as on account of a certain simplicity, and
hearty, downright kindness in her manner, as well as of an excellent
frankness and good sense in her conversation. One of the guests present,
who saw how she had interested me, and who spoke of her in the highest
terms, surprised me by inquiring if I should ever have supposed that
quiet, good-humored little woman to be capable of performing an act of
courage which would have tried the nerves of the boldest man in England?
I naturally enough begged for an explanation; but my neighbor at the
table only smiled and said, 'If you can find an opportunity, ask her
what happened at The Black Cottage, and you will hear something that
will astonish you.' I acted on the hint as soon as I had an opportunity
of speaking to her privately. The lady answered that it was too long
a story to tell then, and explained, on my suggesting that she should
relate it on some future day, that she was about to start for her
country home the next morning. 'But,' she was good enough to add, 'as I
have been under great obligations to you for many Sundays past, and as
you seem interested in this matter, I will employ my first leisure time
after my return in telling you by writing, instead of by word of mouth,
what really happened to me on one memorable night of my life in The
Black Cottage.'

"She faithfully performed her promise. In a fortnight afterward I
received from her the narrative which I am now about to read."

BROTHER OWEN'S STORY

OF

THE SIEGE OF THE BLACK COTTAGE.

To begin at the beginning, I must take you back to the time after my
mother's death, when my only brother had gone to sea, when my sister was
out at service, and when I lived alone with my father in the midst of a
moor in the west of England.

The moor was covered with great limestone rocks, and intersected here
and there by streamlets. The nearest habitation to ours was situated
about a mile and a half off, where a strip of the fertile land stretched
out into the waste like a tongue. Here the outbuildings of the great
Moor Farm, then in the possession of my husband's father, began. The
farm-lands stretched down gently into a beautiful rich valley, lying
nicely sheltered by the high platform of the moor. When the ground began
to rise again, miles and miles away, it led up to a country house called
Holme Manor, belonging to a gentleman named Knifton. Mr. Knifton
had lately married a young lady whom my mother had nursed, and whose
kindness and friendship for me, her foster-sister, I shall remember
gratefully to the last day of my life. These and other slight
particulars it is necessary to my story that I should tell you, and it
is also necessary that you should be especially careful to bear them
well in mind.

My father was by trade a stone-mason. His cottage stood a mile and a
half from the nearest habitation. In all other directions we were four
or five times that distance from neighbors. Being very poor people, this
lonely situation had one great attraction for us--we lived rent free
on it. In addition to that advantage, the stones, by shaping which my
father gained his livelihood, lay all about him at his very door, so
that he thought his position, solitary as it was, quite an enviable one.
I can hardly say that I agreed with him, though I never complained.
I was very fond of my father, and managed to make the best of my
loneliness with the thought of being useful to him. Mrs. Knifton
wished to take me into her service when she married, but I declined,
unwillingly enough, for my father's sake. If I had gone away, he would
have had nobody to live with him; and my mother made me promise on her
death-bed that he should never be left to pine away alone in the midst
of the bleak moor.

Our cottage, small as it was, was stoutly and snugly built, with stone
from the moor as a matter of course. The walls were lined inside and
fenced outside with wood, the gift of Mr. Knifton's father to my father.
This double covering of cracks and crevices, which would have been
superfluous in a sheltered position, was absolutely necessary, in our
exposed situation, to keep out the cold winds which, excepting just the
summer months, swept over us continually all the year round. The outside
boards, covering our roughly-built stone walls, my father protected
against the wet with pitch and tar. This gave to our little abode a
curiously dark, dingy look, especially when it was seen from a distance;
and so it had come to be called in the neighborhood, even before I was
born, The Black Cottage.

I have now related the preliminary particulars which it is desirable
that you should know, and may proceed at once to the pleasanter task of
telling you my story.

One cloudy autumn day, when I was rather more than eighteen years old,
a herdsman walked over from Moor Farm with a letter which had been left
there for my father. It came from a builder living at our county town,
half a day's journey off, and it invited my father to come to him and
give his judgment about an estimate for some stonework on a very large
scale. My father's expenses for loss of time were to be paid, and he was
to have his share of employment afterwards in preparing the stone. He
was only too glad, therefore, to obey the directions which the letter
contained, and to prepare at once for his long walk to the county town.

Considering the time at which he received the letter, and the necessity
of resting before he attempted to return, it was impossible for him to
avoid being away from home for one night, at least. He proposed to me,
in case I disliked being left alone in the Black Cottage, to lock the
door and to take me to Moor Farm to sleep with any one of the milkmaids
who would give me a share of her bed. I by no means liked the notion of
sleeping with a girl whom I did not know, and I saw no reason to feel
afraid of being left alone for only one night; so I declined. No thieves
had ever come near us; our poverty was sufficient protection against
them; and of other dangers there were none that even the most timid
person could apprehend. Accordingly, I got my father's dinner, laughing
at the notion of my taking refuge under the protection of a milkmaid
at Moor Farm. He started for his walk as soon as he had done, saying he
should try and be back by dinner-time the next day, and leaving me and
my cat Polly to take care of the house.

I had cleared the table and brightened up the fire, and had sat down to
my work with the cat dozing at my feet, when I heard the trampling of
horses, and, running to the door, saw Mr. and Mrs. Knifton, with their
groom behind them, riding up to the Black Cottage. It was part of the
young lady's kindness never to neglect an opportunity of coming to pay
me a friendly visit, and her husband was generally willing to accompany
her for his wife's sake. I made my best courtesy, therefore, with a
great deal of pleasure, but with no particular surprise at seeing them.
They dismounted and entered the cottage, laughing and talking in great
spirits. I soon heard that they were riding to the same county town
for which my father was bound and that they intended to stay with some
friends there for a few days, and to return home on horseback, as they
went out.

I heard this, and I also discovered that they had been having an
argument, in jest, about money-matters, as they rode along to
our cottage. Mrs. Knifton had accused her husband of inveterate
extravagance, and of never being able to go out with money in his pocket
without spending it all, if he possibly could, before he got home again.
Mr. Knifton had laughingly defended himself by declaring that all his
pocket-money went in presents for his wife, and that, if he spent it
lavishly, it was under her sole influence and superintendence.

"We are going to Cliverton now," he said to Mrs. Knifton, naming the
county town, and warming himself at our poor fire just as pleasantly
as if he had been standing on his own grand hearth. "You will stop to
admire every pretty thing in every one of the Cliverton shop-windows;
I shall hand you the purse, and you will go in and buy. When we
have reached home again, and you have had time to get tired of your
purchases, you will clasp your hands in amazement, and declare that you
are quite shocked at my habits of inveterate extravagance. I am only the
banker who keeps the money; you, my love, are the spendthrift who throws
it all away!"

"Am I, sir?" said Mrs. Knifton, with a look of mock indignation. "We
will see if I am to be misrepresented in this way with impunity.
Bessie, my dear" (turning to me), "you shall judge how far I deserve the
character which that unscrupulous man has just given to me. _I_ am the
spendthrift, am I? And you are only the banker? Very well. Banker, give
me my money at once, if you please!"

Mr. Knifton laughed, and took some gold and silver from his waistcoat
pocket.

"No, no," said Mrs. Knifton, "you may want what you have got there for
necessary expenses. Is that all the money you have about you? What do
I feel here?" and she tapped her husband on the chest, just over the
breast-pocket of his coat.

Mr. Knifton laughed again, and produced his pocketbook. His wife
snatched it out of his hand, opened it, and drew out some bank-notes,
put them back again immediately, and, closing the pocketbook, stepped
across the room to my poor mother's little walnut-wood book-case, the
only bit of valuable furniture we had in the house.

"What are you going to do there?" asked Mr. Knifton, following his wife.

Mrs. Knifton opened the glass door of the book-case, put the pocketbook
in a vacant place on one of the lower shelves, closed and locked the
door again, and gave me the key.

"You called me a spendthrift just now," she said. "There is my answer.
Not one farthing of that money shall you spend at Cliverton on _me_.
Keep the key in your pocket, Bessie, and, whatever Mr. Knifton may say,
on no account let him have it until we call again on our way back. No,
sir, I won't trust you with that money in your pocket in the town of
Cliverton. I will make sure of your taking it all home again, by leaving
it here in more trustworthy hands than yours until we ride back. Bessie,
my dear, what do you say to that as a lesson in economy inflicted on a
prudent husband by a spendthrift wife?"

She took Mr. Knifton's arm while she spoke, and drew him away to the
door. He protested and made some resistance, but she easily carried her
point, for he was far too fond of her to have a will of his own in any
trifling matter between them. Whatever the men might say, Mr. Knifton
was a model husband in the estimation of all the women who knew him.

"You will see us as we come back, Bessie. Till then, you are our banker,
and the pocketbook is yours," cried Mrs. Knifton, gayly, at the door.
Her husband lifted her into the saddle, mounted himself, and away they
both galloped over the moor as wild and happy as a couple of children.

Although my being trusted with money by Mrs. Knifton was no novelty (in
her maiden days she always employed me to pay her dress-maker's bills),
I did not feel quite easy at having a pocketbook full of bank-notes left
by her in my charge. I had no positive apprehensions about the safety of
the deposit placed in my hands, but it was one of the odd points in my
character then (and I think it is still) to feel an unreasonably strong
objection to charging myself with money responsibilities of any kind,
even to suit the convenience of my dearest friends. As soon as I was
left alone, the very sight of the pocketbook behind the glass door of
the book-case began to worry me, and instead of returning to my work, I
puzzled my brains about finding a place to lock it up in, where it would
not be exposed to the view of any chance passers-by who might stray into
the Black Cottage.

This was not an easy matter to compass in a poor house like ours, where
we had nothing valuable to put under lock and key. After running over
various hiding-places in my mind, I thought of my tea-caddy, a present
from Mrs. Knifton, which I always kept out of harm's way in my own
bedroom. Most unluckily--as it afterward turned out--instead of taking
the pocketbook to the tea-caddy, I went into my room first to take the
tea-caddy to the pocketbook. I only acted in this roundabout way from
sheer thoughtlessness, and severely enough I was punished for it, as you
will acknowledge yourself when you have read a page or two more of my
story.

I was just getting the unlucky tea-caddy out of my cupboard, when I
heard footsteps in the passage, and, running out immediately, saw two
men walk into the kitchen--the room in which I had received Mr. and Mrs.
Knifton. I inquired what they wanted sharply enough, and one of them
answered immediately that they wanted my father. He turned toward me, of
course, as he spoke, and I recognized him as a stone-mason, going among
his comrades by the name of Shifty Dick. He bore a very bad character
for everything but wrestling, a sport for which the working men of our
parts were famous all through the county. Shifty Dick was champion,
and he had got his name from some tricks of wrestling, for which he was
celebrated. He was a tall, heavy man, with a lowering, scarred face, and
huge hairy hands--the last visitor in the whole world that I should have
been glad to see under any circumstances. His companion was a stranger,
whom he addressed by the name of Jerry--a quick, dapper, wicked-looking
man, who took off his cap to me with mock politeness, and showed, in
so doing, a very bald head, with some very ugly-looking knobs on it. I
distrusted him worse than I did Shifty Dick, and managed to get between
his leering eyes and the book-case, as I told the two that my father was
gone out, and that I did not expect him back till the next day.

The words were hardly out of my mouth before I repented that my anxiety
to get rid of my unwelcome visitors had made me incautious enough to
acknowledge that my father would be away from home for the whole night.

Shifty Dick and his companion looked at each other when I unwisely let
out the truth, but made no remark except to ask me if I would give them
a drop of cider. I answered sharply that I had no cider in the house,
having no fear of the consequences of refusing them drink, because
I knew that plenty of men were at work within hail, in a neighboring
quarry. The two looked at each other again when I denied having any
cider to give them; and Jerry (as I am obliged to call him, knowing no
other name by which to distinguish the fellow) took off his cap to me
once more, and, with a kind of blackguard gentility upon him, said they
would have the pleasure of calling the next day, when my father was
at home. I said good-afternoon as ungraciously as possible, and, to my
great relief, they both left the cottage immediately afterward.

As soon as they were well away, I watched them from the door. They
trudged off in the direction of Moor Farm; and, as it was beginning to
get dusk, I soon lost sight of them.

Half an hour afterward I looked out again.

The wind had lulled with the sunset, but the mist was rising, and a
heavy rain was beginning to fall. Never did the lonely prospect of the
moor look so dreary as it looked to my eyes that evening. Never did I
regret any slight thing more sincerely than I then regretted the leaving
of Mr. Knifton's pocketbook in my charge. I cannot say that I suffered
under any actual alarm, for I felt next to certain that neither Shifty
Dick nor Jerry had got a chance of setting eyes on so small a thing as
the pocketbook while they were in the kitchen; but there was a kind
of vague distrust troubling me--a suspicion of the night--a dislike of
being left by myself, which I never remember having experienced before.
This feeling so increased after I had closed the door and gone back
to the kitchen, that, when I heard the voices of the quarrymen as they
passed our cottage on their way home to the village in the valley below
Moor Farm, I stepped out into the passage with a momentary notion
of telling them how I was situated, and asking them for advice and
protection.

I had hardly formed this idea, however, before I dismissed it. None
of the quarrymen were intimate friends of mine. I had a nodding
acquaintance with them, and believed them to be honest men, as times
went. But my own common sense told me that what little knowledge of
their characters I had was by no means sufficient to warrant me in
admitting them into my confidence in the matter of the pocketbook. I had
seen enough of poverty and poor men to know what a terrible temptation a
large sum of money is to those whose whole lives are passed in
scraping up sixpences by weary hard work. It is one thing to write fine
sentiments in books about incorruptible honesty, and another thing to
put those sentiments in practice when one day's work is all that a man
has to set up in the way of an obstacle between starvation and his own
fireside.

The only resource that remained was to carry the pocketbook with me to
Moor Farm, and ask permission to pass the night there. But I could not
persuade myself that there was any real necessity for taking such a
course as this; and, if the truth must be told, my pride revolted at the
idea of presenting myself in the character of a coward before the people
at the farm. Timidity is thought rather a graceful attraction among
ladies, but among poor women it is something to be laughed at. A woman
with less spirit of her own than I had, and always shall have, would
have considered twice in my situation before she made up her mind to
encounter the jokes of plowmen and the jeers of milkmaids. As for me, I
had hardly considered about going to the farm before I despised myself
for entertaining any such notion. "No, no," thought I, "I am not the
woman to walk a mile and a half through rain, and mist, and darkness to
tell a whole kitchenful of people that I am afraid. Come what may, here
I stop till father gets back."

Having arrived at that valiant resolution, the first thing I did was to
lock and bolt the back and front doors, and see to the security of every
shutter in the house.

That duty performed, I made a blazing fire, lighted my candle, and sat
down to tea, as snug and comfortable as possible. I could hardly believe
now, with the light in the room, and the sense of security inspired by
the closed doors and shutters, that I had ever felt even the slightest
apprehension earlier in the day. I sang as I washed up the tea-things;
and even the cat seemed to catch the infection of my good spirits. I
never knew the pretty creature so playful as she was that evening.

The tea-things put by, I took up my knitting, and worked away at it
so long that I began at last to get drowsy. The fire was so bright and
comforting that I could not muster resolution enough to leave it and
go to bed. I sat staring lazily into the blaze, with my knitting on my
lap--sat till the splashing of the rain outside and the fitful, sullen
sobbing of the wind grew fainter and fainter on my ear. The last sounds
I heard before I fairly dozed off to sleep were the cheerful crackling
of the fire and the steady purring of the cat, as she basked luxuriously
in the warm light on the hearth. Those were the last sounds before I
fell asleep. The sound that woke me was one loud bang at the front door.

I started up, with my heart (as the saying is) in my mouth, with a
frightful momentary shuddering at the roots of my hair--I started up
breathless, cold and motionless, waiting in the silence I hardly knew
for what, doubtful at first whether I had dreamed about the bang at the
door, or whether the blow had really been struck on it.

In a minute or less there came a second bang, louder than the first. I
ran out into the passage.

"Who's there?"

"Let us in," answered a voice, which I recognised immediately as the
voice of Shifty Dick.

"Wait a bit, my dear, and let me explain," said a second voice, in the
low, oily, jeering tones of Dick's companion--the wickedly clever little
man whom he called Jerry. "You are alone in the house, my pretty little
dear. You may crack your sweet voice with screeching, and there's nobody
near to hear you. Listen to reason, my love, and let us in. We don't
want cider this time--we only want a very neat-looking pocketbook
which you happen to have, and your late excellent mother's four silver
teaspoons, which you keep so nice and clean on the chimney-piece. If you
let us in we won't hurt a hair of your head, my cherub, and we promise
to go away the moment we have got what we want, unless you particularly
wish us to stop to tea. If you keep us out, we shall be obliged to break
into the house and then--"

"And then," burst in Shifty Dick, "we'll _mash_ you!"

"Yes," said Jerry, "we'll mash you, my beauty. But you won't drive us to
doing that, will you? You will let us in?"

This long parley gave me time to recover from the effect which the
first bang at the door had produced on my nerves. The threats of the two
villains would have terrified some women out of their senses, but the
only result they produced on _me_ was violent indignation. I had, thank
God, a strong spirit of my own, and the cool, contemptuous insolence of
the man Jerry effectually roused it.

"You cowardly villains!" I screamed at them through the door. "You think
you can frighten me because I am only a poor girl left alone in the
house. You ragamuffin thieves, I defy you both! Our bolts are strong,
our shutters are thick. I am here to keep my father's house safe, and
keep it I will against an army of you!"

You may imagine what a passion I was in when I vapored and blustered in
that way. I heard Jerry laugh and Shifty Dick swear a whole mouthful of
oaths. Then there was a dead silence for a minute or two, and then the
two ruffians attacked the door.

I rushed into the kitchen and seized the poker, and then heaped wood on
the fire, and lighted all the candles I could find; for I felt as though
I could keep up my courage better if I had plenty of light. Strange and
improbable as it may appear, the next thing that attracted my attention
was my poor pussy, crouched up, panic-stricken, in a corner. I was so
fond of the little creature that I took her up in my arms and carried
her into my bedroom and put her inside my bed. A comical thing to do in
a situation of deadly peril, was it not? But it seemed quite natural and
proper at the time.

All this while the blows were falling faster and faster on the door.
They were dealt, as I conjectured, with heavy stones picked up from the
ground outside. Jerry sang at his wicked work, and Shifty Dick swore. As
I left the bedroom after putting the cat under cover, I heard the lower
panel of the door begin to crack.

I ran into the kitchen and huddled our four silver spoons into my
pocket; then took the unlucky book with the bank-notes and put it in the
bosom of my dress. I was determined to defend the property confided to
my care with my life. Just as I had secured the pocketbook I heard
the door splintering, and rushed into the passage again with my heavy
kitchen poker lifted in both hands.

I was in time to see the bald head of Jerry, with the ugly-looking knobs
on it, pushed into the passage through a great rent in one of the lower
panels of the door.

"Get out, you villain, or I'll brain you on the spot!" I screeched,
threatening him with the poker.

Mr. Jerry took his head out again much faster than he put it in.

The next thing that came through the rent was a long pitchfork, which
they darted at me from the outside, to move me from the door. I struck
at it with all my might, and the blow must have jarred the hand of
Shifty Dick up to his very shoulder, for I heard him give a roar of rage
and pain. Before he could catch at the fork with his other hand I had
drawn it inside. By this time even Jerry lost his temper and swore more
awfully than Dick himself.

Then there came another minute of respite. I suspected they had gone to
get bigger stones, and I dreaded the giving way of the whole door.

Running into the bedroom as this fear beset me, I laid hold of my chest
of drawers, dragged it into the passage, and threw it down against the
door. On the top of that I heaped my father's big tool chest, three
chairs, and a scuttleful of coals; and last, I dragged out the kitchen
table and rammed it as hard as I could against the whole barricade. They
heard me as they were coming up to the door with fresh stones. Jerry
said: "Stop a bit!" and then the two consulted together in whispers. I
listened eagerly, and just caught these words:

"Let's try it the other way."

Nothing more was said, but I heard their footsteps retreating from the
door.

Were they going to besiege the back door now?

I had hardly asked myself that question when I heard their voices at the
other side of the house. The back door was smaller than the front, but
it had this advantage in the way of strength--it was made of two solid
oak boards joined lengthwise, and strengthened inside by heavy cross
pieces. It had no bolts like the front door, but was fastened by a bar
of iron running across it in a slanting direction, and fitting at either
end into the wall.

"They must have the whole cottage down before they can break in at
that door!" I thought to myself. And they soon found out as much for
themselves. After five minutes of banging at the back door they gave up
any further attack in that direction and cast their heavy stones down
with curses of fury awful to hear.

I went into the kitchen and dropped on the window-seat to rest for a
moment. Suspense and excitement together were beginning to tell upon me.
The perspiration broke out thick on my forehead, and I began to feel the
bruises I had inflicted on my hands in making the barricade against
the front door. I had not lost a particle of my resolution, but I was
beginning to lose strength. There was a bottle of rum in the cupboard,
which my brother the sailor had left with us the last time he was
ashore. I drank a drop of it. Never before or since have I put anything
down my throat that did me half so much good as that precious mouthful
of rum!

I was still sitting in the window-seat drying my face, when I suddenly
heard their voices close behind me.

They were feeling the outside of the window against which I was sitting.
It was protected, like all the other windows in the cottage, by iron
bars. I listened in dreadful suspense for the sound of filing, but
nothing of the sort was audible. They had evidently reckoned on
frightening me easily into letting them in, and had come unprovided with
house-breaking tools of any kind. A fresh burst of oaths informed me
that they had recognized the obstacle of the iron bars. I listened
breathlessly for some warning of what they were going to do next, but
their voices seemed to die away in the distance. They were retreating
from the window. Were they also retreating from the house altogether?
Had they given up the idea of effecting an entrance in despair?

A long silence followed--a silence which tried my courage even more
severely than the tumult of their first attack on the cottage.

Dreadful suspicions now beset me of their being able to accomplish by
treachery what they had failed to effect by force. Well as I knew the
cottage, I began to doubt whether there might not be ways of cunningly
and silently entering it against which I was not provided. The ticking
of the clock annoyed me; the crackling of the fire startled me. I looked
out twenty times in a minute into the dark corners of the passage,
straining my eyes, holding my breath, anticipating the most unlikely
events, the most impossible dangers. Had they really gone, or were they
still prowling about the house? Oh, what a sum of money I would have
given only to have known what they were about in that interval of
silence!

I was startled at last out of my suspense in the most awful manner.
A shout from one of them reached my ears on a sudden down the kitchen
chimney. It was so unexpected and so horrible in the stillness that
I screamed for the first time since the attack on the house. My worst
forebodings had never suggested to me that the two villains might mount
upon the roof.

"Let us in, you she-devil!" roared a voice down the chimney.

There was another pause. The smoke from the wood fire, thin and light
as it was in the red state of the embers at that moment, had evidently
obliged the man to take his face from the mouth of the chimney. I
counted the seconds while he was, as I conjectured, getting his breath
again. In less than half a minute there came another shout:

"Let us in, or we'll burn the place down over your head!"

Burn it? Burn what? There was nothing easily combustible but the thatch
on the roof; and that had been well soaked by the heavy rain which had
now fallen incessantly for more than six hours. Burn the place over my
head? How?

While I was still casting about wildly in my mind to discover what
possible danger there could be of fire, one of the heavy stones
placed on the thatch to keep it from being torn up by high winds came
thundering down the chimney. It scattered the live embers on the hearth
all over the room. A richly-furnished place, with knickknacks and fine
muslin about it, would have been set on fire immediately. Even our
bare floor and rough furniture gave out a smell of burning at the first
shower of embers which the first stone scattered.

For an instant I stood quite horror-struck before this new proof of the
devilish ingenuity of the villains outside. But the dreadful danger
I was now in recalled me to my senses immediately. There was a large
canful of water in my bedroom, and I ran in at once to fetch it. Before
I could get back to the kitchen a second stone had been thrown down the
chimney, and the floor was smoldering in several places.

I had wit enough to let the smoldering go on for a moment or two more,
and to pour the whole of my canful of water over the fire before the
third stone came down the chimney. The live embers on the floor I easily
disposed of after that. The man on the roof must have heard the hissing
of the fire as I put it out, and have felt the change produced in the
air at the mouth of the chimney, for after the third stone had descended
no more followed it. As for either of the ruffians themselves dropping
down by the same road along which the stones had come, that was not to
be dreaded. The chimney, as I well knew by our experience in cleaning
it, was too narrow to give passage to any one above the size of a small
boy.

I looked upward as that comforting reflection crossed my mind--I looked
up, and saw, as plainly as I see the paper I am now writing on, the
point of a knife coming through the inside of the roof just over my
head. Our cottage had no upper story, and our rooms had no ceilings.
Slowly and wickedly the knife wriggled its way through the dry inside
thatch between the rafters. It stopped for a while, and there came a
sound of tearing. That, in its turn, stopped too; there was a great fall
of dry thatch on the floor; and I saw the heavy, hairy hand of Shifty
Dick, armed with the knife, come through after the fallen fragments. He
tapped at the rafters with the back of the knife, as if to test their
strength. Thank God, they were substantial and close together! Nothing
lighter than a hatchet would have sufficed to remove any part of them.

The murderous hand was still tapping with the knife when I heard a
shout from the man Jerry, coming from the neighborhood of my father's
stone-shed in the back yard. The hand and knife disappeared instantly. I
went to the back door and put my ear to it, and listened.

Both men were now in the shed. I made the most desperate efforts to call
to mind what tools and other things were left in it which might be
used against me. But my agitation confused me. I could remember nothing
except my father's big stone-saw, which was far too heavy and unwieldy
to be used on the roof of the cottage. I was still puzzling my brains,
and making my head swim to no purpose, when I heard the men dragging
something out of the shed. At the same instant that the noise caught my
ear, the remembrance flashed across me like lightning of some beams of
wood which had lain in the shed for years past. I had hardly time to
feel certain that they were removing one of these beams before I heard
Shifty Dick say to Jerry.

"Which door?"

"The front," was the answer. "We've cracked it already; we'll have it
down now in no time."

Senses less sharpened by danger than mine would have understood but
too easily, from these words, that they were about to use the beam as a
battering-ram against the door. When that conviction overcame me, I lost
courage at last. I felt that the door must come down. No such barricade
as I had constructed could support it for more than a few minutes
against such shocks as it was now to receive.

"I can do no more to keep the house against them," I said to myself,
with my knees knocking together, and the tears at last beginning to wet
my cheeks. "I must trust to the night and the thick darkness, and save
my life by running for it while there is yet time."

I huddled on my cloak and hood, and had my hand on the bar of the back
door, when a piteous mew from the bedroom reminded me of the existence
of poor Pussy. I ran in, and huddled the creature up in my apron. Before
I was out in the passage again, the first shock from the beam fell on
the door.

The upper hinge gave way. The chairs and coal-scuttle, forming the top
of my barricade, were hurled, rattling, on to the floor, but the lower
hinge of the door, and the chest of drawers and the tool-chest still
kept their places.

"One more!" I heard the villains cry--"one more run with the beam, and
down it comes!"

Just as they must have been starting for that "one more run," I opened
the back door and fled into the night, with the bookful of banknotes
in my bosom, the silver spoons in my pocket, and the cat in my arms.
I threaded my way easily enough through the familiar obstacles in the
backyard, and was out in the pitch darkness of the moor before I heard
the second shock, and the crash which told me that the whole door had
given way.

In a few minutes they must have discovered the fact of my flight with
the pocketbook, for I heard shouts in the distance as if they were
running out to pursue me. I kept on at the top of my speed, and the
noise soon died away. It was so dark that twenty thieves instead of two
would have found it useless to follow me.

How long it was before I reached the farmhouse--the nearest place to
which I could fly for refuge--I cannot tell you. I remember that I had
just sense enough to keep the wind at my back (having observed in the
beginning of the evening that it blew toward Moor Farm), and to go on
resolutely through the darkness. In all other respects I was by this
time half crazed by what I had gone through. If it had so happened that
the wind had changed after I had observed its direction early in the
evening, I should have gone astray, and have probably perished of
fatigue and exposure on the moor. Providentially, it still blew steadily
as it had blown for hours past, and I reached the farmhouse with my
clothes wet through, and my brain in a high fever. When I made my alarm
at the door, they had all gone to bed but the farmer's eldest son,
who was sitting up late over his pipe and newspaper. I just mustered
strength enough to gasp out a few words, telling him what was the
matter, and then fell down at his feet, for the first time in my life in
a dead swoon.

That swoon was followed by a severe illness. When I got strong enough
to look about me again, I found myself in one of the farmhouse beds--my
father, Mrs. Knifton, and the doctor were all in the room--my cat was
asleep at my feet, and the pocketbook that I had saved lay on the table
by my side.

There was plenty of news for me to hear as soon as I was fit to listen
to it. Shifty Dick and the other rascal had been caught, and were in
prison, waiting their trial at the next assizes. Mr. and Mrs. Knifton
had been so shocked at the danger I had run--for which they blamed their
own want of thoughtfulness in leaving the pocketbook in my care--that
they had insisted on my father's removing from our lonely home to
a cottage on their land, which we were to inhabit rent free. The
bank-notes that I had saved were given to me to buy furniture with, in
place of the things that the thieves had broken. These pleasant tidings
assisted so greatly in promoting my recovery, that I was soon able
to relate to my friends at the farmhouse the particulars that I have
written here. They were all surprised and interested, but no one, as I
thought, listened to me with such breathless attention as the farmer's
eldest son. Mrs. Knifton noticed this too, and began to make jokes about
it, in her light-hearted way, as soon as we were alone. I thought little
of her jesting at the time; but when I got well, and we went to live
at our new home, "the young farmer," as he was called in our parts,
constantly came to see us, and constantly managed to meet me out of
doors. I had my share of vanity, like other young women, and I began
to think of Mrs. Knifton's jokes with some attention. To be brief, the
young farmer managed one Sunday--I never could tell how--to lose his way
with me in returning from church, and before we found out the right road
home again he had asked me to be his wife.

His relations did all they could to keep us asunder and break off
the match, thinking a poor stonemason's daughter no fit wife for a
prosperous yeoman. But the farmer was too obstinate for them. He had one
form of answer to all their objections. "A man, if he is worth the name,
marries according to his own notions, and to please himself," he used
to say. "My notion is, that when I take a wife I am placing my character
and my happiness--the most precious things I have to trust--in one
woman's care. The woman I mean to marry had a small charge confided to
her care, and showed herself worthy of it at the risk of her life. That
is proof enough for me that she is worthy of the greatest charge I can
put into her hands. Rank and riches are fine things, but the certainty
of getting a good wife is something better still. I'm of age, I know my
own mind, and I mean to marry the stone-mason's daughter."

And he did marry me. Whether I proved myself worthy or not of his good
opinion is a question which I must leave you to ask my husband. All
that I had to relate about myself and my doings is now told. Whatever
interest my perilous adventure may excite, ends, I am well aware, with
my escape to the farmhouse. I have only ventured on writing these few
additional sentences because my marriage is the moral of my story. It
has brought me the choicest blessings of happiness and prosperity, and I
owe them all to my night-adventure in _The Black Cottage_.

THE SECOND DAY.

A CLEAR, cloudless, bracing autumn morning. I rose gayly, with the
pleasant conviction on my mind that our experiment had thus far been
successful beyond our hopes.

Short and slight as the first story had been, the result of it on
Jessie's mind had proved conclusive. Before I could put the question
to her, she declared of her own accord, and with her customary
exaggeration, that she had definitely abandoned all idea of writing to
her aunt until our collection of narratives was exhausted.

"I am in a fever of curiosity about what is to come," she said, when we
all parted for the night; "and, even if I wanted to leave you, I could
not possibly go away now, without hearing the stories to the end."

So far, so good. All my anxieties from this time were for George's
return. Again to-day I searched the newspapers, and again there were no
tidings of the ship.

Miss Jessie occupied the second day by a drive to our county town to
make some little purchases. Owen, and Morgan, and I were all hard at
work, during her absence, on the stories that still remained to be
completed. Owen desponded about ever getting done; Morgan grumbled at
what he called the absurd difficulty of writing nonsense. I worked on
smoothly and contentedly, stimulated by the success of the first night.

We assembled as before in our guest's sitting-room. As the clock struck
eight she drew out the second card. It was Number Two. The lot had
fallen on me to read next.

"Although my story is told in the first person," I said, addressing
Jessie, "you must not suppose that the events related in this particular
case happened to me. They happened to a friend of mine, who naturally
described them to me from his own personal point of view. In producing
my narrative from the recollection of what he told me some years since,
I have supposed myself to be listening to him again, and have therefore
written in his character, and, whenever my memory would help me, as
nearly as possible in his language also. By this means I hope I have
succeeded in giving an air of reality to a story which has truth, at any
rate, to recommend it. I must ask you to excuse me if I enter into
no details in offering this short explanation. Although the persons
concerned in my narrative have ceased to exist, it is necessary to
observe all due delicacy toward their memories. Who they were, and how
I became acquainted with them, are matters of no moment. The interest
of the story, such as it is, stands in no need, in this instance, of any
assistance from personal explanations."

With those words I addressed myself to my task, and read as follows:




BROTHER GRIFFITH'S STORY of THE FAMILY SECRET.



CHAPTER I.

WAS it an Englishman or a Frenchman who first remarked that every family
had a skeleton in its cupboard? I am not learned enough to know, but I
reverence the observation, whoever made it. It speaks a startling truth
through an appropriately grim metaphor--a truth which I have discovered
by practical experience. Our family had a skeleton in the cupboard, and
the name of it was Uncle George.

I arrived at the knowledge that this skeleton existed, and I traced it
to the particular cupboard in which it was hidden, by slow degrees. I
was a child when I first began to suspect that there was such a thing,
and a grown man when I at last discovered that my suspicions were true.

My father was a doctor, having an excellent practice in a large country
town. I have heard that he married against the wishes of his family.
They could not object to my mother on the score of birth, breeding, or
character--they only disliked her heartily. My grandfather, grandmother,
uncles, and aunts all declared that she was a heartless, deceitful
woman; all disliked her manners, her opinions, and even the expression
of her face--all, with the exception of my father's youngest brother,
George.

George was the unlucky member of our family. The rest were all clever;
he was slow in capacity. The rest were all remarkably handsome; he was
the sort of man that no woman ever looks at twice. The rest succeeded
in life; he failed. His profession was the same as my father's, but he
never got on when he started in practice for himself. The sick poor,
who could not choose, employed him, and liked him. The sick rich, who
could--especially the ladies--declined to call him in when they could
get anybody else. In experience he gained greatly by his profession; in
money and reputation he gained nothing.

There are very few of us, however dull and unattractive we may be to
outward appearance, who have not some strong passion, some germ of what
is called romance, hidden more or less deeply in our natures. All the
passion and romance in the nature of my Uncle George lay in his love and
admiration for my father.

He sincerely worshipped his eldest brother as one of the noblest of
human beings. When my father was engaged to be married, and when the
rest of the family, as I have already mentioned, did not hesitate to
express their unfavorable opinion of the disposition of his chosen wife,
Uncle George, who had never ventured on differing with anyone before,
to the amazement of everybody, undertook the defense of his future
sister-in-law in the most vehement and positive manner. In his
estimation, his brother's choice was something sacred and indisputable.
The lady might, and did, treat him with unconcealed contempt, laugh at
his awkwardness, grow impatient at his stammering--it made no difference
to Uncle George. She was to be his brother's wife, and, in virtue of
that one great fact, she became, in the estimation of the poor surgeon,
a very queen, who, by the laws of the domestic constitution, could do no
wrong.

When my father had been married a little while, he took his youngest
brother to live with him as his assistant.

If Uncle George had been made president of the College of Surgeons, he
could not have been prouder and happier than he was in his new position.
I am afraid my father never understood the depth of his brother's
affection for him. All the hard work fell to George's share: the long
journeys at night, the physicking of wearisome poor people, the drunken
cases, the revolting cases--all the drudging, dirty business of the
surgery, in short, was turned over to him; and day after day, month
after month, he struggled through it without a murmur. When his brother
and his sister-in-law went out to dine with the county gentry, it never
entered his head to feel disappointed at being left unnoticed at home.
When the return dinners were given, and he was asked to come in at
tea-time, and left to sit unregarded in a corner, it never occurred to
him to imagine that he was treated with any want of consideration or
respect. He was part of the furniture of the house, and it was the
business as well as the pleasure of his life to turn himself to any use
to which his brother might please to put him.

So much for what I have heard from others on the subject of my Uncle
George. My own personal experience of him is limited to what I remember
as a mere child. Let me say something, however, first about my parents,
my sister and myself.

My sister was the eldest born and the best loved. I did not come into
the world till four years after her birth, and no other child followed
me. Caroline, from her earliest days, was the perfection of beauty and
health. I was small, weakly, and, if the truth must be told, almost
as plain-featured as Uncle George himself. It would be ungracious and
undutiful in me to presume to decide whether there was any foundation or
not for the dislike that my father's family always felt for my mother.
All I can venture to say is, that her children never had any cause to
complain of her.

Her passionate affection for my sister, her pride in the child's beauty,
I remember well, as also her uniform kindness and indulgence toward me.
My personal defects must have been a sore trial to her in secret,
but neither she nor my father ever showed me that they perceived any
difference between Caroline and myself. When presents were made to my
sister, presents were made to me. When my father and mother caught my
sister up in their arms and kissed her they scrupulously gave me my turn
afterward. My childish instinct told me that there was a difference in
their smiles when they looked at me and looked at her; that the kisses
given to Caroline were warmer than the kisses given to me; that the
hands which dried her tears in our childish griefs, touched her more
gently than the hands which dried mine. But these, and other small signs
of preference like them, were such as no parents could be expected
to control. I noticed them at the time rather with wonder than with
repining. I recall them now without a harsh thought either toward my
father or my mother. Both loved me, and both did their duty by me. If I
seem to speak constrainedly of them here, it is not on my own account. I
can honestly say that, with all my heart and soul.

Even Uncle George, fond as he was of me, was fonder of my beautiful
child-sister.

When I used mischievously to pull at his lank, scanty hair, he would
gently and laughingly take it out of my hands, but he would let Caroline
tug at it till his dim, wandering gray eyes winked and watered again
with pain. He used to plunge perilously about the garden, in awkward
imitation of the cantering of a horse, while I sat on his shoulders;
but he would never proceed at any pace beyond a slow and safe walk when
Caroline had a ride in her turn. When he took us out walking, Caroline
was always on the side next the wall. When we interrupted him over his
dirty work in the surgery, he used to tell me to go and play until
he was ready for me; but he would put down his bottles, and clean his
clumsy fingers on his coarse apron, and lead Caroline out again, as if
she had been the greatest lady in the land. Ah! how he loved her! and,
let me be honest and grateful, and add, how he loved me, too!

When I was eight years old and Caroline was twelve, I was separated from
home for some time. I had been ailing for many months previously; had
got benefit from being taken to the sea-side, and had shown symptoms of
relapsing on being brought home again to the midland county in which we
resided. After much consultation, it was at last resolved that I should
be sent to live, until my constitution got stronger, with a maiden
sister of my mother's, who had a house at a watering-place on the south
coast.

I left home, I remember, loaded with presents, rejoicing over the
prospect of looking at the sea again, as careless of the future and as
happy in the present as any boy could be. Uncle George petitioned for a
holiday to take me to the seaside, but he could not be spared from
the surgery. He consoled himself and me by promising to make me a
magnificent model of a ship.

I have that model before my eyes now while I write. It is dusty with
age; the paint on it is cracked; the ropes are tangled; the sails are
moth-eaten and yellow. The hull is all out of proportion, and the rig
has been smiled at by every nautical friend of mine who has ever looked
at it. Yet, worn-out and faulty as it is--inferior to the cheapest
miniature vessel nowadays in any toy-shop window--I hardly know a
possession of mine in this world that I would not sooner part with than
Uncle George's ship.

My life at the sea-side was a very happy one. I remained with my aunt
more than a year. My mother often came to see how I was going on, and
at first always brought my sister with her; but during the last eight
months of my stay Caroline never once appeared. I noticed also, at the
same period, a change in my mother's manner. She looked paler and more
anxious at each succeeding visit, and always had long conferences in
private with my aunt. At last she ceased to come and see us altogether,
and only wrote to know how my health was getting on. My father, too,
who had at the earlier periods of my absence from home traveled to
the sea-side to watch the progress of my recovery as often as his
professional engagements would permit, now kept away like my mother.
Even Uncle George, who had never been allowed a holiday to come and see
me, but who had hitherto often written and begged me to write to him,
broke off our correspondence.

I was naturally perplexed and amazed by these changes, and persecuted
my aunt to tell me the reason of them. At first she tried to put me off
with excuses; then she admitted that there was trouble in our house; and
finally she confessed that the trouble was caused by the illness of
my sister. When I inquired what that illness was, my aunt said it was
useless to attempt to explain it to me. I next applied to the servants.
One of them was less cautious than my aunt, and answered my question,
but in terms that I could not comprehend. After much explanation, I was
made to understand that "something was growing on my sister's neck that
would spoil her beauty forever, and perhaps kill her, if it could not be
got rid of." How well I remember the shudder of horror that ran through
me at the vague idea of this deadly "something"! A fearful, awe-struck
curiosity to see what Caroline's illness was with my own eyes troubled
my inmost heart, and I begged to be allowed to go home and help to nurse
her. The request was, it is almost needless to say, refused.

Weeks passed away, and still I heard nothing, except that my sister
continued to be ill. One day I privately wrote a letter to Uncle George,
asking him, in my childish way, to come and tell me about Caroline's
illness.

I knew where the post-office was, and slipped out in the morning
unobserved and dropped my letter in the box. I stole home again by the
garden, and climbed in at the window of a back parlor on the ground
floor. The room above was my aunt's bedchamber, and the moment I was
inside the house I heard moans and loud convulsive sobs proceeding from
it. My aunt was a singularly quiet, composed woman. I could not
imagine that the loud sobbing and moaning came from her, and I ran
down terrified into the kitchen to ask the servants who was crying so
violently in my aunt's room.

I found the housemaid and the cook talking together in whispers with
serious faces. They started when they saw me as if I had been a grown-up
master who had caught them neglecting their work.

"He's too young to feel it much," I heard one say to the other. "So far
as he is concerned, it seems like a mercy that it happened no later."

In a few minutes they had told me the worst. It was indeed my aunt who
had been crying in the bedroom. Caroline was dead.

I felt the blow more severely than the servants or anyone else about me
supposed. Still I was a child in years, and I had the blessed elasticity
of a child's nature. If I had been older I might have been too much
absorbed in grief to observe my aunt so closely as I did, when she was
composed enough to see me later in the day.

I was not surprised by the swollen state of her eyes, the paleness of
her cheeks, or the fresh burst of tears that came from her when she took
me in her arms at meeting. But I was both amazed and perplexed by the
look of terror that I detected in her face. It was natural enough that
she should grieve and weep over my sister's death, but why should she
have that frightened look as if some other catastrophe had happened?

I asked if there was any more dreadful news from home besides the news
of Caroline's death.

My aunt, said No in a strange, stifled voice, and suddenly turned her
face from me. Was my father dead? No. My mother? No. Uncle George? My
aunt trembled all over as she said No to that also, and bade me cease
asking any more questions. She was not fit to bear them yet she said,
and signed to the servant to lead me out of the room.

The next day I was told that I was to go home after the funeral, and was
taken out toward evening by the housemaid, partly for a walk, partly to
be measured for my mourning clothes. After we had left the tailor's,
I persuaded the girl to extend our walk for some distance along the
sea-beach, telling her, as we went, every little anecdote connected with
my lost sister that came tenderly back to my memory in those first days
of sorrow. She was so interested in hearing and I in speaking that we
let the sun go down before we thought of turning back.

The evening was cloudy, and it got on from dusk to dark by the time we
approached the town again. The housemaid was rather nervous at finding
herself alone with me on the beach, and once or twice looked behind her
distrustfully as we went on. Suddenly she squeezed my hand hard, and
said:

"Let's get up on the cliff as fast as we can."

The words were hardly out of her mouth before I heard footsteps behind
me--a man came round quickly to my side, snatched me away from the girl,
and, catching me up in his arms without a word, covered my face with
kisses. I knew he was crying, because my cheeks were instantly wet with
his tears; but it was too dark for me to see who he was, or even how he
was dressed. He did not, I should think, hold me half a minute in his
arms. The housemaid screamed for help. I was put down gently on the
sand, and the strange man instantly disappeared in the darkness.

When this extraordinary adventure was related to my aunt, she seemed
at first merely bewildered at hearing of it; but in a moment more there
came a change over her face, as if she had suddenly recollected or
thought of something. She turned deadly pale, and said, in a hurried
way, very unusual with her:

"Never mind; don't talk about it any more. It was only a mischievous
trick to frighten you, I dare say. Forget all about it, my dear--forget
all about it."

It was easier to give this advice than to make me follow it. For many
nights after, I thought of nothing but the strange man who had kissed me
and cried over me.

Who could he be? Somebody who loved me very much, and who was very
sorry. My childish logic carried me to that length. But when I tried to
think over all the grown-up gentlemen who loved me very much, I could
never get on, to my own satisfaction, beyond my father and my Uncle
George.



CHAPTER II.

I was taken home on the appointed day to suffer the trial--a hard one
even at my tender years--of witnessing my mother's passionate grief and
my father's mute despair. I remember that the scene of our first meeting
after Caroline's death was wisely and considerately shortened by my
aunt, who took me out of the room. She seemed to have a confused desire
to keep me from leaving her after the door had closed behind us; but I
broke away and ran downstairs to the surgery, to go and cry for my lost
playmate with the sharer of all our games, Uncle George.

I opened the surgery door and could see nobody. I dried my tears and
looked all round the room--it was empty. I ran upstairs again to Uncle
George's garret bedroom--he was not there; his cheap hairbrush and old
cast-off razor-case that had belonged to my grandfather were not on the
dressing-table. Had he got some other bedroom? I went out on the landing
and called softly, with an unaccountable terror and sinking at my heart:

"Uncle George!"

Nobody answered; but my aunt came hastily up the garret stairs.

"Hush!" she said. "You must never call that name out here again!"

She stopped suddenly, and looked as if her own words had frightened her.

"Is Uncle George dead?" I asked. My aunt turned red and pale, and
stammered.

I did not wait to hear what she said. I brushed past her, down the
stairs. My heart was bursting--my flesh felt cold. I ran breathlessly
and recklessly into the room where my father and mother had received me.
They were both sitting there still. I ran up to them, wringing my hands,
and crying out in a passion of tears:

"Is Uncle George dead?"

My mother gave a scream that terrified me into instant silence and
stillness. My father looked at her for a moment, rang the bell that
summoned the maid, then seized me roughly by the arm and dragged me out
of the room.

He took me down into the study, seated himself in his accustomed chair,
and put me before him between his knees. His lips were awfully white,
and I felt his two hands, as they grasped my shoulders, shaking
violently.

"You are never to mention the name of Uncle George again," he said, in
a quick, angry, trembling whisper. "Never to me, never to your
mother, never to your aunt, never to anybody in this world!
Never--never--never!"

The repetition of the word terrified me even more than the suppressed
vehemence with which he spoke. He saw that I was frightened, and
softened his manner a little before he went on.

"You will never see Uncle George again," he said. "Your mother and I
love you dearly; but if you forget what I have told you, you will be
sent away from home. Never speak that name again--mind, never! Now kiss
me, and go away."

How his lips trembled--and oh, how cold they felt on mine!

I shrunk out of the room the moment he had kissed me, and went and hid
myself in the garden.

"Uncle George is gone. I am never to see him any more; I am never to
speak of him again"--those were the words I repeated to myself, with
indescribable terror and confusion, the moment I was alone. There was
something unspeakably horrible to my young mind in this mystery which
I was commanded always to respect, and which, so far as I then knew,
I could never hope to see revealed. My father, my mother, my aunt, all
appeared to be separated from me now by some impassable barrier. Home
seemed home no longer with Caroline dead, Uncle George gone, and a
forbidden subject of talk perpetually and mysteriously interposing
between my parents and me.

Though I never infringed the command my father had given me in his study
(his words and looks, and that dreadful scream of my mother's, which
seemed to be still ringing in my ears, were more than enough to insure
my obedience), I also never lost the secret desire to penetrate the
darkness which clouded over the fate of Uncle George.

For two years I remained at home and discovered nothing. If I asked the
servants about my uncle, they could only tell me that one morning he
disappeared from the house. Of the members of my father's family I could
make no inquiries. They lived far away, and never came to see us; and
the idea of writing to them, at my age and in my position, was out of
the question. My aunt was as unapproachably silent as my father and
mother; but I never forgot how her face had altered when she reflected
for a moment after hearing of my extraordinary adventure while going
home with the servant over the sands at night. The more I thought of
that change of countenance in connection with what had occurred on my
return to my father's house, the more certain I felt that the stranger
who had kissed me and wept over me must have been no other than Uncle
George.

At the end of my two years at home I was sent to sea in the merchant
navy by my own earnest desire. I had always determined to be a sailor
from the time when I first went to stay with my aunt at the sea-side,
and I persisted long enough in my resolution to make my parents
recognize the necessity of acceding to my wishes.

My new life delighted me, and I remained away on foreign stations more
than four years. When I at length returned home, it was to find a new
affliction darkening our fireside. My father had died on the very day
when I sailed for my return voyage to England.

Absence and change of scene had in no respect weakened my desire to
penetrate the mystery of Uncle George's disappearance. My mother's
health was so delicate that I hesitated for some time to approach the
forbidden subject in her presence. When I at last ventured to refer to
it, suggesting to her that any prudent reserve which might have been
necessary while I was a child, need no longer be persisted in now that I
was growing to be a young man, she fell into a violent fit of trembling,
and commanded me to say no more. It had been my father's will, she said,
that the reserve to which I referred should be always adopted toward me;
he had not authorized her, before he died, to speak more openly; and,
now that he was gone, she would not so much as think of acting on her
own unaided judgment. My aunt said the same thing in effect when I
appealed to her. Determined not to be discouraged even yet, I undertook
a journey, ostensibly to pay my respects to my father's family, but with
the secret intention of trying what I could learn in that quarter on the
subject of Uncle George.

My investigations led to some results, though they were by no means
satisfactory. George had always been looked upon with something like
contempt by his handsome sisters and his prosperous brothers, and he
had not improved his position in the family by his warm advocacy of his
brother's cause at the time of my father's marriage. I found that my
uncle's surviving relatives now spoke of him slightingly and carelessly.
They assured me that they had never heard from him, and that they knew
nothing about him, except that he had gone away to settle, as they
supposed, in some foreign place, after having behaved very basely and
badly to my father. He had been traced to London, where he had sold out
of the funds the small share of money which he had inherited after his
father's death, and he had been seen on the deck of a packet bound for
France later on the same day. Beyond this nothing was known about him.
In what the alleged baseness of his behavior had consisted none of his
brothers and sisters could tell me. My father had refused to pain
them by going into particulars, not only at the time of his brother's
disappearance, but afterward, whenever the subject was mentioned. George
had always been the black sheep of the flock, and he must have been
conscious of his own baseness, or he would certainly have written to
explain and to justify himself.

Such were the particulars which I gleaned during my visit to my father's
family. To my mind, they tended rather to deepen than to reveal the
mystery. That such a gentle, docile, affectionate creature as Uncle
George should have injured the brother he loved by word or deed at any
period of their intercourse, seemed incredible; but that he should have
been guilty of an act of baseness at the very time when my sister
was dying was simply and plainly impossible. And yet there was the
incomprehensible fact staring me in the face that the death of Caroline
and the disappearance of Uncle George had taken place in the same week!
Never did I feel more daunted and bewildered by the family secret than
after I had heard all the particulars in connection with it that my
father's relatives had to tell me.

I may pass over the events of the next few years of my life briefly
enough.

My nautical pursuits filled up all my time, and took me far away from
my country and my friends. But, whatever I did, and wherever I went, the
memory of Uncle George, and the desire to penetrate the mystery of his
disappearance, haunted me like familiar spirits. Often, in the lonely
watches of the night at sea, did I recall the dark evening on the beach,
the strange man's hurried embrace, the startling sensation of feeling
his tears on my cheeks, the disappearance of him before I had breath
or self-possession enough to say a word. Often did I think over the
inexplicable events that followed, when I had returned, after my
sister's funeral, to my father's house; and oftener still did I puzzle
my brains vainly, in the attempt to form some plan for inducing my
mother or my aunt to disclose the secret which they had hitherto kept
from me so perseveringly. My only chance of knowing what had really
happened to Uncle George, my only hope of seeing him again, rested with
those two near and dear relatives. I despaired of ever getting my mother
to speak on the forbidden subject after what had passed between us, but
I felt more sanguine about my prospects of ultimately inducing my aunt
to relax in her discretion. My anticipations, however, in this direction
were not destined to be fulfilled. On my next visit to England I found
my aunt prostrated by a paralytic attack, which deprived her of the
power of speech. She died soon afterward in my arms, leaving me her sole
heir. I searched anxiously among her papers for some reference to the
family mystery, but found no clew to guide me. All my mother's letters
to her sister at the time of Caroline's illness and death had been
destroyed.



CHAPTER III.

MORE years passed; my mother followed my aunt to the grave, and still
I was as far as ever from making any discoveries in relation to Uncle
George. Shortly after the period of this last affliction my health gave
way, and I departed, by my doctor's advice, to try some baths in the
south of France.

I traveled slowly to my destination, turning aside from the direct road,
and stopping wherever I pleased. One evening, when I was not more than
two or three days' journey from the baths to which I was bound, I was
struck by the picturesque situation of a little town placed on the brow
of a hill at some distance from the main road, and resolved to have a
nearer look at the place, with a view to stopping there for the night,
if it pleased me. I found the principal inn clean and quiet--ordered
my bed there--and, after dinner, strolled out to look at the church. No
thought of Uncle George was in my mind when I entered the building; and
yet, at that very moment, chance was leading me to the discovery which,
for so many years past, I had vainly endeavored to make--the discovery
which I had given up as hopeless since the day of my mother's death.

I found nothing worth notice in the church, and was about to leave it
again, when I caught a glimpse of a pretty view through a side door, and
stopped to admire it.

The churchyard formed the foreground, and below it the hill-side sloped
away gently into the plain, over which the sun was setting in full
glory. The cure of the church was reading his breviary, walking up and
down a gravel-path that parted the rows of graves. In the course of my
wanderings I had learned to speak French as fluently as most Englishmen,
and when the priest came near me I said a few words in praise of
the view, and complimented him on the neatness and prettiness of
the churchyard. He answered with great politeness, and we got into
conversation together immediately.

As we strolled along the gravel-walk, my attention was attracted by one
of the graves standing apart from the rest. The cross at the head of it
differed remarkably, in some points of appearance, from the crosses on
the other graves. While all the rest had garlands hung on them, this
one cross was quite bare; and, more extraordinary still, no name was
inscribed on it.

The priest, observing that I stopped to look at the grave, shook his
head and sighed.

"A countryman of yours is buried there," he said. "I was present at his
death. He had borne the burden of a great sorrow among us, in this town,
for many weary years, and his conduct had taught us to respect and pity
him with all our hearts."

"How is it that his name is not inscribed over his grave?" I inquired.

"It was suppressed by his own desire," answered the priest, with some
little hesitation. "He confessed to me in his last moments that he had
lived here under an assumed name. I asked his real name, and he told
it to me, with the particulars of his sad story. He had reasons for
desiring to be forgotten after his death. Almost the last words he spoke
were, 'Let my name die with me.' Almost the last request he made was
that I would keep that name a secret from all the world excepting only
one person."

"Some relative, I suppose?" said I.

"Yes--a nephew," said the priest.

The moment the last word was out of his mouth, my heart gave a strange
answering bound. I suppose I must have changed color also, for the cure
looked at me with sudden attention and interest.

"A nephew," the priest went on, "whom he had loved like his own child.
He told me that if this nephew ever traced him to his burial-place,
and asked about him, I was free in that case to disclose all I knew. 'I
should like my little Charley to know the truth,' he said. 'In spite of
the difference in our ages, Charley and I were playmates years ago.'"

My heart beat faster, and I felt a choking sensation at the throat the
moment I heard the priest unconsciously mention my Christian name in
mentioning the dying man's last words.

As soon as I could steady my voice and feel certain of my
self-possession, I communicated my family name to the cure, and asked
him if that was not part of the secret that he had been requested to
preserve.

He started back several steps, and clasped his hands amazedly.

"Can it be?" he said, in low tones, gazing at me earnestly, with
something like dread in his face.

I gave him my passport, and looked away toward the grave. The tears
came into my eyes as the recollections of past days crowded back on me.
Hardly knowing what I did, I knelt down by the grave, and smoothed the
grass over it with my hand. Oh, Uncle George, why not have told your
secret to your old playmate? Why leave him to find you _here?_

The priest raised me gently, and begged me to go with him into his own
house. On our way there, I mentioned persons and places that I thought
my uncle might have spoken of, in order to satisfy my companion that
I was really the person I represented myself to be. By the time we had
entered his little parlor, and had sat down alone in it, we were almost
like old friends together.

I thought it best that I should begin by telling all that I have related
here on the subject of Uncle George, and his disappearance from home. My
host listened with a very sad face, and said, when I had done:

"I can understand your anxiety to know what I am authorized to tell
you, but pardon me if I say first that there are circumstances in your
uncle's story which it may pain you to hear--" He stopped suddenly.

"Which it may pain me to hear as a nephew?" I asked.

"No," said the priest, looking away from me, "as a son."

I gratefully expressed my sense of the delicacy and kindness which had
prompted my companion's warning, but I begged him, at the same time, to
keep me no longer in suspense and to tell me the stern truth, no matter
how painfully it might affect me as a listener.

"In telling me all you knew about what you term the Family Secret,"
said the priest, "you have mentioned as a strange coincidence that your
sister's death and your uncle's disappearance took place at the same
time. Did you ever suspect what cause it was that occasioned your
sister's death?"

"I only knew what my father told me, and what all our friends
believed--that she had a tumor in the neck, or, as I sometimes heard it
stated, from the effect on her constitution of a tumor in the neck."

"She died under an operation for the removal of that tumor," said the
priest, in low tones; "and the operator was your Uncle George."

In those few words all the truth burst upon me.

"Console yourself with the thought that the long martyrdom of his life
is over," the priest went on. "He rests; he is at peace. He and his
little darling understand each other, and are happy now. That thought
bore him up to the last on his death-bed. He always spoke of your sister
as his 'little darling.' He firmly believed that she was waiting to
forgive and console him in the other world--and who shall say he was
deceived in that belief?"

Not I! Not anyone who has ever loved and suffered, surely!

"It was out of the depths of his self-sacrificing love for the child
that he drew the fatal courage to undertake the operation," continued
the priest. "Your father naturally shrank from attempting it. His
medical brethren whom he consulted all doubted the propriety of taking
any measures for the removal of the tumor, in the particular condition
and situation of it when they were called in. Your uncle alone differed
with them. He was too modest a man to say so, but your mother found
it out. The deformity of her beautiful child horrified her. She was
desperate enough to catch at the faintest hope of remedying it that
anyone might hold out to her; and she persuaded your uncle to put his
opinion to the proof. Her horror at the deformity of the child, and her
despair at the prospect of its lasting for life, seem to have utterly
blinded her to all natural sense of the danger of the operation. It
is hard to know how to say it to you, her son, but it must be told,
nevertheless, that one day, when your father was out, she untruly
informed your uncle that his brother had consented to the performance of
the operation, and that he had gone purposely out of the house because
he had not nerve enough to stay and witness it. After that, your uncle
no longer hesitated. He had no fear of results, provided he could be
certain of his own courage. All he dreaded was the effect on him of his
love for the child when he first found himself face to face with the
dreadful necessity of touching her skin with the knife."

I tried hard to control myself, but I could not repress a shudder at
those words.

"It is useless to shock you by going into particulars," said the priest,
considerately. "Let it be enough if I say that your uncle's fortitude
failed to support him when he wanted it most. His love for the child
shook the firm hand which had never trembled before. In a word, the
operation failed. Your father returned, and found his child dying.
The frenzy of his despair when the truth was told him carried him to
excesses which it shocks me to mention--excesses which began in his
degrading his brother by a blow, which ended in his binding himself
by an oath to make that brother suffer public punishment for his fatal
rashness in a court of law. Your uncle was too heartbroken by what had
happened to feel those outrages as some men might have felt them. He
looked for one moment at his sister-in-law (I do not like to say your
mother, considering what I have now to tell you), to see if she would
acknowledge that she had encouraged him to attempt the operation, and
that she had deceived him in saying that he had his brother's permission
to try it. She was silent, and when she spoke, it was to join her
husband in denouncing him as the murderer of their child. Whether fear
of your father's anger, or revengeful indignation against your uncle
most actuated her, I cannot presume to inquire in your presence. I can
only state facts."

The priest paused and looked at me anxiously. I could not speak to him
at that moment--I could only encourage him to proceed by pressing his
hand.

He resumed in these terms:

"Meanwhile, your uncle turned to your father, and spoke the last words
he was ever to address to his eldest brother in this world. He said, 'I
have deserved the worst your anger can inflict on me, but I will spare
you the scandal of bringing me to justice in open court. The law, if it
found me guilty, could at the worst but banish me from my country and my
friends. I will go of my own accord. God is my witness that I honestly
believed I could save the child from deformity and suffering. I have
risked all and lost all. My heart and spirit are broken. I am fit for
nothing but to go and hide myself, and my shame and misery, from all
eyes that have ever looked on me. I shall never come back, never expect
your pity or forgiveness. If you think less harshly of me when I am
gone, keep secret what has happened; let no other lips say of me
what yours and your wife's have said. I shall think that forbearance
atonement enough--atonement greater than I have deserved. Forget me in
this world. May we meet in another, where the secrets of all hearts are
opened, and where the child who is gone before may make peace between
us!' He said those words and went out. Your father never saw him or
heard from him again."

I knew the reason now why my father had never confided the truth to
anyone, his own family included. My mother had evidently confessed
all to her sister under the seal of secrecy, and there the dreadful
disclosure had been arrested.

"Your uncle told me," the priest continued, "that before he left England
he took leave of you by stealth, in a place you were staying at by the
sea-side. He had not the heart to quit his country and his friends
forever without kissing you for the last time. He followed you in the
dark, and caught you up in his arms, and left you again before you had a
chance of discovering him. The next day he quitted England."

"For this place?" I asked.

"Yes. He had spent a week here once with a student friend at the time
when he was a pupil in the Hotel Dieu, and to this place he returned to
hide, to suffer, and to die. We all saw that he was a man crushed and
broken by some great sorrow, and we respected him and his affliction. He
lived alone, and only came out of doors toward evening, when he used to
sit on the brow of the hill yonder, with his head on his hand, looking
toward England. That place seemed a favorite with him, and he is buried
close by it. He revealed the story of his past life to no living soul
here but me, and to me he only spoke when his last hour was approaching.
What he had suffered during his long exile no man can presume to say.
I, who saw more of him than anyone, never heard a word of complaint fall
from his lips. He had the courage of the martyrs while he lived, and
the resignation of the saints when he died. Just at the last his mind
wandered. He said he saw his little darling waiting by the bedside to
lead him away, and he died with a smile on his face--the first I had
ever seen there."

The priest ceased, and we went out together in the mournful twilight,
and stood for a little while on the brow of the hill where Uncle George
used to sit, with his face turned toward England. How my heart ached
for him as I thought of what he must have suffered in the silence and
solitude of his long exile! Was it well for me that I had discovered the
Family Secret at last? I have sometimes thought not. I have sometimes
wished that the darkness had never been cleared away which once hid from
me the fate of Uncle George.

THE THIRD DAY.

FINE again. Our guest rode out, with her ragged little groom, as usual.
There was no news yet in the paper--that is to say, no news of George or
his ship.

On this day Morgan completed his second story, and in two or three days
more I expected to finish the last of my own contributions. Owen was
still behindhand and still despondent.

The lot drawing to-night was Five. This proved to be the number of the
first of Morgan's stories, which he had completed before we began the
readings. His second story, finished this day, being still uncorrected
by me, could not yet be added to the common stock.

On being informed that it had come to his turn to occupy the attention
of the company, Morgan startled us by immediately objecting to the
trouble of reading his own composition, and by coolly handing it over
to me, on the ground that my numerous corrections had made it, to all
intents and purposes, my story.

Owen and I both remonstrated; and Jessie, mischievously persisting in
her favorite jest at Morgan's expense, entreated that he would read, if
it was only for her sake. Finding that we were all determined, and all
against him, he declared that, rather than hear our voices any longer,
he would submit to the minor inconvenience of listening to his own.
Accordingly, he took his manuscript back again, and, with an air of
surly resignation, spread it open before him.

"I don't think you will like this story, miss," he began, addressing
Jessie, "but I shall read it, nevertheless, with the greatest pleasure.
It begins in a stable--it gropes its way through a dream--it keeps
company with a hostler--and it stops without an end. What do you think
of that?"

After favoring his audience with this promising preface, Morgan indulged
himself in a chuckle of supreme satisfaction, and then began to read,
without wasting another preliminary word on any one of us.




BROTHER MORGAN'S STORY of THE DREAM-WOMAN.



CHAPTER I.


I HAD not been settled much more than six weeks in my country practice
when I was sent for to a neighboring town, to consult with the resident
medical man there on a case of very dangerous illness.

My horse had come down with me at the end of a long ride the night
before, and had hurt himself, luckily, much more than he had hurt
his master. Being deprived of the animal's services, I started for my
destination by the coach (there were no railways at that time), and I
hoped to get back again, toward the afternoon, in the same way.

After the consultation was over, I went to the principal inn of the town
to wait for the coach. When it came up it was full inside and out. There
was no resource left me but to get home as cheaply as I could by hiring
a gig. The price asked for this accommodation struck me as being so
extortionate, that I determined to look out for an inn of inferior
pretensions, and to try if I could not make a better bargain with a less
prosperous establishment.

I soon found a likely-looking house, dingy and quiet, with an
old-fashioned sign, that had evidently not been repainted for many years
past. The landlord, in this case, was not above making a small profit,
and as soon as we came to terms he rang the yard-bell to order the gig.

"Has Robert not come back from that errand?" asked the landlord,
appealing to the waiter who answered the bell.

"No, sir, he hasn't."

"Well, then, you must wake up Isaac."

"Wake up Isaac!" I repeated; "that sounds rather odd. Do your hostlers
go to bed in the daytime?"

"This one does," said the landlord, smiling to himself in rather a
strange way.

"And dreams too," added the waiter; "I shan't forget the turn it gave me
the first time I heard him."

"Never you mind about that," retorted the proprietor; "you go and rouse
Isaac up. The gentleman's waiting for his gig."

The landlord's manner and the waiter's manner expressed a great deal
more than they either of them said. I began to suspect that I might be
on the trace of something professionally interesting to me as a medical
man, and I thought I should like to look at the hostler before the
waiter awakened him.

"Stop a minute," I interposed; "I have rather a fancy for seeing this
man before you wake him up. I'm a doctor; and if this queer sleeping and
dreaming of his comes from anything wrong in his brain, I may be able to
tell you what to do with him."

"I rather think you will find his complaint past all doctoring, sir,"
said the landlord; "but, if you would like to see him, you're welcome,
I'm sure."

He led the way across a yard and down a passage to the stables, opened
one of the doors, and, waiting outside himself, told me to look in.

I found myself in a two-stall stable. In one of the stalls a horse
was munching his corn; in the other an old man was lying asleep on the
litter.

I stooped and looked at him attentively. It was a withered, woe-begone
face. The eyebrows were painfully contracted; the mouth was fast set,
and drawn down at the corners.

The hollow wrinkled cheeks, and the scanty grizzled hair, told their
own tale of some past sorrow or suffering. He was drawing his breath
convulsively when I first looked at him, and in a moment more he began
to talk in his sleep.

"Wake up!" I heard him say, in a quick whisper, through his clinched
teeth. "Wake up there! Murder!"

He moved one lean arm slowly till it rested over his throat, shuddered a
little, and turned on his straw. Then the arm left his throat, the
hand stretched itself out, and clutched at the side toward which he
had turned, as if he fancied himself to be grasping at the edge of
something. I saw his lips move, and bent lower over him. He was still
talking in his sleep.

"Light gray eyes," he murmured, "and a droop in the left eyelid; flaxen
hair, with a gold-yellow streak in it--all right, mother--fair white
arms, with a down on them--little lady's hand, with a reddish look under
the finger nails. The knife--always the cursed knife--first on one side,
then on the other. Aha! you she-devil, where's the knife?"

At the last word his voice rose, and he grew restless on a sudden. I
saw him shudder on the straw; his withered face became distorted, and
he threw up both his hands with a quick hysterical gasp. They struck
against the bottom of the manger under which he lay, and the blow
awakened him. I had just time to slip through the door and close it
before his eyes were fairly open, and his senses his own again.

"Do you know anything about that man's past life?" I said to the
landlord.

"Yes, sir, I know pretty well all about it," was the answer, "and an
uncommon queer story it is. Most people don't believe it. It's true,
though, for all that. Why, just look at him," continued the landlord,
opening the stable door again. "Poor devil! he's so worn out with his
restless nights that he's dropped back into his sleep already."

"Don't wake him," I said; "I'm in no hurry for the gig. Wait till the
other man comes back from his errand; and, in the meantime, suppose I
have some lunch and a bottle of sherry, and suppose you come and help me
to get through it?"

The heart of mine host, as I had anticipated, warmed to me over his own
wine. He soon became communicative on the subject of the man asleep in
the stable, and by little and little I drew the whole story out of him.
Extravagant and incredible as the events must appear to everybody, they
are related here just as I heard them and just as they happened.



CHAPTER II.

SOME years ago there lived in the suburbs of a large seaport town on
the west coast of England a man in humble circumstances, by name Isaac
Scatchard. His means of subsistence were derived from any employment
that he could get as an hostler, and occasionally, when times went well
with him, from temporary engagements in service as stable-helper in
private houses. Though a faithful, steady, and honest man, he got on
badly in his calling. His ill luck was proverbial among his neighbors.
He was always missing good opportunities by no fault of his own, and
always living longest in service with amiable people who were not
punctual payers of wages. "Unlucky Isaac" was his nickname in his own
neighborhood, and no one could say that he did not richly deserve it.

With far more than one man's fair share of adversity to endure, Isaac
had but one consolation to support him, and that was of the dreariest
and most negative kind. He had no wife and children to increase his
anxieties and add to the bitterness of his various failures in life.
It might have been from mere insensibility, or it might have been from
generous unwillingness to involve another in his own unlucky destiny,
but the fact undoubtedly was, that he had arrived at the middle term of
life without marrying, and, what is much more remarkable, without once
exposing himself, from eighteen to eight-and-thirty, to the genial
imputation of ever having had a sweetheart.

When he was out of service he lived alone with his widowed mother.
Mrs. Scatchard was a woman above the average in her lowly station as to
capacity and manners. She had seen better days, as the phrase is, but
she never referred to them in the presence of curious visitors;
and, though perfectly polite to every one who approached her, never
cultivated any intimacies among her neighbors. She contrived to provide,
hardly enough, for her simple wants by doing rough work for the tailors,
and always managed to keep a decent home for her son to return to
whenever his ill luck drove him out helpless into the world.

One bleak autumn when Isaac was getting on fast toward forty and when
he was as usual out of place through no fault of his own, he set forth,
from his mother's cottage on a long walk inland to a gentleman's seat
where he had heard that a stable-helper was required.

It wanted then but two days of his birthday; and Mrs. Scatchard, with
her usual fondness, made him promise, before he started, that he would
be back in time to keep that anniversary with her, in as festive a way
as their poor means would allow. It was easy for him to comply with this
request, even supposing he slept a night each way on the road.

He was to start from home on Monday morning, and, whether he got the new
place or not, he was to be back for his birthday dinner on Wednesday at
two o'clock.

Arriving at his destination too late on the Monday night to make
application for the stablehelper's place, he slept at the village
inn, and in good time on the Tuesday morning presented himself at the
gentleman's house to fill the vacant situation. Here again his ill luck
pursued him as inexorably as ever. The excellent written testimonials to
his character which he was able to produce availed him nothing; his long
walk had been taken in vain: only the day before the stable-helper's
place had been given to another man.

Isaac accepted this new disappointment resignedly and as a matter of
course. Naturally slow in capacity, he had the bluntness of sensibility
and phlegmatic patience of disposition which frequently distinguish
men with sluggishly-working mental powers. He thanked the gentleman's
steward with his usual quiet civility for granting him an interview, and
took his departure with no appearance of unusual depression in his face
or manner.

Before starting on his homeward walk he made some inquiries at the
inn, and ascertained that he might save a few miles on his return by
following the new road. Furnished with full instructions, several times
repeated, as to the various turnings he was to take, he set forth on his
homeward journey and walked on all day with only one stoppage for bread
and cheese. Just as it was getting toward dark, the rain came on and the
wind began to rise, and he found himself, to make matters worse, in a
part of the country with which he was entirely unacquainted, though
he knew himself to be some fifteen miles from home. The first house he
found to inquire at was a lonely roadside inn, standing on the outskirts
of a thick wood. Solitary as the place looked, it was welcome to a lost
man who was also hungry, thirsty, footsore and wet. The landlord was
civil and respectable-looking, and the price he asked for a bed was
reasonable enough. Isaac therefore decided on stopping comfortably at
the inn for that night.

He was constitutionally a temperate man.

His supper consisted of two rashers of bacon, a slice of home-made bread
and a pint of ale. He did not go to bed immediately after this moderate
meal, but sat up with the landlord, talking about his bad prospects
and his long run of ill-luck, and diverging from these topics to the
subjects of horse-flesh and racing. Nothing was said either by himself,
his host, or the few laborers who strayed into the tap-room, which
could, in the slightest degree, excite the very small and very dull
imaginative faculty which Isaac Scatchard possessed.

At a little after eleven the house was closed. Isaac went round with
the landlord and held the candle while the doors and lower windows were
being secured. He noticed with surprise the strength of the bolts and
bars, and iron-sheathed shutters.

"You see, we are rather lonely here," said the landlord. "We never have
had any attempts made to break in yet, but it's always as well to be on
the safe side. When nobody is sleeping here, I am the only man in the
house. My wife and daughter are timid, and the servant-girl takes after
her missuses. Another glass of ale before you turn in? No! Well, how
such a sober man as you comes to be out of place is more than I can
make out, for one. Here's where you're to sleep. You're our only lodger
to-night, and I think you'll say my missus has done her best to make you
comfortable. You're quite sure you won't have another glass of ale? Very
well. Good-night."

It was half-past eleven by the clock in the passage as they went
upstairs to the bedroom, the window of which looked on to the wood at
the back of the house.

Isaac locked the door, set his candle on the chest of drawers, and
wearily got ready for bed.

The bleak autumn wind was still blowing, and the solemn, monotonous,
surging moan of it in the wood was dreary and awful to hear through the
night-silence. Isaac felt strangely wakeful.

He resolved, as he lay down in bed, to keep the candle alight until he
began to grow sleepy, for there was something unendurably depressing in
the bare idea of lying awake in the darkness, listening to the dismal,
ceaseless moaning of the wind in the wood.

Sleep stole on him before he was aware of it. His eyes closed, and
he fell off insensibly to rest without having so much as thought of
extinguishing the candle.

The first sensation of which he was conscious after sinking into slumber
was a strange shivering that ran through him suddenly from head to foot,
and a dreadful sinking pain at the heart, such as he had never felt
before. The shivering only disturbed his slumbers; the pain woke him
instantly. In one moment he passed from a state of sleep to a state of
wakefulness--his eyes wide open--his mental perceptions cleared on a
sudden, as if by a miracle.

The candle had burned down nearly to the last morsel of tallow, but
the top of the unsnuffed wick had just fallen off, and the light in the
little room was, for the moment, fair and full.

Between the foot of his bed and the closed door there stood a woman with
a knife in her hand, looking at him.

He was stricken speechless with terror, but he did not lose the
preternatural clearness of his faculties, and he never took his eyes off
the woman. She said not a word as they stared each other in the face,
but she began to move slowly toward the left-hand side of the bed.

His eyes followed her. She was a fair, fine woman, with yellowish flaxen
hair and light gray eyes, with a droop in the left eyelid. He noticed
those things and fixed them on his mind before she was round at the side
of the bed. Speechless, with no expression in her face, with no noise
following her footfall, she came closer and closer--stopped--and slowly
raised the knife. He laid his right arm over his throat to save it; but,
as he saw the knife coming down, threw his hand across the bed to
the right side, and jerked his body over that way just as the knife
descended on the mattress within an inch of his shoulder.

His eyes fixed on her arm and hand as she slowly drew her knife out of
the bed: a white, well-shaped arm, with a pretty down lying lightly over
the fair skin--a delicate lady's hand, with the crowning beauty of a
pink flush under and round the finger-nails.

She drew the knife out, and passed back again slowly to the foot of
the bed; stopped there for a moment looking at him; then came on--still
speechless, still with no expression on the blank, beautiful face, still
with no sound following the stealthy footfalls--came on to the right
side of the bed, where he now lay.

As she approached, she raised the knife again, and he drew himself away
to the left side. She struck, as before, right into the mattress, with
a deliberate, perpendicularly downward action of the arm. This time his
eyes wandered from her to the knife. It was like the large clasp-knives
which he had often seen laboring men use to cut their bread and bacon
with. Her delicate little fingers did not conceal more than two-thirds
of the handle: he noticed that it was made of buck-horn, clean and
shining as the blade was, and looking like new.

For the second time she drew the knife out, concealed it in the wide
sleeve of her gown, then stopped by the bedside, watching him. For an
instant he saw her standing in that position, then the wick of the spent
candle fell over into the socket; the flame diminished to a little blue
point, and the room grew dark.

A moment, or less, if possible, passed so, and then the wick flamed up,
smokingly, for the last time. His eyes were still looking eagerly over
the right-hand side of the bed when the final flash of light came, but
they discovered nothing. The fair woman with the knife was gone.

The conviction that he was alone again weakened the hold of the terror
that had struck him dumb up to this time. The preternatural sharpness
which the very intensity of his panic had mysteriously imparted to his
faculties left them suddenly. His brain grew confused--his heart beat
wildly--his ears opened for the first time since the appearance of the
woman to a sense of the woeful ceaseless moaning of the wind among the
trees. With the dreadful conviction of the reality of what he had seen
still strong within him, he leaped out of bed, and screaming "Murder!
Wake up, there! wake up!" dashed headlong through the darkness to the
door.

It was fast locked, exactly as he had left it on going to bed.

His cries on starting up had alarmed the house. He heard the terrified,
confused exclamations of women; he saw the master of the house
approaching along the passage with his burning rush-candle in one hand
and his gun in the other.

"What is it?" asked the landlord, breathlessly. Isaac could only answer
in a whisper. "A woman, with a knife in her hand," he gasped out. "In my
room--a fair, yellow-haired woman; she jobbed at me with the knife twice
over."

The landlord's pale cheeks grew paler. He looked at Isaac eagerly by the
flickering light of his candle, and his face began to get red again; his
voice altered, too, as well as his complexion.

"She seems to have missed you twice," he said.

"I dodged the knife as it came down," Isaac went on, in the same scared
whisper. "It struck the bed each time."

The landlord took his candle into the bedroom immediately. In less than
a minute he came out again into the passage in a violent passion.

"The devil fly away with you and your woman with the knife! There isn't
a mark in the bedclothes anywhere. What do you mean by coming into a
man's place and frightening his family out of their wits about a dream?"

"I'll leave your house," said Isaac, faintly. "Better out on the road,
in rain and dark, on my road home, than back again in that room, after
what I've seen in it. Lend me a light to get my clothes by, and tell me
what I'm to pay."

"Pay!" cried the landlord, leading the way with his light sulkily
into the bedroom. "You'll find your score on the slate when you go
downstairs. I wouldn't have taken you in for all the money you've got
about you if I'd known your dreaming, screeching ways beforehand. Look
at the bed. Where's the cut of a knife in it? Look at the window--is the
lock bursted? Look at the door (which I heard you fasten yourself)--is
it broke in? A murdering woman with a knife in my house! You ought to be
ashamed of yourself!"

Isaac answered not a word. He huddled on his clothes, and then they went
downstairs together.

"Nigh on twenty minutes past two!" said the landlord, as they passed
the clock. "A nice time in the morning to frighten honest people out of
their wits!"

Isaac paid his bill, and the landlord let him out at the front door,
asking, with a grin of contempt, as he undid the strong fastenings,
whether "the murdering woman got in that way."

They parted without a word on either side. The rain had ceased, but the
night was dark, and the wind bleaker than ever. Little did the darkness,
or the cold, or the uncertainty about the way home matter to Isaac. If
he had been turned out into a wilderness in a thunder-storm it would
have been a relief after what he had suffered in the bedroom of the inn.

What was the fair woman with the knife? The creature of a dream, or that
other creature from the unknown world called among men by the name of
ghost? He could make nothing of the mystery--had made nothing of it,
even when it was midday on Wednesday, and when he stood, at last, after
many times missing his road, once more on the doorstep of home.



CHAPTER III.

His mother came out eagerly to receive him.

His face told her in a moment that something was wrong.

"I've lost the place; but that's my luck. I dreamed an ill dream last
night, mother--or maybe I saw a ghost. Take it either way, it scared me
out of my senses, and I'm not my own man again yet."

"Isaac, your face frightens me. Come in to the fire--come in, and tell
mother all about it."

He was as anxious to tell as she was to hear; for it had been his
hope, all the way home, that his mother, with her quicker capacity and
superior knowledge, might be able to throw some light on the mystery
which he could not clear up for himself. His memory of the dream was
still mechanically vivid, though his thoughts were entirely confused by
it.

His mother's face grew paler and paler as he went on. She never
interrupted him by so much as a single word; but when he had done, she
moved her chair close to his, put her arm round his neck, and said to
him:

"Isaac, you dreamed your ill dream on this Wednesday morning. What time
was it when you saw the fair woman with the knife in her hand?" Isaac
reflected on what the landlord had said when they had passed by the
clock on his leaving the inn; allowed as nearly as he could for the time
that must have elapsed between the unlocking of his bedroom door and the
paying of his bill just before going away, and answered:

"Somewhere about two o'clock in the morning."

His mother suddenly quitted her hold of his neck, and struck her hands
together with a gesture of despair.

"This Wednesday is your birthday, Isaac, and two o'clock in the morning
was the time when you were born."

Isaac's capacities were not quick enough to catch the infection of his
mother's superstitious dread. He was amazed, and a little startled,
also, when she suddenly rose from her chair, opened her old
writing-desk, took pen, ink and paper, and then said to him:

"Your memory is but a poor one, Isaac, and, now I'm an old woman, mine's
not much better. I want all about this dream of yours to be as well
known to both of us, years hence, as it is now. Tell me over again all
you told me a minute ago, when you spoke of what the woman with the
knife looked like."

Isaac obeyed, and marveled much as he saw his mother carefully set down
on paper the very words that he was saying.

"Light gray eyes," she wrote, as they came to the descriptive part,
"with a droop in the left eyelid; flaxen hair, with a gold-yellow streak
in it; white arms, with a down upon them; little lady's hand, with
a reddish look about the finger nails; clasp-knife with a buck-horn
handle, that seemed as good as new." To these particulars Mrs. Scatchard
added the year, month, day of the week, and time in the morning when
the woman of the dream appeared to her son. She then locked up the paper
carefully in her writing-desk.

Neither on that day nor on any day after could her son induce her to
return to the matter of the dream. She obstinately kept her thoughts
about it to herself, and even refused to refer again to the paper in her
writing-desk. Ere long Isaac grew weary of attempting to make her break
her resolute silence; and time, which sooner or later wears out all
things, gradually wore out the impression produced on him by the dream.
He began by thinking of it carelessly, and he ended by not thinking of
it at all.

The result was the more easily brought about by the advent of some
important changes for the better in his prospects which commenced not
long after his terrible night's experience at the inn. He reaped at last
the reward of his long and patient suffering under adversity by getting
an excellent place, keeping it for seven years, and leaving it, on the
death of his master, not only with an excellent character, but also
with a comfortable annuity bequeathed to him as a reward for saving
his mistress's life in a carriage accident. Thus it happened that Isaac
Scatchard returned to his old mother, seven years after the time of the
dream at the inn, with an annual sum of money at his disposal sufficient
to keep them both in ease and independence for the rest of their lives.

The mother, whose health had been bad of late years, profited so much by
the care bestowed on her and by freedom from money anxieties, that when
Isaac's birthday came round she was able to sit up comfortably at table
and dine with him.

On that day, as the evening drew on, Mrs. Scatchard discovered that a
bottle of tonic medicine which she was accustomed to take, and in which
she had fancied that a dose or more was still left, happened to be
empty. Isaac immediately volunteered to go to the chemist's and get
it filled again. It was as rainy and bleak an autumn night as on the
memorable past occasion when he lost his way and slept at the road-side
inn.

On going into the chemist's shop he was passed hurriedly by a
poorly-dressed woman coming out of it. The glimpse he had of her
face struck him, and he looked back after her as she descended the
door-steps.

"You're noticing that woman?" said the chemist's apprentice behind the
counter. "It's my opinion there's something wrong with her. She's been
asking for laudanum to put to a bad tooth. Master's out for half an
hour, and I told her I wasn't allowed to sell poison to strangers in
his absence. She laughed in a queer way, and said she would come back
in half an hour. If she expects master to serve her, I think she'll be
disappointed. It's a case of suicide, sir, if ever there was one yet."

These words added immeasurably to the sudden interest in the woman which
Isaac had felt at the first sight of her face. After he had got the
medicine-bottle filled, he looked about anxiously for her as soon as
he was out in the street. She was walking slowly up and down on
the opposite side of the road. With his heart, very much to his own
surprise, beating fast, Isaac crossed over and spoke to her.

He asked if she was in any distress. She pointed to her torn shawl, her
scanty dress, her crushed, dirty bonnet; then moved under a lamp so as
to let the light fall on her stern, pale, but still most beautiful face.

"I look like a comfortable, happy woman, don't I?" she said, with a
bitter laugh.

She spoke with a purity of intonation which Isaac had never heard before
from other than ladies' lips. Her slightest actions seemed to have the
easy, negligent grace of a thoroughbred woman. Her skin, for all its
poverty-stricken paleness, was as delicate as if her life had been
passed in the enjoyment of every social comfort that wealth can
purchase. Even her small, finely-shaped hands, gloveless as they were,
had not lost their whiteness.

Little by little, in answer to his questions, the sad story of the woman
came out. There is no need to relate it here; it is told over and over
again in police reports and paragraphs about attempted suicides.

"My name is Rebecca Murdoch," said the woman, as she ended. "I have
nine-pence left, and I thought of spending it at the chemist's over the
way in securing a passage to the other world. Whatever it is, it can't
be worse to me than this, so why should I stop here?"

Besides the natural compassion and sadness moved in his heart by what he
heard, Isaac felt within him some mysterious influence at work all the
time the woman was speaking which utterly confused his ideas and almost
deprived him of his powers of speech. All that he could say in answer
to her last reckless words was that he would prevent her from attempting
her own life, if he followed her about all night to do it. His rough,
trembling earnestness seemed to impress her.

"I won't occasion you that trouble," she answered, when he repeated his
threat. "You have given me a fancy for living by speaking kindly to me.
No need for the mockery of protestations and promises. You may believe
me without them. Come to Fuller's Meadow to-morrow at twelve, and you
will find me alive, to answer for myself--No!--no money. My ninepence
will do to get me as good a night's lodging as I want."

She nodded and left him. He made no attempt to follow--he felt no
suspicion that she was deceiving him.

"It's strange, but I can't help believing her," he said to himself, and
walked away, bewildered, toward home.

On entering the house, his mind was still so completely absorbed by its
new subject of interest that he took no notice of what his mother was
doing when he came in with the bottle of medicine. She had opened her
old writing-desk in his absence, and was now reading a paper attentively
that lay inside it. On every birthday of Isaac's since she had written
down the particulars of his dream from his own lips, she had been
accustomed to read that same paper, and ponder over it in private.

The next day he went to Fuller's Meadow.

He had done only right in believing her so implicitly. She was there,
punctual to a minute, to answer for herself. The last-left faint
defenses in Isaac's heart against the fascination which a word or look
from her began inscrutably to exercise over him sank down and vanished
before her forever on that memorable morning.

When a man, previously insensible to the influence of women, forms
an attachment in middle life, the instances are rare indeed, let the
warning circumstances be what they may, in which he is found capable of
freeing himself from the tyranny of the new ruling passion. The charm
of being spoken to familiarly, fondly, and gratefully by a woman whose
language and manners still retained enough of their early refinement
to hint at the high social station that she had lost, would have been a
dangerous luxury to a man of Isaac's rank at the age of twenty. But it
was far more than that--it was certain ruin to him--now that his heart
was opening unworthily to a new influence at that middle time of life
when strong feelings of all kinds, once implanted, strike root most
stubbornly in a man's moral nature. A few more stolen interviews after
that first morning in Fuller's Meadow completed his infatuation. In less
than a month from the time when he first met her, Isaac Scatchard had
consented to give Rebecca Murdoch a new interest in existence, and a
chance of recovering the character she had lost by promising to make her
his wife.

She had taken possession, not of his passions only, but of his faculties
as well. All the mind he had he put into her keeping. She directed
him on every point--even instructing him how to break the news of his
approaching marriage in the safest manner to his mother.

"If you tell her how you met me and who I am at first," said the cunning
woman, "she will move heaven and earth to prevent our marriage. Say I am
the sister of one of your fellow-servants--ask her to see me before you
go into any more particulars--and leave it to me to do the rest. I mean
to make her love me next best to you, Isaac, before she knows anything
of who I really am." The motive of the deceit was sufficient to sanctify
it to Isaac. The stratagem proposed relieved him of his one great
anxiety, and quieted his uneasy conscience on the subject of his mother.
Still, there was something wanting to perfect his happiness, something
that he could not realize, something mysteriously untraceable, and yet
something that perpetually made itself felt; not when he was absent
from Rebecca Murdoch, but, strange to say, when he was actually in her
presence! She was kindness itself with him. She never made him feel
his inferior capacities and inferior manners. She showed the sweetest
anxiety to please him in the smallest trifles; but, in spite of all
these attractions, he never could feel quite at his ease with her. At
their first meeting, there had mingled with his admiration, when he
looked in her face, a faint, involuntary feeling of doubt whether that
face was entirely strange to him. No after familiarity had the slightest
effect on this inexplicable, wearisome uncertainty.

Concealing the truth as he had been directed, he announced his marriage
engagement precipitately and confusedly to his mother on the day when he
contracted it. Poor Mrs. Scatchard showed her perfect confidence in her
son by flinging her arms round his neck, and giving him joy of having
found at last, in the sister of one of his fellow-servants, a woman
to comfort and care for him after his mother was gone. She was all
eagerness to see the woman of her son's choice, and the next day was
fixed for the introduction.

It was a bright sunny morning, and the little cottage parlor was full of
light as Mrs. Scatchard, happy and expectant, dressed for the
occasion in her Sunday gown, sat waiting for her son and her future
daughter-in-law.

Punctual to the appointed time, Isaac hurriedly and nervously led his
promised wife into the room. His mother rose to receive her--advanced
a few steps, smiling--looked Rebecca full in the eyes, and suddenly
stopped. Her face, which had been flushed the moment before, turned
white in an instant; her eyes lost their expression of softness and
kindness, and assumed a blank look of terror; her outstretched hands
fell to her sides, and she staggered back a few steps with a low cry to
her son.

"Isaac," she whispered, clutching him fast by the arm when he asked
alarmedly if she was taken ill, "Isaac, does that woman's face remind
you of nothing?"

Before he could answer--before he could look round to where Rebecca
stood, astonished and angered by her reception, at the lower end of the
room, his mother pointed impatiently to her writing-desk, and gave him
the key.

"Open it," she said, in a quick breathless whisper.

"What does this mean? Why am I treated as if I had no business here?
Does your mother want to insult me?" asked Rebecca, angrily.

"Open it, and give me the paper in the left-hand drawer. Quick! quick,
for Heaven's sake!" said Mrs. Scatchard, shrinking further back in
terror.

Isaac gave her the paper. She looked it over eagerly for a moment, then
followed Rebecca, who was now turning away haughtily to leave the room,
and caught her by the shoulder--abruptly raised the long, loose sleeve
of her gown, and glanced at her hand and arm. Something like fear
began to steal over the angry expression of Rebecca's face as she shook
herself free from the old woman's grasp. "Mad!" she said to herself;
"and Isaac never told me." With these few words she left the room.

Isaac was hastening after her when his mother turned and stopped his
further progress. It wrung his heart to see the misery and terror in her
face as she looked at him.

"Light gray eyes," she said, in low, mournful, awe-struck tones,
pointing toward the open door; "a droop in the left eyelid; flaxen hair,
with a gold-yellow streak in it; white arms, with a down upon them;
little lady's hand, with a reddish look under the finger nails--The
Dream-Woman, Isaac, the Dream-Woman!"

That faint cleaving doubt which he had never been able to shake off in
Rebecca Murdoch's presence was fatally set at rest forever. He had seen
her face, then, before--seven years before, on his birthday, in the
bedroom of the lonely inn.

"Be warned! oh, my son, be warned! Isaac, Isaac, let her go, and do you
stop with me!"

Something darkened the parlor window as those words were said. A sudden
chill ran through him, and he glanced sidelong at the shadow. Rebecca
Murdoch had come back. She was peering in curiously at them over the low
window-blind.

"I have promised to marry, mother," he said, "and marry I must."

The tears came into his eyes as he spoke and dimmed his sight, but he
could just discern the fatal face outside moving away again from the
window.

His mother's head sank lower.

"Are you faint?" he whispered.

"Broken-hearted, Isaac."

He stooped down and kissed her. The shadow, as he did so, returned to
the window, and the fatal face peered in curiously once more.



CHAPTER IV.

THREE weeks after that day Isaac and Rebecca were man and wife. All that
was hopelessly dogged and stubborn in the man's moral nature seemed to
have closed round his fatal passion, and to have fixed it unassailably
in his heart.

After that first interview in the cottage parlor no consideration would
induce Mrs. Scatchard to see her son's wife again or even to talk of her
when Isaac tried hard to plead her cause after their marriage.

This course of conduct was not in any degree occasioned by a discovery
of the degradation in which Rebecca had lived. There was no question of
that between mother and son. There was no question of anything but the
fearfully-exact resemblance between the living, breathing woman and the
specter-woman of Isaac's dream.

Rebecca on her side neither felt nor expressed the slightest sorrow at
the estrangement between herself and her mother-in-law. Isaac, for the
sake of peace, had never contradicted her first idea that age and long
illness had affected Mrs. Scatchard's mind. He even allowed his wife to
upbraid him for not having confessed this to her at the time of their
marriage engagement, rather than risk anything by hinting at the truth.
The sacrifice of his integrity before his one all-mastering delusion
seemed but a small thing, and cost his conscience but little after the
sacrifices he had already made.

The time of waking from this delusion--the cruel and the rueful
time--was not far off. After some quiet months of married life, as the
summer was ending, and the year was getting on toward the month of his
birthday, Isaac found his wife altering toward him. She grew sullen and
contemptuous; she formed acquaintances of the most dangerous kind in
defiance of his objections, his entreaties, and his commands; and, worst
of all, she learned, ere long, after every fresh difference with her
husband, to seek the deadly self-oblivion of drink. Little by little,
after the first miserable discovery that his wife was keeping company
with drunkards, the shocking certainty forced itself on Isaac that she
had grown to be a drunkard herself.

He had been in a sadly desponding state for some time before the
occurrence of these domestic calamities. His mother's health, as he
could but too plainly discern every time he went to see her at the
cottage, was failing fast, and he upbraided himself in secret as the
cause of the bodily and mental suffering she endured. When to his
remorse on his mother's account was added the shame and misery
occasioned by the discovery of his wife's degradation, he sank under the
double trial--his face began to alter fast, and he looked what he was, a
spirit-broken man.

His mother, still struggling bravely against the illness that was
hurrying her to the grave, was the first to notice the sad alteration in
him, and the first to hear of his last worst trouble with his wife.
She could only weep bitterly on the day when he made his humiliating
confession, but on the next occasion when he went to see her she had
taken a resolution in reference to his domestic afflictions which
astonished and even alarmed him. He found her dressed to go out, and on
asking the reason received this answer:

"I am not long for this world, Isaac," she said, "and I shall not feel
easy on my death-bed unless I have done my best to the last to make my
son happy. I mean to put my own fears and my own feelings out of the
question, and to go with you to your wife, and try what I can do to
reclaim her. Give me your arm, Isaac, and let me do the last thing I can
in this world to help my son before it is too late."

He could not disobey her, and they walked together slowly toward his
miserable home.

It was only one o'clock in the afternoon when they reached the cottage
where he lived. It was their dinner-hour, and Rebecca was in the
kitchen. He was thus able to take his mother quietly into the parlor,
and then prepare his wife for the interview. She had fortunately drunk
but little at that early hour, and she was less sullen and capricious
than usual.

He returned to his mother with his mind tolerably at ease. His wife
soon followed him into the parlor, and the meeting between her and Mrs.
Scatchard passed off better than he had ventured to anticipate, though
he observed with secret apprehension that his mother, resolutely as she
controlled herself in other respects, could not look his wife in the
face when she spoke to her. It was a relief to him, therefore, when
Rebecca began to lay the cloth.

She laid the cloth, brought in the bread-tray, and cut a slice from
the loaf for her husband, then returned to the kitchen. At that moment,
Isaac, still anxiously watching his mother, was startled by seeing the
same ghastly change pass over her face which had altered it so awfully
on the morning when Rebecca and she first met. Before he could say a
word, she whispered, with a look of horror:

"Take me back--home, home again, Isaac. Come with me, and never go back
again."

He was afraid to ask for an explanation; he could only sign to her to be
silent, and help her quickly to the door. As they passed the breadtray
on the table she stopped and pointed to it.

"Did you see what your wife cut your bread with?" she asked, in a low
whisper.

"No, mother--I was not noticing--what was it?"

"Look!"

He did look. A new clasp-knife with a buckhorn handle lay with the loaf
in the bread-tray. He stretched out his hand shudderingly to possess
himself of it; but, at the same time, there was a noise in the kitchen,
and his mother caught at his arm.

"The knife of the dream! Isaac, I'm faint with fear. Take me away before
she comes back."

He was hardly able to support her. The visible, tangible reality of the
knife struck him with a panic, and utterly destroyed any faint doubts
that he might have entertained up to this time in relation to the
mysterious dream-warning of nearly eight years before. By a last
desperate effort, he summoned self-possession enough to help his mother
out of the house--so quietly that the "Dream-woman" (he thought of her
by that name now) did not hear them departing from the kitchen.

"Don't go back, Isaac--don't go back!" implored Mrs. Scatchard, as he
turned to go away, after seeing her safely seated again in her own room.

"I must get the knife," he answered, under his breath. His mother tried
to stop him again, but he hurried out without another word.

On his return he found that his wife had discovered their secret
departure from the house. She had been drinking, and was in a fury of
passion. The dinner in the kitchen was flung under the grate; the cloth
was off the parlor table. Where was the knife?

Unwisely, he asked for it. She was only too glad of the opportunity of
irritating him which the request afforded her. "He wanted the knife, did
he? Could he give her a reason why? No! Then he should not have it--not
if he went down on his knees to ask for it." Further recriminations
elicited the fact that she had bought it a bargain, and that she
considered it her own especial property. Isaac saw the uselessness of
attempting to get the knife by fair means, and determined to search for
it, later in the day, in secret. The search was unsuccessful. Night came
on, and he left the house to walk about the streets. He was afraid now
to sleep in the same room with her.

Three weeks passed. Still sullenly enraged with him, she would not give
up the knife; and still that fear of sleeping in the same room with her
possessed him. He walked about at night, or dozed in the parlor, or sat
watching by his mother's bedside. Before the expiration of the first
week in the new month his mother died. It wanted then but ten days of
her son's birthday. She had longed to live till that anniversary.
Isaac was present at her death, and her last words in this world were
addressed to him:

"Don't go back, my son, don't go back!" He was obliged to go back, if
it were only to watch his wife. Exasperated to the last degree by his
distrust of her, she had revengefully sought to add a sting to his
grief, during the last days of his mother's illness, by declaring that
she would assert her right to attend the funeral. In spite of any thing
he could do or say, she held with wicked pertinacity to her word, and on
the day appointed for the burial forced herself--inflamed and shameless
with drink--into her husband's presence, and declared that she would
walk in the funeral procession to his mother's grave.

This last worst outrage, accompanied by all that was most insulting in
word and look, maddened him for the moment. He struck her.

The instant the blow was dealt he repented it. She crouched down,
silent, in a corner of the room, and eyed him steadily; it was a look
that cooled his hot blood and made him tremble. But there was no time
now to think of a means of making atonement. Nothing remained but to
risk the worst till the funeral was over. There was but one way of
making sure of her. He locked her into her bedroom.

When he came back some hours after, he found her sitting, very much
altered in look and bearing, by the bedside, with a bundle on her lap.
She rose, and faced him quietly, and spoke with a strange stillness
in her voice, a strange repose in her eyes, a strange composure in her
manner.

"No man has ever struck me twice," she said, "and my husband shall have
no second opportunity. Set the door open and let me go. From this day
forth we see each other no more."

Before he could answer she passed him and left the room. He saw her walk
away up the street.

Would she return?

All that night he watched and waited, but no footstep came near the
house. The next night, overpowered by fatigue, he lay down in bed in
his clothes, with the door locked, the key on the table, and the candle
burning. His slumber was not disturbed. The third night, the fourth, the
fifth, the sixth passed, and nothing happened.

He lay down on the seventh, still in his clothes, still with the door
locked, the key on the table, and the candle burning, but easier in his
mind.

Easier in his mind, and in perfect health of body when he fell off to
sleep. But his rest was disturbed. He woke twice without any sensation
of uneasiness. But the third time it was that never-to-be-forgotten
shivering of the night at the lonely inn, that dreadful sinking pain at
the heart, which once more aroused him in an instant.

His eyes opened toward the left-hand side of the bed, and there
stood--The Dream-Woman again? No! His wife; the living reality, with the
dream-specter's face, in the dream-specter's attitude; the fair arm up,
the knife clasped in the delicate white hand.

He sprang upon her almost at the instant of seeing her, and yet not
quickly enough to prevent her from hiding the knife. Without a word from
him--without a cry from her--he pinioned her in a chair. With one hand
he felt up her sleeve, and there, where the Dream-Woman had hidden the
knife, his wife had hidden it--the knife with the buckhorn handle, that
looked like new.

In the despair of that fearful moment his brain was steady, his heart
was calm. He looked at her fixedly with the knife in his hand, and said
these last words:

"You told me we should see each other no more, and you have come back.
It is my turn now to go, and to go forever. I say that we shall see each
other no more, and my word shall not be broken."

He left her, and set forth into the night. There was a bleak wind
abroad, and the smell of recent rain was in the air. The distant
church-clocks chimed the quarter as he walked rapidly beyond the last
houses in the suburb. He asked the first policeman he met what hour that
was of which the quarter past had just struck.

The man referred sleepily to his watch, and answered, "Two o'clock." Two
in the morning. What day of the month was this day that had just begun?
He reckoned it up from the date of his mother's funeral. The fatal
parallel was complete: it was his birthday!

Had he escaped the mortal peril which his dream foretold? or had he only
received a second warning?

As that ominous doubt forced itself on his mind, he stopped, reflected,
and turned back again toward the city. He was still resolute to hold to
his word, and never to let her see him more; but there was a thought
now in his mind of having her watched and followed. The knife was in
his possession; the world was before him; but a new distrust of her--a
vague, unspeakable, superstitious dread had overcome him.

"I must know where she goes, now she thinks I have left her," he said to
himself, as he stole back wearily to the precincts of his house.

It was still dark. He had left the candle burning in the bedchamber; but
when he looked up to the window of the room now there was no light in
it. He crept cautiously to the house door. On going away, he remembered
to have closed it; on trying it now, he found it open.

He waited outside, never losing sight of the house, till daylight. Then
he ventured indoors--listened, and heard nothing--looked into kitchen,
scullery, parlor and found nothing; went up at last into the bedroom--it
was empty. A picklock lay on the floor betraying how she had gained
entrance in the night, and that was the only trace of her.

Whither had she gone? That no mortal tongue could tell him. The darkness
had covered her flight; and when the day broke, no man could say where
the light found her.

Before leaving the house and the town forever, he gave instructions to
a friend and neighbor to sell his furniture for anything that it would
fetch, and apply the proceeds to employing the police to trace her. The
directions were honestly followed, and the money was all spent, but the
inquiries led to nothing. The picklock on the bedroom floor remained the
one last useless trace of the Dream-Woman.


At this point of the narrative the landlord paused, and, turning toward
the window of the room in which we were sitting, looked in the direction
of the stable-yard.

"So far," he said, "I tell you what was told to me. The little that
remains to be added lies within my own experience. Between two and three
months after the events I have just been relating, Isaac Scatchard came
to me, withered and old-looking before his time, just as you saw him
to-day. He had his testimonials to character with him, and he asked for
employment here. Knowing that my wife and he were distantly related, I
gave him a trial in consideration of that relationship, and liked him in
spite of his queer habits. He is as sober, honest, and willing a man as
there is in England. As for his restlessness at night, and his sleeping
away his leisure time in the day, who can wonder at it after hearing his
story? Besides, he never objects to being roused up when he's wanted, so
there's not much inconvenience to complain of, after all."

"I suppose he is afraid of a return of that dreadful dream, and of
waking out of it in the dark?" said I.

"No," returned the landlord. "The dream comes back to him so often that
he has got to bear with it by this time resignedly enough. It's his wife
keeps him waking at night as he has often told me."

"What! Has she never been heard of yet?"

"Never. Isaac himself has the one perpetual thought about her, that she
is alive and looking for him. I believe he wouldn't let himself drop
off to sleep toward two in the morning for a king's ransom. Two in the
morning, he says, is the time she will find him, one of these days. Two
in the morning is the time all the year round when he likes to be most
certain that he has got that clasp-knife safe about him. He does not
mind being alone as long as he is awake, except on the night before his
birthday, when he firmly believes himself to be in peril of his life.
The birthday has only come round once since he has been here, and then
he sat up along with the night-porter. 'She's looking for me,' is all
he says when anybody speaks to him about the one anxiety of his life;
'she's looking for me.' He may be right. She may be looking for him. Who
can tell?"

"Who can tell?" said I.


THE FOURTH DAY.

THE sky once more cloudy and threatening. No news of George. I corrected
Morgan's second story to-day; numbered it Seven, and added it to our
stock.

Undeterred by the weather, Miss Jessie set off this morning on the
longest ride she had yet undertaken. She had heard--through one of
my brother's laborers, I believe--of the actual existence, in this
nineteenth century, of no less a personage than a Welsh Bard, who was
to be found at a distant farmhouse far beyond the limits of Owen's
property. The prospect of discovering this remarkable relic of past
times hurried her off, under the guidance of her ragged groom, in a high
state of excitement, to see and hear the venerable man. She was away the
whole day, and for the first time since her visit she kept us waiting
more than half an hour for dinner. The moment we all sat down to table,
she informed us, to Morgan's great delight, that the bard was a rank
impostor.

"Why, what did you expect to see?" I asked.

"A Welsh patriarch, to be sure, with a long white beard, flowing robes,
and a harp to match," answered Miss Jessie.

"And what did you find?"

"A highly-respectable middle-aged rustic; a smiling, smoothly-shaven,
obliging man, dressed in a blue swallow-tailed coat, with brass buttons,
and exhibiting his bardic legs in a pair of extremely stout and
comfortable corduroy trousers."

"But he sang old Welsh songs, surely?"

"Sang! I'll tell you what he did. He sat down on a Windsor chair,
without a harp; he put his hands in his pockets, cleared his throat,
looked up at the ceiling, and suddenly burst into a series of the
shrillest falsetto screeches I ever heard in my life. My own private
opinion is that he was suffering from hydrophobia. I have lost all
belief, henceforth and forever, in bards--all belief in everything,
in short, except your very delightful stories and this remarkably good
dinner."

Ending with that smart double fire of compliments to her hosts, the
Queen of Hearts honored us all three with a smile of approval, and
transferred her attention to her knife and fork.

The number drawn to-night was One. On examination of the Purple Volume,
it proved to be my turn to read again.

"Our story to-night," I said, "contains the narrative of a very
remarkable adventure which really befell me when I was a young man.
At the time of my life when these events happened I was dabbling in
literature when I ought to have been studying law, and traveling on the
Continent when I ought to have been keeping my terms at Lincoln's Inn.
At the outset of the story, you will find that I refer to the county
in which I lived in my youth, and to a neighboring family possessing
a large estate in it. That county is situated in a part of England
far away from The Glen Tower, and that family is therefore not to be
associated with any present or former neighbors of ours in this part of
the world."

After saying these necessary words of explanation, I opened the first
page, and began the story of my Own Adventure. I observed that my
audience started a little as I read the title, which I must add, in
my own defense, had been almost forced on my choice by the peculiar
character of the narrative. It was "MAD MONKTON."




BROTHER GRIFFITH'S STORY of MAD MONKTON



CHAPTER I.


THE Monktons of Wincot Abbey bore a sad character for want of
sociability in our county. They never went to other people's houses,
and, excepting my father, and a lady and her daughter living near them,
never received anybody under their own roof.

Proud as they all certainly were, it was not pride, but dread, which
kept them thus apart from their neighbors. The family had suffered for
generations past from the horrible affliction of hereditary insanity,
and the members of it shrank from exposing their calamity to others, as
they must have exposed it if they had mingled with the busy little world
around them. There is a frightful story of a crime committed in past
times by two of the Monktons, near relatives, from which the first
appearance of the insanity was always supposed to date, but it is
needless for me to shock any one by repeating it. It is enough to say
that at intervals almost every form of madness appeared in the family,
monomania being the most frequent manifestation of the affliction among
them. I have these particulars, and one or two yet to be related, from
my father.

At the period of my youth but three of the Monktons were left at the
Abbey--Mr. and Mrs. Monkton and their only child Alfred, heir to the
property. The one other member of this, the elder branch of the family,
who was then alive, was Mr. Monkton's younger brother, Stephen. He was
an unmarried man, possessing a fine estate in Scotland; but he lived
almost entirely on the Continent, and bore the reputation of being
a shameless profligate. The family at Wincot held almost as little
communication with him as with their neighbors.

I have already mentioned my father, and a lady and her daughter, as the
only privileged people who were admitted into Wincot Abbey.

My father had been an old school and college friend of Mr. Monkton,
and accident had brought them so much together in later life that their
continued intimacy at Wincot was quite intelligible. I am not so well
able to account for the friendly terms on which Mrs. Elmslie (the lady
to whom I have alluded) lived with the Monktons. Her late husband had
been distantly related to Mrs. Monkton, and my father was her daughter's
guardian. But even these claims to friendship and regard never seemed
to me strong enough to explain the intimacy between Mrs. Elmslie and the
inhabitants of the Abbey. Intimate, however, they certainly were,
and one result of the constant interchange of visits between the
two families in due time declared itself: Mr. Monkton's son and Mrs.
Elmslie's daughter became attached to each other.

I had no opportunities of seeing much of the young lady; I only remember
her at that time as a delicate, gentle, lovable girl, the very opposite
in appearance, and apparently in character also, to Alfred Monkton. But
perhaps that was one reason why they fell in love with each other. The
attachment was soon discovered, and was far from being disapproved
by the parents on either side. In all essential points except that of
wealth, the Elmslies were nearly the equals of the Monktons, and want of
money in a bride was of no consequence to the heir of Wincot. Alfred, it
was well known, would succeed to thirty thousand a year on his father's
death.

Thus, though the parents on both sides thought the young people not
old enough to be married at once, they saw no reason why Ada and Alfred
should not be engaged to each other, with the understanding that they
should be united when young Monkton came of age, in two years' time. The
person to be consulted in the matter, after the parents, was my father,
in his capacity of Ada's guardian. He knew that the family misery had
shown itself many years ago in Mrs. Monkton, who was her husband's
cousin. The _illness,_ as it was significantly called, had been
palliated by careful treatment, and was reported to have passed away.
But my father was not to be deceived. He knew where the hereditary
taint still lurked; he viewed with horror the bare possibility of its
reappearing one day in the children of his friend's only daughter; and
he positively refused his consent to the marriage engagement.

The result was that the doors of the Abbey and the doors of Mrs.
Elmslie's house were closed to him. This suspension of friendly
intercourse had lasted but a very short time when Mrs. Monkton died.
Her husband, who was fondly attached to her, caught a violent cold while
attending her funeral. The cold was neglected, and settled on his lungs.
In a few months' time he followed his wife to the grave, and Alfred was
left master of the grand old Abbey and the fair lands that spread all
around it.

At this period Mrs. Elmslie had the indelicacy to endeavor a second time
to procure my father's consent to the marriage engagement. He refused
it again more positively than before. More than a year passed away. The
time was approaching fast when Alfred would be of age. I returned from
college to spend the long vacation at home, and made some advances
toward bettering my acquaintance with young Monkton. They were
evaded--certainly with perfect politeness, but still in such a way as to
prevent me from offering my friendship to him again. Any mortification
I might have felt at this petty repulse under ordinary circumstances
was dismissed from my mind by the occurrence of a real misfortune in
our household. For some months past my father's health had been failing,
and, just at the time of which I am now writing, his sons had to mourn
the irreparable calamity of his death.

This event, through some informality or error in the late Mr. Elmslie's
will, left the future of Ada's life entirely at her mother's disposal.
The consequence was the immediate ratification of the marriage
engagement to which my father had so steadily refused his consent. As
soon as the fact was publicly announced, some of Mrs. Elmslie's more
intimate friends, who were acquainted with the reports affecting the
Monkton family, ventured to mingle with their formal congratulations
one or two significant references to the late Mrs. Monkton and some
searching inquiries as to the disposition of her son.

Mrs. Elmslie always met these polite hints with one bold form of answer.
She first admitted the existence of these reports about the Monktons
which her friends were unwilling to specify distinctly, and then
declared that they were infamous calumnies. The hereditary taint had
died out of the family generations back. Alfred was the best, the
kindest, the sanest of human beings. He loved study and retirement; Ada
sympathized with his tastes, and had made her choice unbiased; if any
more hints were dropped about sacrificing her by her marriage, those
hints would be viewed as so many insults to her mother, whose affection
for her it was monstrous to call in question. This way of talking
silenced people, but did not convince them. They began to suspect, what
was indeed the actual truth, that Mrs. Elmslie was a selfish, worldly,
grasping woman, who wanted to get her daughter well married, and cared
nothing for consequences as long as she saw Ada mistress of the greatest
establishment in the whole county.

It seemed, however, as if there was some fatality at work to prevent
the attainment of Mrs. Elmslie's great object in life. Hardly was one
obstacle to the ill-omened marriage removed by my father's death before
another succeeded it in the shape of anxieties and difficulties caused
by the delicate state of Ada's health. Doctors were consulted in all
directions, and the result of their advice was that the marriage must be
deferred, and that Miss Elmslie must leave England for a certain time,
to reside in a warmer climate--the south of France, if I remember
rightly. Thus it happened that just before Alfred came of age Ada and
her mother departed for the Continent, and the union of the two young
people was understood to be indefinitely postponed. Some curiosity was
felt in the neighborhood as to what Alfred Monkton would do under these
circumstances. Would he follow his lady-love? would he go yachting?
would he throw open the doors of the old Abbey at last, and endeavor
to forget the absence of Ada and the postponement of his marriage in a
round of gayeties? He did none of these things. He simply remained at
Wincot, living as suspiciously strange and solitary a life as his father
had lived before him. Literally, there was now no companion for him
at the Abbey but the old priest--the Monktons, I should have mentioned
before, were Roman Catholics--who had held the office of tutor to Alfred
from his earliest years. He came of age, and there was not even so much
as a private dinner-party at Wincot to celebrate the event. Families
in the neighborhood determined to forget the offense which his father's
reserve had given them, and invited him to their houses. The invitations
were politely declined. Civil visitors called resolutely at the Abbey,
and were as resolutely bowed away from the doors as soon as they had
left their cards. Under this combination of sinister and aggravating
circumstances people in all directions took to shaking their heads
mysteriously when the name of Mr. Alfred Monkton was mentioned, hinting
at the family calamity, and wondering peevishly or sadly, as their
tempers inclined them, what he could possibly do to occupy himself month
after month in the lonely old house.

The right answer to this question was not easy to find. It was quite
useless, for example, to apply to the priest for it. He was a very
quiet, polite old gentleman; his replies were always excessively ready
and civil, and appeared at the time to convey an immense quantity of
information; but when they came to be reflected on, it was universally
observed that nothing tangible could ever be got out of them. The
housekeeper, a weird old woman, with a very abrupt and repelling manner,
was too fierce and taciturn to be safely approached. The few indoor
servants had all been long enough in the family to have learned to
hold their tongues in public as a regular habit. It was only from the
farm-servants who supplied the table at the Abbey that any information
could be obtained, and vague enough it was when they came to communicate
it.

Some of them had observed the "young master" walking about the library
with heaps of dusty papers in his hands. Others had heard odd noises
in the uninhabited parts of the Abbey, had looked up, and had seen him
forcing open the old windows, as if to let light and air into the rooms
supposed to have been shut close for years and years, or had discovered
him standing on the perilous summit of one of the crumbling turrets,
never ascended before within their memories, and popularly considered
to be inhabited by the ghosts of the monks who had once possessed the
building. The result of these observations and discoveries, when they
were communicated to others, was of course to impress every one with a
firm belief that "poor young Monkton was going the way that the rest
of the family had gone before him," which opinion always appeared to be
immensely strengthened in the popular mind by a conviction--founded on
no particle of evidence--that the priest was at the bottom of all the
mischief.

Thus far I have spoken from hearsay evidence mostly. What I have next to
tell will be the result of my own personal experience.



CHAPTER II.

ABOUT five months after Alfred Monkton came of age I left college, and
resolved to amuse and instruct myself a little by traveling abroad.

At the time when I quitted England young Monkton was still leading
his secluded life at the Abbey, and was, in the opinion of everybody,
sinking rapidly, if he had not already succumbed, under the hereditary
curse of his family. As to the Elmslies, report said that Ada had
benefited by her sojourn abroad, and that mother and daughter were on
their way back to England to resume their old relations with the heir of
Wincot. Before they returned I was away on my travels, and wandered
half over Europe, hardly ever planning whither I should shape my course
beforehand. Chance, which thus led me everywhere, led me at last to
Naples. There I met with an old school friend, who was one of the
_attaches_ at the English embassy, and there began the extraordinary
events in connection with Alfred Monkton which form the main interest of
the story I am now relating.

I was idling away the time one morning with my friend the _attache_
in the garden of the Villa Reale, when we were passed by a young man,
walking alone, who exchanged bows with my friend.

I thought I recognized the dark, eager eyes, the colorless cheeks, the
strangely-vigilant, anxious expression which I remembered in past times
as characteristic of Alfred Monkton's face, and was about to question my
friend on the subject, when he gave me unasked the information of which
I was in search.

"That is Alfred Monkton," said he; "he comes from your part of England.
You ought to know him."

"I do know a little of him," I answered; "he was engaged to Miss Elmslie
when I was last in the neighborhood of Wincot. Is he married to her
yet?"

"No, and he never ought to be. He has gone the way of the rest of the
family--or, in plainer words, he has gone mad."

"Mad! But I ought not to be surprised at hearing that, after the reports
about him in England."

"I speak from no reports; I speak from what he has said and done before
me, and before hundreds of other people. Surely you must have heard of
it?"

"Never. I have been out of the way of news from Naples or England for
months past."

"Then I have a very extraordinary story to tell you. You know, of
course, that Alfred had an uncle, Stephen Monkton. Well, some time ago
this uncle fought a duel in the Roman States with a Frenchman, who shot
him dead. The seconds and the Frenchman (who was unhurt) took to flight
in different directions, as it is supposed. We heard nothing here of
the details of the duel till a month after it happened, when one of the
French journals published an account of it, taken from the papers left
by Monkton's second, who died at Paris of consumption. These papers
stated the manner in which the duel was fought, and how it terminated,
but nothing more. The surviving second and the Frenchman have never been
traced from that time to this. All that anybody knows, therefore, of the
duel is that Stephen Monkton was shot; an event which nobody can regret,
for a greater scoundrel never existed. The exact place where he
died, and what was done with the body are still mysteries not to be
penetrated."

"But what has all this to do with Alfred?"

"Wait a moment, and you will hear. Soon after the news of his uncle's
death reached England, what do you think Alfred did? He actually put off
his marriage with Miss Elmslie, which was then about to be celebrated,
to come out here in search of the burial-place of his wretched scamp of
an uncle; and no power on earth will now induce him to return to England
and to Miss Elmslie until he has found the body, and can take it back
with him, to be buried with all the other dead Monktons in the vault
under Wincot Abbey Chapel. He has squandered his money, pestered
the police, and exposed himself to the ridicule of the men and the
indignation of the women for the last three months in trying to achieve
his insane purpose, and is now as far from it as ever. He will not
assign to anybody the smallest motive for his conduct. You can't laugh
him out of it or reason him out of it. When we met him just now, I
happen to know that he was on his way to the office of the police
minister, to send out fresh agents to search and inquire through the
Roman States for the place where his uncle was shot. And, mind, all this
time he professes to be passionately in love with Miss Elmslie, and to
be miserable at his separation from her. Just think of that! And then
think of his self-imposed absence from her here, to hunt after the
remains of a wretch who was a disgrace to the family, and whom he never
saw but once or twice in his life. Of all the 'Mad Monktons,' as they
used to call them in England, Alfred is the maddest. He is actually our
principal excitement in this dull opera season; though, for my own part,
when I think of the poor girl in England, I am a great deal more ready
to despise him than to laugh at him."

"You know the Elmslies then?"

"Intimately. The other day my mother wrote to me from England, after
having seen Ada. This escapade of Monkton's has outraged all her
friends. They have been entreating her to break off the match, which it
seems she could do if she liked. Even her mother, sordid and selfish as
she is, has been obliged at last, in common decency, to side with the
rest of the family; but the good, faithful girl won't give Monkton up.
She humors his insanity; declares he gave her a good reason in secret
for going away; says she could always make him happy when they were
together in the old Abbey, and can make him still happier when they are
married; in short, she loves him dearly, and will therefore believe in
him to the last. Nothing shakes her. She has made up her mind to throw
away her life on him, and she will do it."

"I hope not. Mad as his conduct looks to us, he may have some sensible
reason for it that we cannot imagine. Does his mind seem at all
disordered when he talks on ordinary topics?"

"Not in the least. When you can get him to say anything, which is not
often, he talks like a sensible, well-educated man. Keep silence about
his precious errand here, and you would fancy him the gentlest and most
temperate of human beings; but touch the subject of his vagabond of an
uncle, and the Monkton madness comes out directly. The other night
a lady asked him, jestingly of course, whether he had ever seen his
uncle's ghost. He scowled at her like a perfect fiend, and said that he
and his uncle would answer her question together some day, if they came
from hell to do it. We laughed at his words, but the lady fainted at his
looks, and we had a scene of hysterics and hartshorn in consequence. Any
other man would have been kicked out of the room for nearly frightening
a pretty woman to death in that way; but 'Mad Monkton,' as we have
christened him, is a privileged lunatic in Neapolitan society, because
he is English, good-looking, and worth thirty thousand a year. He goes
out everywhere under the impression that he may meet with somebody who
has been let into the secret of the place where the mysterious duel was
fought. If you are introduced to him he is sure to ask you whether you
know anything about it; but beware of following up the subject after you
have answered him, unless you want to make sure that he is out of his
senses. In that case, only talk of his uncle, and the result will rather
more than satisfy you."

A day or two after this conversation with my friend the _attache,_ I met
Monkton at an evening party.

The moment he heard my name mentioned, his face flushed up; he drew me
away into a corner, and referring to his cool reception of my advance
years ago toward making his acquaintance, asked my pardon for what he
termed his inexcusable ingratitude with an earnestness and an agitation
which utterly astonished me. His next proceeding was to question me, as
my friend had said he would, about the place of the mysterious duel.

An extraordinary change came over him while he interrogated me on this
point. Instead of looking into my face as they had looked hitherto, his
eyes wandered away, and fixed themselves intensely, almost fiercely,
either on the perfectly empty wall at our side, or on the vacant space
between the wall and ourselves, it was impossible to say which. I had
come to Naples from Spain by sea, and briefly told him so, as the best
way of satisfying him that I could not assist his inquiries. He pursued
them no further; and, mindful of my friend's warning, I took care to
lead the conversation to general topics. He looked back at me directly,
and, as long as we stood in our corner, his eyes never wandered away
again to the empty wall or the vacant space at our side.

Though more ready to listen than to speak, his conversation, when he did
talk, had no trace of anything the least like insanity about it. He had
evidently read, not generally only, but deeply as well, and could apply
his reading with singular felicity to the illustration of almost any
subject under discussion, neither obtruding his knowledge absurdly, nor
concealing it affectedly. His manner was in itself a standing protest
against such a nickname as "Mad Monkton." He was so shy, so quiet, so
composed and gentle in all his actions, that at times I should have been
almost inclined to call him effeminate. We had a long talk together on
the first evening of our meeting; we often saw each other afterward, and
never lost a single opportunity of bettering our acquaintance. I felt
that he had taken a liking to me, and, in spite of what I had heard
about his behavior to Miss Elmslie, in spite of the suspicions which
the history of his family and his own conduct had arrayed against him, I
began to like "Mad Monkton" as much as he liked me. We took many a quiet
ride together in the country, and sailed often along the shores of the
Bay on either side. But for two eccentricities in his conduct, which I
could not at all understand, I should soon have felt as much at my ease
in his society as if he had been my own brother.

The first of these eccentricities consisted in the reappearance on
several occasions of the odd expression in his eyes which I had first
seen when he asked me whether I knew anything about the duel. No matter
what we were talking about, or where we happened to be, there were times
when he would suddenly look away from my face, now on one side of me,
now on the other, but always where there was nothing to see, and always
with the same intensity and fierceness in his eyes. This looked so like
madness--or hypochondria at the least--that I felt afraid to ask him
about it, and always pretended not to observe him.

The second peculiarity in his conduct was that he never referred, while
in my company, to the reports about his errand at Naples, and never once
spoke of Miss Elmslie, or of his life at Wincot Abbey. This not only
astonished me, but amazed those who had noticed our intimacy, and who
had made sure that I must be the depositary of all his secrets. But the
time was near at hand when this mystery, and some other mysteries of
which I had no suspicion at that period, were all to be revealed.

I met him one night at a large ball, given by a Russian nobleman, whose
name I could not pronounce then, and cannot remember now. I had wandered
away from reception-room, ballroom, and cardroom, to a small apartment
at one extremity of the palace, which was half conservatory, half
boudoir, and which had been prettily illuminated for the occasion with
Chinese lanterns. Nobody was in the room when I got there. The view over
the Mediterranean, bathed in the bright softness of Italian moonlight,
was so lovely that I remained for a long time at the window, looking
out, and listening to the dance-music which faintly reached me from the
ballroom. My thoughts were far away with the relations I had left in
England, when I was startled out of them by hearing my name softly
pronounced.

I looked round directly, and saw Monkton standing in the room. A livid
paleness overspread his face, and his eyes were turned away from me
with the same extraordinary expression in them to which I have already
alluded.

"Do you mind leaving the ball early to-night?" he asked, still not
looking at me.

"Not at all," said I. "Can I do anything for you? Are you ill?"

"No--at least nothing to speak of. Will you come to my rooms?"

"At once, if you like."

"No, not at once. _I_ must go home directly; but don't you come to me
for half an hour yet. You have not been at my rooms before, I know, but
you will easily find them out; they are close by. There is a card with
my address. I _must_ speak to you to-night; my life depends on it. Pray
come! for God's sake, come when the half hour is up!"

I promised to be punctual, and he left me directly.

Most people will be easily able to imagine the state of nervous
impatience and vague expectation in which I passed the allotted period
of delay, after hearing such words as those Monkton had spoken to
me. Before the half hour had quite expired I began to make my way out
through the ballroom.

At the head of the staircase my friend, the _attache,_ met me.

"What! going away already?" Said he.

"Yes; and on a very curious expedition. I am going to Monkton's rooms,
by his own invitation."

"You don't mean it! Upon my honor, you're a bold fellow to trust
yourself alone with 'Mad Monkton' when the moon is at the full."

"He is ill, poor fellow. Besides, I don't think him half as mad as you
do."

"We won't dispute about that; but mark my words, he has not asked you
to go where no visitor has ever been admitted before without a special
purpose. I predict that you will see or hear something to-night which
you will remember for the rest of your life."

We parted. When I knocked at the courtyard gate of the house where
Monkton lived, my friend's last words on the palace staircase recurred
to me, and, though I had laughed at him when he spoke them, I began to
suspect even then that his prediction would be fulfilled.



CHAPTER III.


THE porter who let me into the house where Monkton lived directed me to
the floor on which his rooms were situated. On getting upstairs, I found
his door on the landing ajar. He heard my footsteps, I suppose, for he
called to me to come in before I could knock.

I entered, and found him sitting by the table, with some loose letters
in his hand, which he was just tying together into a packet. I noticed,
as he asked me to sit down, that his expression looked more composed,
though the paleness had not yet left his face. He thanked me for coming;
repeated that he had something very important to say to me; and then
stopped short, apparently too much embarrassed to proceed. I tried to
set him at his ease by assuring him that, if my assistance or advice
could be of any use, I was ready to place myself and my time heartily
and unreservedly at his service.

As I said this I saw his eyes beginning to wander away from my face--to
wander slowly, inch by inch, as it were, until they stopped at a
certain point, with the same fixed stare into vacancy which had so
often startled me on former occasions. The whole expression of his face
altered as I had never yet seen it alter; he sat before me looking like
a man in a death-trance.

"You are very kind," he said, slowly and faintly, speaking, not to me,
but in the direction in which his eyes were still fixed. "I know you can
help me; but--"

He stopped; his face whitened horribly, and the perspiration broke out
all over it. He tried to continue--said a word or two--then stopped
again. Seriously alarmed about him, I rose from my chair with the
intention of getting him some water from a jug which I saw standing on a
side-table.

He sprang up at the same moment. All the suspicions I had ever heard
whispered against his sanity flashed over my mind in an instant, and I
involuntarily stepped back a pace or two.

"Stop," he said, seating himself again; "don't mind me; and don't leave
your chair. I want--I wish, if you please, to make a little alteration,
before we say anything more. Do you mind sitting in a strong light?"

"Not in the least."

I had hitherto been seated in the shade of his reading-lamp, the only
light in the room.

As I answered him he rose again, and, going into another apartment,
returned with a large lamp in his hand; then took two candles from the
side-table, and two others from the chimney piece; placed them all,
to my amazement, together, so as to stand exactly between us, and then
tried to light them. His hand trembled so that he was obliged to give up
the attempt, and allow me to come to his assistance. By his direction,
I took the shade off the reading-lamp after I had lit the other lamp
and the four candles. When we sat down again, with this concentration
of light between us, his better and gentler manner began to return, and
while he now addressed me he spoke without the slightest hesitation.

"It is useless to ask whether you have heard the reports about me," he
said; "I know that you have. My purpose to-night is to give you some
reasonable explanation of the conduct which has produced those reports.
My secret has been hitherto confided to one person only; I am now about
to trust it to your keeping, with a special object which will appear as
I go on. First, however, I must begin by telling you exactly what the
great difficulty is which obliges me to be still absent from England. I
want your advice and your help; and, to conceal nothing from you, I want
also to test your forbearance and your friendly sympathy, before I can
venture on thrusting my miserable secret into your keeping. Will you
pardon this apparent distrust of your frank and open character--this
apparent ingratitude for your kindness toward me ever since we first
met?"

I begged him not to speak of these things, but to go on.

"You know," he proceeded, "that I am here to recover the body of my
Uncle Stephen, and to carry it back with me to our family burial-place
in England, and you must also be aware that I have not yet succeeded in
discovering his remains. Try to pass over, for the present, whatever may
seem extraordinary and incomprehensible in such a purpose as mine is,
and read this newspaper article where the ink-line is traced. It is
the only evidence hitherto obtained on the subject of the fatal duel in
which my uncle fell, and I want to hear what course of proceeding the
perusal of it may suggest to you as likely to be best on my part."

He handed me an old French newspaper. The substance of what I read there
is still so firmly impressed on my memory that I am certain of being
able to repeat correctly at this distance of time all the facts which it
is necessary for me to communicate to the reader.

The article began, I remember, with editorial remarks on the great
curiosity then felt in regard to the fatal duel between the Count St. Lo
and Mr. Stephen Monkton, an English gentleman. The writer proceeded to
dwell at great length on the extraordinary secrecy in which the whole
affair had been involved from first to last, and to express a hope
that the publication of a certain manuscript, to which his introductory
observations referred, might lead to the production of fresh evidence
from other and better-informed quarters. The manuscript had been found
among the papers of Monsieur Foulon, Mr. Monkton's second, who had died
at Paris of a rapid decline shortly after returning to his home in that
city from the scene of the duel. The document was unfinished, having
been left incomplete at the very place where the reader would most wish
to find it continued. No reason could be discovered for this, and no
second manuscript bearing on the all-important subject had been found,
after the strictest search among the papers left by the deceased.

The document itself then followed.

It purported to be an agreement privately drawn up between Mr. Monkton's
second, Monsieur Foulon, and the Count St. Lo's second, Monsieur
Dalville, and contained a statement of all the arrangements for
conducting the duel. The paper was dated "Naples, February 22d," and was
divided into some seven or eight clauses. The first clause described
the origin and nature of the quarrel--a very disgraceful affair on both
sides, worth neither remembering nor repeating. The second clause stated
that, the challenged man having chosen the pistol as his weapon, and
the challenger (an excellent swordsman), having, on his side, thereupon
insisted that the duel should be fought in such a manner as to make
the first fire decisive in its results, the seconds, seeing that fatal
consequences must inevitably follow the hostile meeting, determined,
first of all, that the duel should be kept a profound secret from
everybody, and that the place where it was to be fought should not be
made known beforehand, even to the principals themselves. It was added
that this excess of precaution had been rendered absolutely necessary
in consequence of a recent address from the Pope to the ruling powers in
Italy commenting on the scandalous frequency of the practice of dueling,
and urgently desiring that the laws against duelists should be enforced
for the future with the utmost rigor.

The third clause detailed the manner in which it had been arranged that
the duel should be fought.

The pistols having been loaded by the seconds on the ground, the
combatants were to be placed thirty paces apart, and were to toss up for
the first fire. The man who won was to advance ten paces marked out for
him beforehand--and was then to discharge his pistol. If he missed, or
failed to disable his opponent, the latter was free to advance, if he
chose, the whole remaining twenty paces before he fired in his turn.
This arrangement insured the decisive termination of the duel at the
first discharge of the pistols, and both principals and seconds pledged
themselves on either side to abide by it.

The fourth clause stated that the seconds had agreed that the duel
should be fought out of the Neapolitan States, but left themselves to be
guided by circumstances as to the exact locality in which it should take
place. The remaining clauses, so far as I remember them, were devoted
to detailing the different precautions to be adopted for avoiding
discovery. The duelists and their seconds were to leave Naples in
separate parties; were to change carriages several times; were to meet
at a certain town, or, failing that, at a certain post-house on the high
road from Naples to Rome; were to carry drawing-books, color boxes, and
camp-stools, as if they had been artists out on a sketching-tour; and
were to proceed to the place of the duel on foot, employing no guides,
for fear of treachery. Such general arrangements as these, and others
for facilitating the flight of the survivors after the affair was over,
formed the conclusion of this extraordinary document, which was signed,
in initials only, by both the seconds.

Just below the initials appeared the beginning of a narrative, dated
"Paris," and evidently intended to describe the duel itself with extreme
minuteness. The hand-writing was that of the deceased second.

Monsieur Foulon, the gentleman in question, stated his belief that
circumstances might transpire which would render an account by an
eyewitness of the hostile meeting between St. Lo and Mr. Monkton an
important document. He proposed, therefore, as one of the seconds, to
testify that the duel had been fought in exact accordance with the terms
of the agreement, both the principals conducting themselves like men of
gallantry and honor (!). And he further announced that, in order not to
compromise any one, he should place the paper containing his testimony
in safe hands, with strict directions that it was on no account to be
opened except in a case of the last emergency.

After thus preamble, Monsieur Foulon related that the duel had been
fought two days after the drawing up of the agreement, in a locality to
which accident had conducted the dueling party. (The name of the place
was not mentioned, nor even the neighborhood in which it was situated.)
The men having been placed according to previous arrangement, the Count
St. Lo had won the toss for the first fire, had advanced his ten paces,
and had shot his opponent in the body. Mr. Monkton did not immediately
fall, but staggered forward some six or seven paces, discharged his
pistol ineffectually at the count, and dropped to the ground a dead man.
Monsieur Foulon then stated that he tore a leaf from his pocketbook,
wrote on it a brief description of the manner in which Mr. Monkton had
died, and pinned the paper to his clothes; this proceeding having been
rendered necessary by the peculiar nature of the plan organized on the
spot for safely disposing of the dead body. What this plan was, or what
was done with the corpse, did not appear, for at this important point
the narrative abruptly broke off.

A foot-note in the newspaper merely stated the manner in which
the document had been obtained for publication, and repeated the
announcement contained in the editor's introductory remarks, that no
continuation had been found by the persons intrusted with the care of
Monsieur Foulon's papers. I have now given the whole substance of what
I read, and have mentioned all that was then known of Mr. Stephen
Monkton's death.

When I gave the newspaper back to Alfred he was too much agitated to
speak, but he reminded me by a sign that he was anxiously waiting to
hear what I had to say. My position was a very trying and a very painful
one. I could hardly tell what consequences might not follow any want
of caution on my part, and could think at first of no safer plan than
questioning him carefully before I committed myself either one way or
the other.

"Will you excuse me if I ask you a question or two before I give you my
advice?" said I.

He nodded impatiently.

"Yes, yes--any questions you like."

"Were you at any time in the habit of seeing your uncle frequently?"

"I never saw him more than twice in my life--on each occasion when I was
a mere child."

"Then you could have had no very strong personal regard for him?"

"Regard for him! I should have been ashamed to feel any regard for him.
He disgraced us wherever he went."

"May I ask if any family motive is involved in your anxiety to recover
his remains?"

"Family motives may enter into it among others--but why do you ask?"

"Because, having heard that you employ the police to assist your search,
I was anxious to know whether you had stimulated their superiors to
make them do their best in your service by giving some strong personal
reasons at headquarters for the very unusual project which has brought
you here."

"I give no reasons. I pay for the work I want done, and, in return for
my liberality, I am treated with the most infamous indifference on
all sides. A stranger in the country, and badly acquainted with the
language, I can do nothing to help myself. The authorities, both at Rome
and in this place, pretend to assist me, pretend to search and inquire
as I would have them search and inquire, and do nothing more. I am
insulted, laughed at, almost to my face."

"Do you not think it possible--mind, I have no wish to excuse the
misconduct of the authorities, and do not share in any such opinion
myself--but do you not think it likely that the police may doubt whether
you are in earnest?"

"Not in earnest!" he cried, starting up and confronting me fiercely,
with wild eyes and quickened breath. "Not in earnest! _You_ think I'm
not in earnest too. I know you think it, though you tell me you don't.
Stop; before we say another word, your own eyes shall convince you. Come
here--only for a minute--only for one minute!"

I followed him into his bedroom, which opened out of the sitting-room.
At one side of his bed stood a large packing-case of plain wood, upward
of seven feet in length.

"Open the lid and look in," he said, "while I hold the candle so that
you can see."

I obeyed his directions, and discovered to my astonishment that the
packing-case contained a leaden coffin, magnificently emblazoned with
the arms of the Monkton family, and inscribed in old-fashioned letters
with the name of "Stephen Monkton," his age and the manner of his death
being added underneath.

"I keep his coffin ready for him," whispered Alfred, close at my ear.
"Does that look like earnest?"

It looked more like insanity--so like that I shrank from answering him.

"Yes! yes! I see you are convinced," he continued quickly; "we may go
back into the next room, and may talk without restraint on either side
now."

On returning to our places, I mechanically moved my chair away from
the table. My mind was by this time in such a state of confusion and
uncertainty about what it would be best for me to say or do next, that I
forgot for the moment the position he had assigned to me when we lit the
candles. He reminded me of this directly.

"Don't move away," he said, very earnestly; "keep on sitting in the
light; pray do! I'll soon tell you why I am so particular about
that. But first give me your advice; help me in my great distress and
suspense. Remember, you promised me you would."

I made an effort to collect my thoughts, and succeeded. It was useless
to treat the affair otherwise than seriously in his presence; it would
have been cruel not to have advised him as I best could.

"You know," I said, "that two days after the drawing up of the agreement
at Naples, the duel was fought out of the Neapolitan States. This
fact has of course led you to the conclusion that all inquiries about
localities had better be confined to the Roman territory?"

"Certainly; the search, such as it is, has been made there, and there
only. If I can believe the police, they and their agents have inquired
for the place where the duel was fought (offering a large reward in my
name to the person who can discover it) all along the high road from
Naples to Rome. They have also circulated--at least so they tell
me--descriptions of the duelists and their seconds; have left an agent
to superintend investigations at the post-house, and another at the town
mentioned as meeting-points in the agreement; and have endeavored, by
correspondence with foreign authorities, to trace the Count St. Lo and
Monsieur Dalville to their place or places of refuge. All these efforts,
supposing them to have been really made, have hitherto proved utterly
fruitless."

"My impression is," said I, after a moment's consideration, "that all
inquiries made along the high road, or anywhere near Rome, are likely to
be made in vain. As to the discovery of your uncle's remains, that is, I
think, identical with the discovery of the place where he was shot; for
those engaged in the duel would certainly not risk detection by carrying
a corpse any distance with them in their flight. The place, then, is
all that we want to find out. Now let us consider for a moment. The
dueling-party changed carriages; traveled separately, two and two;
doubtless took roundabout roads; stopped at the post-house and the town
as a blind; walked, perhaps, a considerable distance unguided. Depend
upon it, such precautions as these (which we know they must have
employed) left them very little time out of the two days--though they
might start at sunrise and not stop at night-fall--for straightforward
traveling. My belief therefore is, that the duel was fought somewhere
near the Neapolitan frontier; and, if I had been the police agent who
conducted the search, I should only have pursued it parallel with the
frontier, starting from west to east till I got up among the lonely
places in the mountains. That is my idea; do you think it worth
anything?"

His face flushed all over in an instant. "I think it an inspiration!" he
cried. "Not a day is to be lost in carrying out our plan. The police are
not to be trusted with it. I must start myself to-morrow morning; and
you--"

He stopped; his face grew suddenly pale; he sighed heavily; his eyes
wandered once more into the fixed look at vacancy; and the rigid,
deathly expression fastened again upon all his features.

"I must tell you my secret before I talk of to-morrow," he proceeded,
faintly. "If I hesitated any longer at confessing everything, I should
be unworthy of your past kindness, unworthy of the help which it is my
last hope that you will gladly give me when you have heard all."

I begged him to wait until he was more composed, until he was better
able to speak; but he did not appear to notice what I said. Slowly, and
struggling as it seemed against himself, he turned a little away from
me, and, bending his head over the table, supported it on his hand. The
packet of letters with which I had seen him occupied when I came in lay
just beneath his eyes. He looked down on it steadfastly when he next
spoke to me.



CHAPTER IV.

"You were born, I believe, in our county," he said; "perhaps, therefore,
you may have heard at some time of a curious old prophecy about our
family, which is still preserved among the traditions of Wincot Abbey?"

"I have heard of such a prophecy," I answered, "but I never knew in what
terms it was expressed. It professed to predict the extinction of your
family, or something of that sort, did it not?"

"No inquiries," he went on, "have traced back that prophecy to the time
when it was first made; none of our family records tell us anything of
its origin. Old servants and old tenants of ours remember to have heard
it from their fathers and grandfathers. The monks, whom we succeeded in
the Abbey in Henry the Eighth's time, got knowledge of it in some way,
for I myself discovered the rhymes, in which we know the prophecy to
have been preserved from a very remote period, written on a blank leaf
of one of the Abbey manuscripts. These are the verses, if verses they
deserve to be called:

     When in Wincot vault a place
     Waits for one of Monkton's race--
     When that one forlorn shall lie
     Graveless under open sky,
     Beggared of six feet of earth,
     Though lord of acres from his birth--
     That shall be a certain sign
     Of the end of Monkton's line.
     Dwindling ever faster, faster,
     Dwindling to the last-left master;
     From mortal ken, from light of day,
     Monkton's race shall pass away."

"The prediction seems almost vague enough to have been uttered by an
ancient oracle," said I, observing that he waited, after repeating the
verses, as if expecting me to say something.

"Vague or not, it is being accomplished," he returned. "I am now the
'last-left master'--the last of that elder line of our family at which
the prediction points; and the corpse of Stephen Monkton is not in the
vaults of Wincot Abbey. Wait before you exclaim against me. I have more
to say about this. Long before the Abbey was ours, when we lived in the
ancient manor-house near it (the very ruins of which have long since
disappeared), the family burying-place was in the vault under the Abbey
chapel. Whether in those remote times the prediction against us was
known and dreaded or not, this much is certain: every one of the
Monktons (whether living at the Abbey or on the smaller estate in
Scotland) was buried in Wincot vault, no matter at what risk or what
sacrifice. In the fierce fighting days of the olden time, the bodies of
my ancestors who fell in foreign places were recovered and brought back
to Wincot, though it often cost not heavy ransom only, but desperate
bloodshed as well, to obtain them. This superstition, if you please
to call it so, has never died out of the family from that time to the
present day; for centuries the succession of the dead in the vault at
the Abbey has been unbroken--absolutely unbroken--until now. The place
mentioned in the prediction as waiting to be filled is Stephen Monkton's
place; the voice that cries vainly to the earth for shelter is the
spirit-voice of the dead. As surely as if I saw it, I know that they
have left him unburied on the ground where he fell!"

He stopped me before I could utter a word in remonstrance by slowly
rising to his feet, and pointing in the same direction toward which his
eyes had wandered a short time since.

"I can guess what you want to ask me," he exclaimed, sternly and loudly;
"you want to ask me how I can be mad enough to believe in a doggerel
prophecy uttered in an age of superstition to awe the most ignorant
hearers. I answer" (at those words his voice sank suddenly to a
whisper), "I answer, because _Stephen Monkton himself stands there at
this moment confirming me in my belief_."

Whether it was the awe and horror that looked out ghastly from his face
as he confronted me, whether it was that I had never hitherto fairly
believed in the reports about his madness, and that the conviction of
their truth now forced itself upon me on a sudden, I know not, but I
felt my blood curdling as he spoke, and I knew in my own heart, as I sat
there speechless, that I dare not turn round and look where he was still
pointing close at my side.

"I see there," he went on, in the same whispering voice, "the figure of
a dark-complexioned man standing up with his head uncovered. One of
his hands, still clutching a pistol, has fallen to his side; the other
presses a bloody handkerchief over his mouth. The spasm of mortal agony
convulses his features; but I know them for the features of a swarthy
man who twice frightened me by taking me up in his arms when I was a
child at Wincot Abbey. I asked the nurses at the time who that man was,
and they told me it was my uncle, Stephen Monkton. Plainly, as if he
stood there living, I see him now at your side, with the death-glare in
his great black eyes; and so have I ever seen him, since the moment when
he was shot; at home and abroad, waking or sleeping, day and night, we
are always together, wherever I go!"

His whispering tones sank into almost inaudible murmuring as he
pronounced these last words. From the direction and expression of his
eyes, I suspected that he was speaking to the apparition. If I had
beheld it myself at that moment, it would have been, I think, a less
horrible sight to witness than to see him, as I saw him now, muttering
inarticulately at vacancy. My own nerves were more shaken than I could
have thought possible by what had passed. A vague dread of being near
him in his present mood came over me, and I moved back a step or two.

He noticed the action instantly.

"Don't go! pray--pray don't go! Have I alarmed you? Don't you believe
me? Do the lights make your eyes ache? I only asked you to sit in the
glare of the candles because I could not bear to see the light that
always shines from the phantom there at dusk shining over you as you sat
in the shadow. Don't go--don't leave me yet!"

There was an utter forlornness, an unspeakable misery in his face as he
spoke these words, which gave me back my self-possession by the simple
process of first moving me to pity. I resumed my chair, and said that I
would stay with him as long as he wished.

"Thank you a thousand times. You are patience and kindness itself," he
said, going back to his former place and resuming his former gentleness
of manner. "Now that I have got over my first confession of the misery
that follows me in secret wherever I go, I think I can tell you calmly
all that remains to be told. You see, as I said, my Uncle Stephen" he
turned away his head quickly, and looked down at the table as the name
passed his lips--"my Uncle Stephen came twice to Wincot while I was a
child, and on both occasions frightened me dreadfully. He only took me
up in his arms and spoke to me--very kindly, as I afterward heard, for
_him_--but he terrified me, nevertheless. Perhaps I was frightened at
his great stature, his swarthy complexion, and his thick black hair and
mustache, as other children might have been; perhaps the mere sight of
him had some strange influence on me which I could not then understand
and cannot now explain. However it was, I used to dream of him long
after he had gone away, and to fancy that he was stealing on me to catch
me up in his arms whenever I was left in the dark. The servants who took
care of me found this out, and used to threaten me with my Uncle Stephen
whenever I was perverse and difficult to manage. As I grew up, I still
retained my vague dread and abhorrence of our absent relative. I always
listened intently, yet without knowing why, whenever his name was
mentioned by my father or my mother--listened with an unaccountable
presentiment that something terrible had happened to him, or was about
to happen to me. This feeling only changed when I was left alone in the
Abbey; and then it seemed to merge into the eager curiosity which had
begun to grow on me, rather before that time, about the origin of
the ancient prophecy predicting the extinction of our race. Are you
following me?"

"I follow every word with the closest attention."

"You must know, then, that I had first found out some fragments of
the old rhyme in which the prophecy occurs quoted as a curiosity in an
antiquarian book in the library. On the page opposite this quotation had
been pasted a rude old wood-cut, representing a dark-haired man, whose
face was so strangely like what I remembered of my Uncle Stephen that
the portrait absolutely startled me. When I asked my father about
this--it was then just before his death--he either knew, or pretended
to know, nothing of it; and when I afterward mentioned the prediction
he fretfully changed the subject. It was just the same with our chaplain
when I spoke to him. He said the portrait had been done centuries before
my uncle was born, and called the prophecy doggerel and nonsense. I
used to argue with him on the latter point, asking why we Catholics,
who believed that the gift of working miracles had never departed from
certain favored persons, might not just as well believe that the gift
of prophecy had never departed, either? He would not dispute with me; he
would only say that I must not waste time in thinking of such trifles;
that I had more imagination than was good for me, and must suppress
instead of exciting it. Such advice as this only irritated my curiosity.
I determined secretly to search throughout the oldest uninhabited part
of the Abbey, and to try if I could not find out from forgotten family
records what the portrait was, and when the prophecy had been first
written or uttered. Did you ever pass a day alone in the long-deserted
chambers of an ancient house?"

"Never! such solitude as that is not at all to my taste."

"Ah! what a life it was when I began my search. I should like to live it
over again. Such tempting suspense, such strange discoveries, such wild
fancies, such inthralling terrors, all belonged to that life. Only think
of breaking open the door of a room which no living soul had entered
before you for nearly a hundred years; think of the first step forward
into a region of airless, awful stillness, where the light falls faint
and sickly through closed windows and rotting curtains; think of the
ghostly creaking of the old floor that cries out on you for treading on
it, step as softly as you will; think of arms, helmets, weird tapestries
of by-gone days, that seem to be moving out on you from the walls as
you first walk up to them in the dim light; think of prying into great
cabinets and iron-clasped chests, not knowing what horrors may appear
when you tear them open; of poring over their contents till twilight
stole on you and darkness grew terrible in the lonely place; of trying
to leave it, and not being able to go, as if something held you; of wind
wailing at you outside; of shadows darkening round you, and closing you
up in obscurity within--only think of these things, and you may imagine
the fascination of suspense and terror in such a life as mine was in
those past days."

(I shrank from imagining that life: it was bad enough to see its
results, as I saw them before me now.)

"Well, my search lasted months and months; then it was suspended a
little; then resumed. In whatever direction I pursued it I always found
something to lure me on. Terrible confessions of past crimes, shocking
proofs of secret wickedness that had been hidden securely from all eyes
but mine, came to light. Sometimes these discoveries were associated
with particular parts of the Abbey, which have had a horrible interest
of their own for me ever since; sometimes with certain old portraits in
the picture-gallery, which I actually dreaded to look at after what I
had found out. There were periods when the results of this search of
mine so horrified me that I determined to give it up entirely; but I
never could persevere in my resolution; the temptation to go on seemed
at certain intervals to get too strong for me, and then I yielded to it
again and again. At last I found the book that had belonged to the monks
with the whole of the prophecy written in the blank leaf. This first
success encouraged me to get back further yet in the family records.
I had discovered nothing hitherto of the identity of the mysterious
portrait; but the same intuitive conviction which had assured me of its
extraordinary resemblance to my Uncle Stephen seemed also to assure me
that he must be more closely connected with the prophecy, and must
know more of it than any one else. I had no means of holding any
communication with him, no means of satisfying myself whether this
strange idea of mine were right or wrong, until the day when my doubts
were settled forever by the same terrible proof which is now present to
me in this very room."

He paused for a moment, and looked at me intently and suspiciously; then
asked if I believed all he had said to me so far. My instant reply in
the affirmative seemed to satisfy his doubts, and he went on.

"On a fine evening in February I was standing alone in one of the
deserted rooms of the western turret at the Abbey, looking at the
sunset. Just before the sun went down I felt a sensation stealing over
me which it is impossible to explain. I saw nothing, heard nothing, knew
nothing. This utter self-oblivion came suddenly; it was not fainting,
for I did not fall to the ground, did not move an inch from my place. If
such a thing could be, I should say it was the temporary separation of
soul and body without death; but all description of my situation at that
time is impossible. Call my state what you will, trance or catalepsy, I
know that I remained standing by the window utterly unconscious--dead,
mind and body--until the sun had set. Then I came to my senses again;
and then, when I opened my eyes, there was the apparition of Stephen
Monkton standing opposite to me, faintly luminous, just as it stands
opposite me at this very moment by your side."

"Was this before the news of the duel reached England?" I asked.

"_Two weeks before_ the news of it reached us at Wincot. And even when
we heard of the duel, we did not hear of the day on which it was
fought. I only found that out when the document which you have read was
published in the French newspaper. The date of that document, you will
remember, is February 22d, and it is stated that the duel was fought two
days afterward. I wrote down in my pocketbook, on the evening when I saw
the phantom, the day of the month on which it first appeared to me. That
day was the 24th of February."

He paused again, as if expecting me to say something. After the words he
had just spoken, what could I say? what could I think?

"Even in the first horror of first seeing the apparition," he went
on, "the prophecy against our house came to my mind, and with it the
conviction that I beheld before me, in that spectral presence, the
warning of my own doom. As soon as I recovered a little, I determined,
nevertheless, to test the reality of what I saw; to find out whether
I was the dupe of my own diseased fancy or not. I left the turret; the
phantom left it with me. I made an excuse to have the drawing-room at
the Abbey brilliantly lighted up; the figure was still opposite me. I
walked out into the park; it was there in the clear starlight. I went
away from home, and traveled many miles to the sea-side; still the tall
dark man in his death agony was with me. After this I strove against the
fatality no more. I returned to the Abbey, and tried to resign myself
to my misery. But this was not to be. I had a hope that was dearer to me
than my own life; I had one treasure belonging to me that I shuddered
at the prospect of losing; and when the phantom presence stood a warning
obstacle between me and this one treasure, this dearest hope, then my
misery grew heavier than I could bear. You must know what I am alluding
to; you must have heard often that I was engaged to be married?"

"Yes, often. I have some acquaintance myself with Miss Elmslie."

"You never can know all that she has sacrificed for me--never can
imagine what I have felt for years and years past"--his voice trembled,
and the tears came into his eyes--"but I dare not trust myself to speak
of that; the thought of the old happy days in the Abbey almost breaks my
heart now. Let me get back to the other subject. I must tell you that
I kept the frightful vision which pursued me, at all times and in all
places, a secret from everybody, knowing the vile reports about my
having inherited madness from my family, and fearing that an unfair
advantage would be taken of any confession that I might make. Though
the phantom always stood opposite to me, and therefore always appeared
either before or by the side of any person to whom I spoke, I soon
schooled myself to hide from others that I was looking at it except
on rare occasions, when I have perhaps betrayed myself to you. But my
self-possession availed me nothing with Ada. The day of our marriage was
approaching."

He stopped and shuddered. I waited in silence till he had controlled
himself.

"Think," he went on, "think of what I must have suffered at looking
always on that hideous vision whenever I looked on my betrothed wife!
Think of my taking her hand, and seeming to take it through the figure
of the apparition! Think of the calm angel-face and the tortured
specter-face being always together whenever my eyes met hers! Think
of this, and you will not wonder that I betrayed my secret to her. She
eagerly entreated to know the worst--nay, more, she insisted on knowing
it. At her bidding I told all, and then left her free to break our
engagement. The thought of death was in my heart as I spoke the parting
words--death by my own act, if life still held out after our separation.
She suspected that thought; she knew it, and never left me till her good
influence had destroyed it forever. But for her I should not have been
alive now; but for her I should never have attempted the project which
has brought me here."

"Do you mean that it was at Miss Elmslie's suggestion that you came to
Naples?" I asked, in amazement.

"I mean that what she said suggested the design which has brought me to
Naples," he answered. "While I believed that the phantom had appeared
to me as the fatal messenger of death, there was no comfort--there was
misery, rather, in hearing her say that no power on earth should make
her desert me, and that she would live for me, and for me only, through
every trial. But it was far different when we afterward reasoned
together about the purpose which the apparition had come to fulfill--far
different when she showed me that its mission might be for good instead
of for evil, and that the warning it was sent to give might be to my
profit instead of to my loss. At those words, the new idea which gave
the new hope of life came to me in an instant. I believed then, what I
believe now, that I have a supernatural warrant for my errand here. In
that faith I live; without it I should die. _She_ never ridiculed it,
never scorned it as insanity. Mark what I say! The spirit that appeared
to me in the Abbey--that has never left me since--that stands there now
by your side, warns me to escape from the fatality which hangs over our
race, and commands me, if I would avoid it, to bury the unburied dead.
Mortal loves and mortal interests must bow to that awful bidding. The
specter-presence will never leave me till I have sheltered the corpse
that cries to the earth to cover it! I dare not return--I dare not marry
till I have filled the place that is empty in Wincot vault."

His eyes flashed and dilated--his voice deepened--a fanatic ecstasy
shone in his expression as he uttered these words. Shocked and grieved
as I was, I made no attempt to remonstrate or to reason with him.
It would have been useless to have referred to any of the usual
commonplaces about optical delusions or diseased imaginations--worse
than useless to have attempted to account by natural causes for any
of the extraordinary coincidences and events of which he had spoken.
Briefly as he had referred to Miss Elmslie, he had said enough to show
me that the only hope of the poor girl who loved him best and had known
him longest of any one was in humoring his delusions to the last. How
faithfully she still clung to the belief that she could restore him!
How resolutely was she sacrificing herself to his morbid fancies, in the
hope of a happy future that might never come! Little as I knew of Miss
Elmslie, the mere thought of her situation, as I now reflected on it,
made me feel sick at heart.

"They call me Mad Monkton!" he exclaimed, suddenly breaking the silence
between us during the last few minutes, "Here and in England everybody
believes I am out of my senses except Ada and you. She has been my
salvation, and you will be my salvation too. Something told me that
when I first met you walking in the Villa Peale. I struggled against
the strong desire that was in me to trust my secret to you, but I could
resist it no longer when I saw you to-night at the ball; the phantom
seemed to draw me on to you as you stood alone in the quiet room. Tell
me more of that idea of yours about finding the place where the duel was
fought. If I set out to-morrow to seek for it myself, where must I go
to first? where?" He stopped; his strength was evidently becoming
exhausted, and his mind was growing confused. "What am I to do? I can't
remember. You know everything--will you not help me? My misery has made
me unable to help myself."

He stopped, murmured something about failing if he went to the frontier
alone, and spoke confusedly of delays that might be fatal, then tried to
utter the name of "Ada"; but, in pronouncing the first letter, his voice
faltered, and, turning abruptly from me, he burst into tears.

My pity for him got the better of my prudence at that moment, and
without thinking of responsibilities, I promised at once to do for him
whatever he asked. The wild triumph in his expression as he started up
and seized my hand showed me that I had better have been more cautious;
but it was too late now to retract what I had said. The next best thing
to do was to try if I could not induce him to compose himself a little,
and then to go away and think coolly over the whole affair by myself.

"Yes, yes," he rejoined, in answer to the few words I now spoke to try
and calm him, "don't be afraid about me. After what you have said, I'll
answer for my own coolness and composure under all emergencies. I have
been so long used to the apparition that I hardly feel its presence at
all except on rare occasions. Besides, I have here in this little packet
of letters the medicine for every malady of the sick heart. They are
Ada's letters; I read them to calm me whenever my misfortune seems to
get the better of my endurance. I wanted that half hour to read them in
to-night before you came, to make myself fit to see you, and I shall go
through them again after you are gone; so, once more, don't be afraid
about me. I know I shall succeed with your help, and Ada shall thank you
as you deserve to be thanked when we get back to England. If you hear
the fools at Naples talk about my being mad, don't trouble yourself
to contradict them; the scandal is so contemptible that it must end by
contradicting itself."

I left him, promising to return early the next day.

When I got back to my hotel, I felt that any idea of sleeping after all
that I had seen and heard was out of the question; so I lit my pipe,
and, sitting by the window--how it refreshed my mind just then to look
at the calm moonlight!--tried to think what it would be best to do. In
the first place, any appeal to doctors or to Alfred's friends in England
was out of the question. I could not persuade myself that his intellect
was sufficiently disordered to justify me, under existing circumstances,
in disclosing the secret which he had intrusted to my keeping. In the
second place, all attempts on my part to induce him to abandon the idea
of searching out his uncle's remains would be utterly useless after what
I had incautiously said to him. Having settled these two conclusions,
the only really great difficulty which remained to perplex me was
whether I was justified in aiding him to execute his extraordinary
purpose.

Supposing that, with my help, he found Mr. Monkton's body, and took
it back with him to England, was it right in me thus to lend myself to
promoting the marriage which would most likely follow these events--a
marriage which it might be the duty of every one to prevent at all
hazards? This set me thinking about the extent of his madness, or to
speak more mildly and more correctly, of his delusion. Sane he certainly
was on all ordinary subjects; nay, in all the narrative parts of what
he had said to me on this very evening he had spoken clearly and
connectedly. As for the story of the apparition, other men, with
intellects as clear as the intellects of their neighbors had fancied
themselves pursued by a phantom, and had even written about it in a
high strain of philosophical speculation. It was plain that the real
hallucination in the case now before me lay in Monkton's conviction
of the truth of the old prophecy, and in his idea that the fancied
apparition was a supernatural warning to him to evade its denunciations;
and it was equally clear that both delusions had been produced, in the
first instance, by the lonely life he had led acting on a naturally
excitable temperament, which was rendered further liable to moral
disease by an hereditary taint of insanity.

Was this curable? Miss Elmslie, who knew him far better than I did,
seemed by her conduct to think so. Had I any reason or right to
determine offhand that she was mistaken? Supposing I refused to go to
the frontier with him, he would then most certainly depart by himself,
to commit all sorts of errors, and perhaps to meet with all sorts
of accidents; while I, an idle man, with my time entirely at my own
disposal, was stopping at Naples, and leaving him to his fate after
I had suggested the plan of his expedition, and had encouraged him to
confide in me. In this way I kept turning the subject over and over
again in my mind, being quite free, let me add, from looking at it
in any other than a practical point of view. I firmly believed, as
a derider of all ghost stories, that Alfred was deceiving himself in
fancying that he had seen the apparition of his uncle before the news
of Mr. Monkton's death reached England, and I was on this account,
therefore, uninfluenced by the slightest infection of my unhappy
friend's delusions when I at last fairly decided to accompany him in his
extraordinary search. Possibly my harum-scarum fondness for excitement
at that time biased me a little in forming my resolution; but I must
add, in common justice to myself, that I also acted from motives of real
sympathy for Monkton, and from a sincere wish to allay, if I could, the
anxiety of the poor girl who was still so faithfully waiting and hoping
for him far away in England.

Certain arrangements preliminary to our departure, which I found myself
obliged to make after a second interview with Alfred, betrayed
the object of our journey to most of our Neapolitan friends. The
astonishment of everybody was of course unbounded, and the nearly
universal suspicion that I must be as mad in my way as Monkton himself
showed itself pretty plainly in my presence. Some people actually
tried to combat my resolution by telling me what a shameless profligate
Stephen Monkton had been--as if I had a strong personal interest in
hunting out his remains! Ridicule moved me as little as any arguments of
this sort; my mind was made up, and I was as obstinate then as I am now.

In two days' time I had got everything ready, and had ordered the
traveling carriage to the door some hours earlier than we had originally
settled. We were jovially threatened with "a parting cheer" by all our
English acquaintances, and I thought it desirable to avoid this on
my friend's account; for he had been more excited, as it was, by the
preparations for the journey than I at all liked. Accordingly, soon
after sunrise, without a soul in the street to stare at us, we privately
left Naples.

Nobody will wonder, I think, that I experienced some difficulty in
realizing my own position, and shrank instinctively from looking forward
a single day into the future, when I now found myself starting, in
company with "Mad Monkton," to hunt for the body of a dead duelist all
along the frontier line of the Roman States!



CHAPTER V.


I HAD settled it in my own mind that we had better make the town of
Fondi, close on the frontier, our headquarters, to begin with, and I
had arranged, with the assistance of the embassy, that the leaden coffin
should follow us so far, securely nailed up in its packing-case. Besides
our passports, we were well furnished with letters of introduction to
the local authorities at most of the important frontier towns, and, to
crown all, we had money enough at our command (thanks to Monkton's
vast fortune) to make sure of the services of any one whom we wanted to
assist us all along our line of search. These various resources insured
us every facility for action, provided always that we succeeded in
discovering the body of the dead duelist. But, in the very probable
event of our failing to do this, our future prospects--more especially
after the responsibility I had undertaken--were of anything but an
agreeable nature to contemplate. I confess I felt uneasy, almost
hopeless, as we posted, in the dazzling Italian sunshine, along the road
to Fondi.

We made an easy two days' journey of it; for I had insisted, on
Monkton's account, that we should travel slowly.

On the first day the excessive agitation of my companion a little
alarmed me; he showed, in many ways, more symptoms of a disordered mind
than I had yet observed in him. On the second day, however, he seemed to
get accustomed to contemplate calmly the new idea of the search on which
we were bent, and, except on one point, he was cheerful and composed
enough. Whenever his dead uncle formed the subject of conversation,
he still persisted--on the strength of the old prophecy, and under the
influence of the apparition which he saw, or thought he saw always--in
asserting that the corpse of Stephen Monkton, wherever it was, lay
yet unburied. On every other topic he deferred to me with the utmost
readiness and docility; on this he maintained his strange opinion with
an obstinacy which set reason and persuasion alike at defiance.

On the third day we rested at Fondi. The packing-case, with the coffin
in it, reached us, and was deposited in a safe place under lock and
key. We engaged some mules, and found a man to act as guide who knew
the country thoroughly. It occurred to me that we had better begin by
confiding the real object of our journey only to the most trustworthy
people we could find among the better-educated classes. For this reason
we followed, in one respect, the example of the fatal dueling-party, by
starting, early on the morning of the fourth day, with sketch-books and
color-boxes, as if we were only artists in search of the picturesque.

After traveling some hours in a northerly direction within the Roman
frontier, we halted to rest ourselves and our mules at a wild little
village far out of the track of tourists in general.

The only person of the smallest importance in the place was the priest,
and to him I addressed my first inquiries, leaving Monkton to await my
return with the guide. I spoke Italian quite fluently, and correctly
enough for my purpose, and was extremely polite and cautious in
introducing my business, but in spite of all the pains I took, I only
succeeded in frightening and bewildering the poor priest more and more
with every fresh word I said to him. The idea of a dueling-party and a
dead man seemed to scare him out of his senses. He bowed, fidgeted, cast
his eyes up to heaven, and piteously shrugging his shoulders, told me,
with rapid Italian circumlocution, that he had not the faintest idea
of what I was talking about. This was my first failure. I confess I was
weak enough to feel a little dispirited when I rejoined Monkton and the
guide.

After the heat of the day was over we resumed our journey.

About three miles from the village, the road, or rather cart-track,
branched off in two directions. The path to the right, our guide
informed us, led up among the mountains to a convent about six miles
off. If we penetrated beyond the convent we should soon reach the
Neapolitan frontier. The path to the left led far inward on the Roman
territory, and would conduct us to a small town where we could sleep for
the night. Now the Roman territory presented the first and fittest field
for our search, and the convent was always within reach, supposing we
returned to Fondi unsuccessful. Besides, the path to the left led over
the widest part of the country we were starting to explore, and I was
always for vanquishing the greatest difficulty first; so we decided
manfully on turning to the left. The expedition in which this resolution
involved us lasted a whole week, and produced no results. We discovered
absolutely nothing, and returned to our headquarters at Fondi so
completely baffled that we did not know whither to turn our steps next.

I was made much more uneasy by the effect of our failure on Monkton than
by the failure itself. His resolution appeared to break down altogether
as soon as we began to retrace our steps.

He became first fretful and capricious, then silent and desponding.
Finally, he sank into a lethargy of body and mind that seriously
alarmed me. On the morning after our return to Fondi he showed a strange
tendency to sleep incessantly, which made me suspect the existence of
some physical malady in his brain. The whole day he hardly exchanged
a word with me, and seemed to be never fairly awake. Early the next
morning I went into his room, and found him as silent and lethargic as
ever. His servant, who was with us, informed me that Alfred had once or
twice before exhibited such physical symptoms of mental exhaustion as
we were now observing during his father's lifetime at Wincot Abbey.
This piece of information made me feel easier, and left my mind free to
return to the consideration of the errand which had brought us to Fondi.

I resolved to occupy the time until my companion got better in
prosecuting our search by myself. That path to the right hand which led
to the convent had not yet been explored. If I set off to trace it, I
need not be away from Monkton more than one night, and I should at least
be able, on my return, to give him the satisfaction of knowing that one
more uncertainty regarding the place of the duel had been cleared up.
These considerations decided me. I left a message for my friend in case
he asked where I had gone, and set out once more for the village at
which we had halted when starting on our first expedition.

Intending to walk to the convent, I parted company with the guide and
the mules where the track branched off, leaving them to go back to the
village and await my return.

For the first four miles the path gently ascended through an open
country, then became abruptly much steeper, and led me deeper and deeper
among thickets and endless woods. By the time my watch informed me that
I must have nearly walked my appointed distance, the view was bounded on
all sides and the sky was shut out overhead by an impervious screen of
leaves and branches. I still followed my only guide, the steep path; and
in ten minutes, emerging suddenly on a plot of tolerably clear and level
ground, I saw the convent before me.

It was a dark, low, sinister-looking place. Not a sign of life or
movement was visible anywhere about it. Green stains streaked the once
white facade of the chapel in all directions. Moss clustered thick in
every crevice of the heavy scowling wall that surrounded the convent.
Long lank weeds grew out of the fissures of roof and parapet, and,
drooping far downward, waved wearily in and out of the barred dormitory
windows. The very cross opposite the entrance-gate, with a shocking
life-sized figure in wood nailed to it, was so beset at the base with
crawling creatures, and looked so slimy, green, and rotten all the way
up, that I absolutely shrank from it.

A bell-rope with a broken handle hung by the gate. I approached
it--hesitated, I hardly knew why--looked up at the convent again, and
then walked round to the back of the building, partly to gain time
to consider what I had better do next, partly from an unaccountable
curiosity that urged me, strangely to myself, to see all I could of the
outside of the place before I attempted to gain admission at the gate.

At the back of the convent I found an outhouse, built on to the wall--a
clumsy, decayed building, with the greater part of the roof fallen in,
and with a jagged hole in one of its sides, where in all probability a
window had once been. Behind the outhouse the trees grew thicker than
ever. As I looked toward them I could not determine whether the ground
beyond me rose or fell--whether it was grassy, or earthy, or rocky. I
could see nothing but the all-pervading leaves, brambles, ferns, and
long grass.

Not a sound broke the oppressive stillness. No bird's note rose from the
leafy wilderness around me; no voices spoke in the convent garden behind
the scowling wall; no clock struck in the chapel-tower; no dog barked in
the ruined outhouse. The dead silence deepened the solitude of the place
inexpressibly. I began to feel it weighing on my spirits--the more,
because woods were never favorite places with me to walk in. The sort of
pastoral happiness which poets often represent when they sing of life in
the woods never, to my mind, has half the charm of life on the mountain
or in the plain. When I am in a wood, I miss the boundless loveliness of
the sky, and the delicious softness that distance gives to the earthly
view beneath. I feel oppressively the change which the free air suffers
when it gets imprisoned among leaves, and I am always awed, rather than
pleased, by that mysterious still light which shines with such a strange
dim luster in deep places among trees. It may convict me of want
of taste and absence of due feeling for the marvelous beauties of
vegetation, but I must frankly own that I never penetrate far into a
wood without finding that the getting out of it again is the pleasantest
part of my walk--the getting out on to the barest down, the wildest
hill-side, the bleakest mountain top--the getting out anywhere, so that
I can see the sky over me and the view before me as far as my eye can
reach.

After such a confession as I have now made, it will appear surprising to
no one that I should have felt the strongest possible inclination, while
I stood by the ruined outhouse, to retrace my steps at once, and make
the best of my way out of the wood. I had, indeed, actually turned to
depart, when the remembrance of the errand which had brought me to the
convent suddenly stayed my feet. It seemed doubtful whether I should be
admitted into the building if I rang the bell; and more than doubtful,
if I were let in, whether the inhabitants would be able to afford me
any clew to the information of which I was in search. However, it was my
duty to Monkton to leave no means of helping him in his desperate object
untried; so I resolved to go round to the front of the convent again,
and ring at the gate-bell at all hazards.

By the merest chance I looked up as I passed the side of the outhouse
where the jagged hole was, and noticed that it was pierced rather high
in the wall.

As I stopped to observe this, the closeness of the atmosphere in the
wood seemed to be affecting me more unpleasantly than ever.

I waited a minute and untied my cravat.

Closeness? surely it was something more than that. The air was even
more distasteful to my nostrils than to my lungs. There was some faint,
indescribable smell loading it--some smell of which I had never had any
previous experience--some smell which I thought (now that my attention
was directed to it) grew more and more certainly traceable to its source
the nearer I advanced to the outhouse.

By the time I had tried the experiment two or three times, and had made
myself sure of this fact, my curiosity became excited. There were plenty
of fragments of stone and brick lying about me. I gathered some of them
together, and piled them up below the hole, then mounted to the top,
and, feeling rather ashamed of what I was doing, peeped into the
outhouse.

The sight of horror that met my eyes the instant I looked through the
hole is as present to my memory now as if I had beheld it yesterday. I
can hardly write of it at this distance of time without a thrill of the
old terror running through me again to the heart.

The first impression conveyed to me, as I looked in, was of a long,
recumbent object, tinged with a lightish blue color all over, extended
on trestles, and bearing a certain hideous, half-formed resemblance to
the human face and figure. I looked again, and felt certain of it. There
were the prominences of the forehead, nose, and chin, dimly shown as
under a veil--there, the round outline of the chest and the hollow below
it--there, the points of the knees, and the stiff, ghastly, upturned
feet. I looked again, yet more attentively. My eyes got accustomed to
the dim light streaming in through the broken roof, and I satisfied
myself, judging by the great length of the body from head to foot, that
I was looking at the corpse of a man--a corpse that had apparently once
had a sheet spread over it, and that had lain rotting on the trestles
under the open sky long enough for the linen to take the livid,
light-blue tinge of mildew and decay which now covered it.

How long I remained with my eyes fixed on that dread sight of death, on
that tombless, terrible wreck of humanity, poisoning the still air, and
seeming even to stain the faint descending light that disclosed it, I
know not. I remember a dull, distant sound among the trees, as if the
breeze were rising--the slow creeping on of the sound to near the place
where I stood--the noiseless whirling fall of a dead leaf on the corpse
below me, through the gap in the outhouse roof--and the effect of
awakening my energies, of relaxing the heavy strain on my mind, which
even the slight change wrought in the scene I beheld by the falling leaf
produced in me immediately. I descended to the ground, and, sitting down
on the heap of stones, wiped away the thick perspiration which covered
my face, and which I now became aware of for the first time. It was
something more than the hideous spectacle unexpectedly offered to my
eyes which had shaken my nerves as I felt that they were shaken now.
Monkton's prediction that, if we succeeded in discovering his uncle's
body, we should find it unburied, recurred to me the instant I saw the
trestles and their ghastly burden. I felt assured on the instant that
I had found the dead man--the old prophecy recurred to my memory--a
strange yearning sorrow, a vague foreboding of ill, an inexplicable
terror, as I thought of the poor lad who was awaiting my return in the
distant town, struck through me with a chill of superstitious dread,
robbed me of my judgment and resolution, and left me when I had at last
recovered myself, weak and dizzy, as if I had just suffered under some
pang of overpowering physical pain.

I hastened round to the convent gate and rang impatiently at the
bell--waited a little while and rang again--then heard footsteps.

In the middle of the gate, just opposite my face, there was a small
sliding panel, not more than a few inches long; this was presently
pushed aside from within. I saw, through a bit of iron grating, two
dull, light gray eyes staring vacantly at me, and heard a feeble husky
voice saying:

"What may you please to want?'

"I am a traveler--" I began.

"We live in a miserable place. We have nothing to show travelers here."

"I don't come to see anything. I have an important question to ask,
which I believe some one in this convent will be able to answer. If you
are not willing to let me in, at least come out and speak to me here."

"Are you alone?"

"Quite alone."

"Are there no women with you?"

"None."

The gate was slowly unbarred, and an old Capuchin, very infirm, very
suspicious, and very dirty, stood before me. I was far too excited and
impatient to waste any time in prefatory phrases; so, telling the monk
at once how I had looked through the hole in the outhouse, and what I
had seen inside, I asked him, in plain terms, who the man had been whose
corpse I had beheld, and why the body was left unburied?

The old Capuchin listened to me with watery eyes that twinkled
suspiciously. He had a battered tin snuff-box in his hand, and his
finger and thumb slowly chased a few scattered grains of snuff round
and round the inside of the box all the time I was speaking. When I had
done, he shook his head and said: "That was certainly an ugly sight in
their outhouse; one of the ugliest sights, he felt sure, that ever I had
seen in all my life!"

"I don't want to talk of the sight," I rejoined, impatiently; "I want
to know who the man was, how he died, and why he is not decently buried.
Can you tell me?"

The monk's finger and thumb having captured three or four grains of
snuff at last, he slowly drew them into his nostrils, holding the box
open under his nose the while, to prevent the possibility of wasting
even one grain, sniffed once or twice luxuriously--closed the
box--then looked at me again with his eyes watering and twinkling more
suspiciously than before.

"Yes," said the monk, "that's an ugly sight in our outhouse--a very ugly
sight, certainly!"

I never had more difficulty in keeping my temper in my life than at
that moment. I succeeded, however, in repressing a very disrespectful
expression on the subject of monks in general, which was on the tip
of my tongue, and made another attempt to conquer the old man's
exasperating reserve. Fortunately for my chances of succeeding with him,
I was a snuff-taker myself, and I had a box full of excellent English
snuff in my pocket, which I now produced as a bribe. It was my last
resource.

"I thought your box seemed empty just now," said I; "will you try a
pinch out of mine?"

The offer was accepted with an almost youthful alacrity of gesture. The
Capuchin took the largest pinch I ever saw held between any man's finger
and thumb--inhaled it slowly without spilling a single grain--half
closed his eyes--and, wagging his head gently, patted me paternally on
the back.

"Oh, my son," said the monk, "what delectable snuff! Oh, my son and
amiable traveler, give the spiritual father who loves you yet another
tiny, tiny pinch!"

"Let me fill your box for you. I shall have plenty left for myself."

The battered tin snuff-box was given to me before I had done speaking;
the paternal hand patted my back more approvingly than ever; the feeble,
husky voice grew glib and eloquent in my praise. I had evidently found
out the weak side of the old Capuchin, and, on returning him his box, I
took instant advantage of the discovery.

"Excuse my troubling you on the subject again," I said, "but I have
particular reasons for wanting to hear all that you can tell me in
explanation of that horrible sight in the outhouse."

"Come in," answered the monk.

He drew me inside the gate, closed it, and then leading the way across a
grass-grown courtyard, looking out on a weedy kitchen-garden, showed
me into a long room with a low ceiling, a dirty dresser, a few
rudely-carved stall seats, and one or two grim, mildewed pictures for
ornaments. This was the sacristy.

"There's nobody here, and it's nice and cool," said the old Capuchin.
It was so damp that I actually shivered. "Would you like to see the
church?" said the monk; "a jewel of a church, if we could keep it in
repair; but we can't. Ah! malediction and misery, we are too poor to
keep our church in repair!"

Here he shook his head and began fumbling with a large bunch of keys.

"Never mind the church now," said I. "Can you, or can you not, tell me
what I want to know?"

"Everything, from beginning to end--absolutely everything. Why, I
answered the gate-bell--I always answer the gate-bell here," said the
Capuchin.

"What, in Heaven's name, has the gate-bell to do with the unburied
corpse in your house?"

"Listen, son of mine, and you shall know. Some time ago--some
months--ah! me, I'm old; I've lost my memory; I don't know how many
months--ah! miserable me, what a very old, old monk I am!" Here he
comforted himself with another pinch of snuff.

"Never mind the exact time," said I. "I don't care about that."

"Good," said the Capuchin. "Now I can go on. Well, let us say it is some
months ago--we in this convent are all at breakfast--wretched, wretched
breakfasts, son of mine, in this convent!--we are at breakfast, and we
hear _bang! bang!_ twice over. 'Guns,' says I. 'What are they shooting
for?' says Brother Jeremy. 'Game,' says Brother Vincent. 'Aha! game,'
says Brother Jeremy. 'If I hear more, I shall send out and discover what
it means,' says the father superior. We hear no more, and we go on with
our wretched breakfasts."

"Where did the report of firearms come from?" I inquired.

"From down below--beyond the big trees at the back of the convent, where
there's some clear ground--nice ground, if it wasn't for the pools and
puddles. But, ah! misery, how damp we are in these parts! how very, very
damp!"

"Well, what happened after the report of firearms?"

"You shall hear. We are still at breakfast, all silent--for what have we
to talk about here? What have we but our devotions, our kitchen-garden,
and our wretched, wretched bits of breakfasts and dinners? I say we are
all silent, when there comes suddenly such a ring at the bell as never
was heard before--a very devil of a ring--a ring that caught us all with
our bits--our wretched, wretched bits!--in our mouths, and stopped us
before we could swallow them. 'Go, brother of mine,' says the father
superior to me, 'go; it is your duty--go to the gate.' I am brave--a
very lion of a Capuchin. I slip out on tiptoe--I wait--I listen--I pull
back our little shutter in the gate--I wait, I listen again--I peep
through the hole--nothing, absolutely nothing that I can see. I am
brave--I am not to be daunted. What do I do next? I open the gate. Ah!
sacred Mother of Heaven, what do I behold lying all along our threshold?
A man--dead!--a big man; bigger than you, bigger than me, bigger than
anybody in this convent--buttoned up tight in a fine coat, with black
eyes, staring, staring up at the sky, and blood soaking through and
through the front of his shirt. What do I do? I scream once--I scream
twice--and run back to the father superior!"

All the particulars of the fatal duel which I had gleaned from the
French newspaper in Monkton's room at Naples recurred vividly to my
memory. The suspicion that I had felt when I looked into the outhouse
became a certainty as I listened to the old monk's last words.

"So far I understand," said I. "The corpse I have just seen in the
outhouse is the corpse of the man whom you found dead outside your gate.
Now tell me why you have not given the remains decent burial."

"Wait--wait--wait," answered the Capuchin. "The father superior hears
me scream and comes out; we all run together to the gate; we lift up the
big man and look at him close. Dead! dead as this (smacking the dresser
with his hand). We look again, and see a bit of paper pinned to the
collar of his coat. Aha! son of mine, you start at that. I thought I
should make you start at last."

I had started, indeed. That paper was doubtless the leaf mentioned
in the second's unfinished narrative as having been torn out of his
pocketbook, and inscribed with the statement of how the dead man had
lost his life. If proof positive were wanted to identify the dead body,
here was such proof found.

"What do you think was written on the bit of paper?" continued the
Capuchin "We read and shudder. This dead man has been killed in a
duel--he, the desperate, the miserable, has died in the commission of
mortal sin; and the men who saw the killing of him ask us Capuchins,
holy men, servants of Heaven, children of our lord the Pope--they ask
_us_ to give him burial! Oh! but we are outraged when we read that; we
groan, we wring our hands, we turn away, we tear our beards, we--"

"Wait one moment," said I, seeing that the old man was heating himself
with his narrative, and was likely, unless I stopped him, to talk more
and more fluently to less and less purpose--"wait a moment. Have you
preserved the paper that was pinned to the dead man's coat; and can I
look at it?"

The Capuchin seemed on the point of giving me an answer, when he
suddenly checked himself. I saw his eyes wander away from my face, and
at the same moment heard a door softly opened and closed again behind
me.

Looking round immediately, I observed another monk in the sacristy--a
tall, lean, black-bearded man, in whose presence my old friend with the
snuff-box suddenly became quite decorous and devotional to look at. I
suspected I was in the presence of the father superior, and I found that
I was right the moment he addressed me.

"I am the father superior of this convent," he said, in quiet, clear
tones, and looking me straight in the face while he spoke, with coldly
attentive eyes. "I have heard the latter part of your conversation, and
I wish to know why you are so particularly anxious to see the piece of
paper that was pinned to the dead man's coat?"

The coolness with which he avowed that he had been listening, and the
quietly imperative manner in which he put his concluding question,
perplexed and startled me. I hardly knew at first what tone I ought to
take in answering him. He observed my hesitation, and attributing it to
the wrong cause, signed to the old Capuchin to retire. Humbly stroking
his long gray beard, and furtively consoling himself with a private
pinch of the "delectable snuff," my venerable friend shuffled out of
the room, making a profound obeisance at the door just before he
disappeared.

"Now," said the father superior, as coldly as ever, "I am waiting, sir,
for your reply."

"You shall have it in the fewest possible words," said I, answering him
in his own tone. "I find, to my disgust and horror, that there is an
unburied corpse in an outhouse attached to your convent. I believe that
corpse to be the body of an English gentleman of rank and fortune, who
was killed in a duel. I have come into this neighborhood with the
nephew and only relation of the slain man, for the express purpose of
recovering his remains; and I wish to see the paper found on the body,
because I believe that paper will identify it to the satisfaction of
the relative to whom I have referred. Do you find my reply sufficiently
straightforward? And do you mean to give me permission to look at the
paper?"

"I am satisfied with your reply, and see no reason for refusing you a
sight of the paper," said the father superior; "but I have something to
say first. In speaking of the impression produced on you by beholding
the corpse, you used the words 'disgust' and 'horror.' This license
of expression in relation to what you have seen in the precincts of a
convent proves to me that you are out of the pale of the Holy Catholic
Church. You have no right, therefore, to expect any explanation; but
I will give you one, nevertheless, as a favor. The slain man died,
unabsolved, in the commission of mortal sin. We infer so much from the
paper which we found on his body; and we know, by the evidence of our
own eyes and ears, that he was killed on the territories of the Church,
and in the act of committing direct violation of those special laws
against the crime of dueling, the strict enforcement of which the holy
father himself has urged on the faithful throughout his dominions by
letters signed with his own hand. Inside this convent the ground is
consecrated, and we Catholics are not accustomed to bury the outlaws of
our religion, the enemies of our holy father, and the violators of our
most sacred laws in consecrated ground. Outside this convent we have no
rights and no power; and, if we had both, we should remember that we are
monks, not grave-diggers, and that the only burial with which _we_ can
have any concern is burial with the prayers of the Church. That is all
the explanation I think it necessary to give. Wait for me here, and you
shall see the paper." With those words the father superior left the room
as quietly as he had entered it.

I had hardly time to think over this bitter and ungracious explanation,
and to feel a little piqued by the language and manner of the person who
had given it to me, before the father superior returned with the
paper in his hand. He placed it before me on the dresser, and I read,
hurriedly traced in pencil, the following lines:


"This paper is attached to the body of the late Mr. Stephen Monkton, an
Englishman of distinction. He has been shot in a duel, conducted with
perfect gallantry and honor on both sides. His body is placed at the
door of this convent, to receive burial at the hands of its inmates, the
survivors of the encounter being obliged to separate and secure their
safety by immediate flight. I, the second of the slain man, and the
writer of this explanation, certify, on my word of honor as a gentleman
that the shot which killed my principal on the instant was fired fairly,
in the strictest accordance with the rules laid down beforehand for the
conduct of the duel.

"(Signed), F."


"F." I recognized easily enough as the initial letter of Monsieur
Foulon's name, the second of Mr. Monkton, who had died of consumption at
Paris.

The discovery and the identification were now complete. Nothing remained
but to break the news to Alfred, and to get permission to remove the
remains in the outhouse. I began almost to doubt the evidence of my own
senses when I reflected that the apparently impracticable object with
which we had left Naples was already, by the merest chance, virtually
accomplished.

"The evidence of the paper is decisive," said I, handing it back. "There
can be no doubt that the remains in the outhouse are the remains of
which we have been in search. May I inquire if any obstacles will be
thrown in our way should the late Mr. Monkton's nephew wish to remove
his uncle's body to the family burial-place in England?"

"Where is this nephew?" asked the father superior.

"He is now awaiting my return at the town of Fondi."

"Is he in a position to prove his relationship?"

"Certainly; he has papers with him which will place it beyond a doubt."

"Let him satisfy the civil authorities of his claim, and he need expect
no obstacle to his wishes from any one here."

I was in no humor for talking a moment longer with my sour-tempered
companion than I could help. The day was wearing on me fast; and,
whether night overtook me or not, I was resolved never to stop on my
return till I got back to Fondi. Accordingly, after telling the father
superior that he might expect to hear from me again immediately, I made
my bow and hastened out of the sacristy.

At the convent gate stood my old friend with the tin snuff-box, waiting
to let me out.

"Bless you, may son," said the venerable recluse, giving me a farewell
pat on the shoulder, "come back soon to your spiritual father who
loves you, and amiably favor him with another tiny, tiny pinch of the
delectable snuff."



CHAPTER VI.


I RETURNED at the top of my speed to the village where I had left the
mules, had the animals saddled immediately, and succeeded in getting
back to Fondi a little before sunset.

While ascending the stairs of our hotel, I suffered under the most
painful uncertainty as to how I should best communicate the news of my
discovery to Alfred. If I could not succeed in preparing him properly
for my tidings, the results, with such an organization as his, might
be fatal. On opening the door of his room, I felt by no means sure of
myself; and when I confronted him, his manner of receiving me took me
so much by surprise that, for a moment or two, I lost my self-possession
altogether.

Every trace of the lethargy in which he was sunk when I had last seen
him had disappeared. His eyes were bright, his cheeks deeply flushed. As
I entered, he started up, and refused my offered hand.

"You have not treated me like a friend," he said, passionately; "you had
no right to continue the search unless I searched with you--you had
no right to leave me here alone. I was wrong to trust you; you are no
better than all the rest of them."

I had by this time recovered a little from my first astonishment,
and was able to reply before he could say anything more. It was quite
useless, in his present state, to reason with him or to defend myself. I
determined to risk everything, and break my news to him at once.

"You will treat me more justly, Monkton, when you know that I have been
doing you good service during my absence," I said. "Unless I am greatly
mistaken, the object for which we have left Naples may be nearer
attainment by both of us than--"

The flush left his cheeks almost in an instant. Some expression in
my face, or some tone in my voice, of which I was not conscious, had
revealed to his nervously-quickened perception more than I had intended
that he should know at first. His eyes fixed themselves intently on
mine; his hand grasped my arm; and he said to me in an eager whisper:

"Tell me the truth at once. Have you found him?"

It was too late to hesitate. I answered in the affirmative.

"Buried or unburied?"

His voice rose abruptly as he put the question, and his unoccupied hand
fastened on my other arm.

"Unburied."

I had hardly uttered the word before the blood flew back into his
cheeks; his eyes flashed again as they looked into mine, and he burst
into a fit of triumphant laughter, which shocked and startled me
inexpressibly.

"What did I tell you? What do you say to the old prophecy now?" he
cried, dropping his hold on my arms, and pacing backward and forward in
the room. "Own you were wrong. Own it, as all Naples shall own it, when
once I have got him safe in his coffin!"

His laughter grew more and mere violent. I tried to quiet him in vain.
His servant and the landlord of the inn entered the room, but they only
added fuel to the fire, and I made them go out again. As I shut the door
on them, I observed lying on a table near at hand the packet of letters
from Miss Elmslie, which my unhappy friend preserved with such care, and
read and re-read with such unfailing devotion. Looking toward me just
when I passed by the table, the letters caught his eye. The new hope
for the future, in connection with the writer of them, which my news was
already awakening in his heart, seemed to overwhelm him in an instant
at sight of the treasured memorials that reminded him of his betrothed
wife. His laughter ceased, his face changed, he ran to the table, caught
the letters up in his hand, looked from them to me for one moment with
an altered expression which went to my heart, then sank down on his
knees at the table, laid his face on the letters, and burst into tears.
I let the new emotion have its way uninterruptedly, and quitted the
room without saying a word. When I returned after a lapse of some little
time, I found him sitting quietly in his chair, reading one of the
letters from the packet which rested on his knee.

His look was kindness itself; his gesture almost womanly in its
gentleness as he rose to meet me, and anxiously held out his hand.

He was quite calm enough now to hear in detail all that I had to tell
him. I suppressed nothing but the particulars of the state in which I
had found the corpse. I assumed no right of direction as to the share he
was to take in our future proceedings, with the exception of insisting
beforehand that he should leave the absolute superintendence of the
removal of the body to me, and that he should be satisfied with a sight
of M. Foulon's paper, after receiving my assurance that the remains
placed in the coffin were really and truly the remains of which we had
been in search.

"Your nerves are not so strong as mine," I said, by way of apology for
my apparent dictation, "and for that reason I must beg leave to assume
the leadership in all that we have now to do, until I see the leaden
coffin soldered down and safe in your possession. After that I shall
resign all my functions to you."

"I want words to thank you for your kindness," he answered. "No
brother could have borne with me more affectionately, or helped me more
patiently than you."

He stopped and grew thoughtful, then occupied himself in tying up slowly
and carefully the packet of Miss Elmslie's letters, and then looked
suddenly toward the vacant wall behind me with that strange expression
the meaning of which I knew so well. Since we had left Naples I had
purposely avoided exciting him by talking on the useless and shocking
subject of the apparition by which he believed himself to be perpetually
followed. Just now, however, he seemed so calm and collected--so little
likely to be violently agitated by any allusion to the dangerous topic,
that I ventured to speak out boldly.

"Does the phantom still appear to you," I asked, "as it appeared at
Naples?"

He looked at me and smiled.

"Did I not tell you that it followed me everywhere?" His eyes wandered
back again to the vacant space, and he went on speaking in that
direction as if he had been continuing the conversation with some third
person in the room. "We shall part," he said, slowly and softly, "when
the empty place is filled in Wincot vault. Then I shall stand with Ada
before the altar in the Abbey chapel, and when my eyes meet hers they
will see the tortured face no more."

Saying this, he leaned his head on his hand, sighed, and began repeating
softly to himself the lines of the old prophecy:

     When in Wincot vault a place
     Waits for one of Monkton's race--
     When that one forlorn shall lie
     Graveless under open sky,
     Beggared of six feet of earth,
     Though lord of acres from his birth--
     That shall be a certain sign
     Of the end of Monktons line.
     Dwindling ever faster, faster,
     Dwindling to the last-left master;
     From mortal ken, from light of day,
     Monkton's race shall pass away."

Fancying that he pronounced the last lines a little incoherently, I
tried to make him change the subject. He took no notice of what I said,
and went on talking to himself.

"Monkton's race shall pass away," he repeated, "but not with _me_. The
fatality hangs over _my_ head no longer. I shall bury the unburied dead;
I shall fill the vacant place in Wincot vault; and then--then the new
life, the life with Ada!" That name seemed to recall him to himself. He
drew his traveling desk toward him, placed the packet of letters in it,
and then took out a sheet of paper. "I am going to write to Ada," he
said, turning to me, "and tell her the good news. Her happiness, when
she knows it, will be even greater than mine."

Worn out by the events of the day, I left him writing and went to bed.
I was, however, either too anxious or too tired to sleep. In this waking
condition, my mind naturally occupied itself with the discovery at
the convent and with the events to which that discovery would in all
probability lead. As I thought on the future, a depression for which
I could not account weighed on my spirits. There was not the slightest
reason for the vaguely melancholy forebodings that oppressed me. The
remains, to the finding of which my unhappy friend attached so much
importance, had been traced; they would certainly be placed at his
disposal in a few days; he might take them to England by the first
merchant vessel that sailed from Naples; and, the gratification of his
strange caprice thus accomplished, there was at least some reason to
hope that his mind might recover its tone, and that the new life he
would lead at Wincot might result in making him a happy man. Such
considerations as these were, in themselves, certainly not calculated to
exert any melancholy influence over me; and yet, all through the night,
the same inconceivable, unaccountable depression weighed heavily on my
spirits--heavily through the hours of darkness--heavily, even when I
walked out to breathe the first freshness of the early morning air.

With the day came the all-engrossing business of opening negotiations
with the authorities.

Only those who have had to deal with Italian officials can imagine how
our patience was tried by every one with whom we came in contact. We
were bandied about from one authority to the other, were stared at,
cross-questioned, mystified--not in the least because the case presented
any special difficulties or intricacies, but because it was absolutely
necessary that every civil dignitary to whom we applied should assert
his own importance by leading us to our object in the most roundabout
manner possible. After our first day's experience of official life in
Italy, I left the absurd formalities, which we had no choice but to
perform, to be accomplished by Alfred alone, and applied myself to the
really serious question of how the remains in the convent outhouse were
to be safely removed.

The best plan that suggested itself to me was to write to a friend in
Rome, where I knew that it was a custom to embalm the bodies of high
dignitaries of the Church, and where, I consequently inferred, such
chemical assistance as was needed in our emergency might be obtained. I
simply stated in my letter that the removal of the body was imperative,
then described the condition in which I had found it, and engaged that
no expense on our part should be spared if the right person or persons
could be found to help us. Here, again, more difficulties interposed
themselves, and more useless formalities were to be gone through, but
in the end patience, perseverance, and money triumphed, and two men came
expressly from Rome to undertake the duties we required of them.

It is unnecessary that I should shock the reader by entering into any
detail in this part of my narrative. When I have said that the progress
of decay was so far suspended by chemical means as to allow of
the remains being placed in the coffin, and to insure their being
transported to England with perfect safety and convenience, I have
said enough. After ten days had been wasted in useless delays and
difficulties, I had the satisfaction of seeing the convent outhouse
empty at last; passed through a final ceremony of snuff-taking,
or rather, of snuff-giving, with the old Capuchin, and ordered the
traveling carriages to be ready at the inn door. Hardly a month had
elapsed since our departure ere we entered Naples successful in the
achievement of a design which had been ridiculed as wildly impracticable
by every friend of ours who had heard of it.

The first object to be accomplished on our return was to obtain the
means of carrying the coffin to England--by sea, as a matter of course.
All inquiries after a merchant vessel on the point of sailing for any
British port led to the most unsatisfactory results. There was only one
way of insuring the immediate transportation of the remains to England,
and that was to hire a vessel. Impatient to return, and resolved not
to lose sight of the coffin till he had seen it placed in Wincot vault,
Monkton decided immediately on hiring the first ship that could be
obtained. The vessel in port which we were informed could soonest be got
ready for sea was a Sicilian brig, and this vessel my friend accordingly
engaged. The best dock-yard artisans that could be got were set to
work, and the smartest captain and crew to be picked up on an emergency
in Naples were chosen to navigate the brig.

Monkton, after again expressing in the warmest terms his gratitude for
the services I had rendered him, disclaimed any intention of asking me
to accompany him on the voyage to England. Greatly to his surprise and
delight, however, I offered of my own accord to take passage in the
brig. The strange coincidences I had witnessed, the extraordinary
discovery I had hit on since our first meeting in Naples, had made his
one great interest in life my one great interest for the time being as
well. I shared none of his delusions, poor fellow; but it is hardly an
exaggeration to say that my eagerness to follow our remarkable adventure
to its end was as great as his anxiety to see the coffin laid in Wincot
vault. Curiosity influenced me, I am afraid, almost as strongly as
friendship, when I offered myself as the companion of his voyage home.

We set sail for England on a calm and lovely afternoon.

For the first time since I had known him, Monkton seemed to be in high
spirits. He talked and jested on all sorts of subjects, and laughed
at me for allowing my cheerfulness to be affected by the dread of
seasickness. I had really no such fear; it was my excuse to my friend
for a return of that unaccountable depression under which I had suffered
at Fondi. Everything was in our favor; everybody on board the brig was
in good spirits. The captain was delighted with the vessel; the crew,
Italians and Maltese, were in high glee at the prospect of making a
short voyage on high wages in a well-provisioned ship. I alone felt
heavy at heart. There was no valid reason that I could assign to myself
for the melancholy that oppressed me, and yet I struggled against it in
vain.

Late on our first night at sea, I made a discovery which was by no means
calculated to restore my spirits to their usual equilibrium. Monkton
was in the cabin, on the floor of which had been placed the packing-case
containing the coffin, and I was on deck. The wind had fallen almost to
a calm, and I was lazily watching the sails of the brig as they flapped
from time to time against the masts, when the captain approached, and,
drawing me out of hearing of the man at the helm, whispered in my ear:

"There's something wrong among the men forward. Did you observe how
suddenly they all became silent just before sunset?"

I had observed it, and told him so.

"There's a Maltese boy on board," pursued the captain, "who is a smart
enough lad, but a bad one to deal with. I have found out that he has
been telling the men there is a dead body inside that packing-case of
your friend's in the cabin."

My heart sank as he spoke. Knowing the superstitious irrationality of
sailors--of foreign sailors especially--I had taken care to spread
a report on board the brig, before the coffin was shipped, that the
packing-case contained a valuable marble statue which Mr. Monkton prized
highly, and was unwilling to trust out of his own sight. How could
this Maltese boy have discovered that the pretended statue was a human
corpse? As I pondered over the question, my suspicions fixed themselves
on Monkton's servant, who spoke Italian fluently, and whom I knew to
be an incorrigible gossip. The man denied it when I charged him with
betraying us, but I have never believed his denial to this day.

"The little imp won't say where he picked up this notion of his about
the dead body," continued the captain. "It's not my place to pry into
secrets; but I advise you to call the crew aft, and contradict the boy,
whether he speaks the truth or not. The men are a parcel of fools who
believe in ghosts, and all the rest of it. Some of them say they would
never have signed our articles if they had known they were going to sail
with a dead man; others only grumble; but I'm afraid we shall have
some trouble with them all, in case of rough weather, unless the boy is
contradicted by you or the other gentleman. The men say that if either
you or your friend tell them on your words of honor that the Maltese is
a liar, they will hand him up to be rope's-ended accordingly; but that
if you won't, they have made up their minds to believe the boy."

Here the captain paused and awaited my answer. I could give him none. I
felt hopeless under our desperate emergency. To get the boy punished
by giving my word of honor to support a direct falsehood was not to be
thought of even for a moment. What other means of extrication from this
miserable dilemma remained? None that I could think of. I thanked the
captain for his attention to our interests, told him I would take time
to consider what course I should pursue, and begged that he would say
nothing to my friend about the discovery he had made. He promised to be
silent, sulkily enough, and walked away from me.

We had expected the breeze to spring up with the morning, but no breeze
came. As it wore on toward noon the atmosphere became insufferably
sultry, and the sea looked as smooth as glass. I saw the captain's eye
turn often and anxiously to windward. Far away in that direction, and
alone in the blue heaven, I observed a little black cloud, and asked if
it would bring us any wind.

"More than we want," the captain replied, shortly; and then, to my
astonishment, ordered the crew aloft to take in sail. The execution of
this maneuver showed but too plainly the temper of the men; they did
their work sulkily and slowly, grumbling and murmuring among themselves.
The captain's manner, as he urged them on with oaths and threats,
convinced me we were in danger. I looked again to windward. The one
little cloud had enlarged to a great bank of murky vapor, and the sea at
the horizon had changed in color.

"The squall will be on us before we know where we are," said the
captain. "Go below; you will be only in the way here."

I descended to the cabin, and prepared Monkton for what was coming.
He was still questioning me about what I had observed on deck when the
storm burst on us. We felt the little brig strain for an instant as if
she would part in two, then she seemed to be swinging round with us,
then to be quite still for a moment, trembling in every timber. Last
came a shock which hurled us from our seats, a deafening crash, and a
flood of water pouring into the cabin. We clambered, half drowned, to
the deck. The brig had, in the nautical phrase, "broached to," and she
now lay on her beam-ends.

Before I could make out anything distinctly in the horrible confusion
except the one tremendous certainty that we were entirely at the mercy
of the sea, I heard a voice from the fore part of the ship which stilled
the clamoring and shouting of the rest of the crew in an instant. The
words were in Italian, but I understood their fatal meaning only too
easily. We had sprung a leak, and the sea was pouring into the ship's
hold like the race of a mill-stream. The captain did not lose his
presence of mind in this fresh emergency. He called for his ax to cut
away the foremast, and, ordering some of the crew to help him, directed
the others to rig out the pumps.

The words had hardly passed his lips before the men broke into open
mutiny. With a savage look at me, their ringleader declared that the
passengers might do as they pleased, but that he and his messmates were
determined to take to the boat, and leave the accursed ship, and _the
dead man in her,_ to go to the bottom together. As he spoke there was a
shout among the sailors, and I observed some of them pointing derisively
behind me. Looking round, I saw Monkton, who had hitherto kept close at
my side, making his way back to the cabin. I followed him directly,
but the water and confusion on deck, and the impossibility, from the
position of the brig, of moving the feet without the slow assistance
of the hands, so impeded my progress that it was impossible for me to
overtake him. When I had got below he was crouched upon the coffin, with
the water on the cabin floor whirling and splashing about him as the
ship heaved and plunged. I saw a warning brightness in his eyes, a
warning flush on his cheek, as I approached and said to him:

"There is nothing left for it, Alfred, but to bow to our misfortune, and
do the best we can to save our lives."

"Save yours," he cried, waving his hand to me, "for _you_ have a future
before you. Mine is gone when this coffin goes to the bottom. If the
ship sinks, I shall know that the fatality is accomplished, and shall
sink with her."

I saw that he was in no state to be reasoned with or persuaded, and
raised myself again to the deck. The men were cutting away all obstacles
so as to launch the longboat placed amidships over the depressed bulwark
of the brig as she lay on her side, and the captain, after having made
a last vain exertion to restore his authority, was looking on at them
in silence. The violence of the squall seemed already to be spending
itself, and I asked whether there was really no chance for us if we
remained by the ship. The captain answered that there might have been
the best chance if the men had obeyed his orders, but that now there was
none. Knowing that I could place no dependence on the presence of mind
of Monkton's servant, I confided to the captain, in the fewest and
plainest words, the condition of my unhappy friend, and asked if I might
depend on his help. He nodded his head, and we descended together to
the cabin. Even at this day it costs me pain to write of the terrible
necessity to which the strength and obstinacy of Monkton's delusion
reduced us in the last resort. We were compelled to secure his hands,
and drag him by main force to the deck. The men were on the point of
launching the boat, and refused at first to receive us into it.

"You cowards!" cried the captain, "have we got the dead man with us
this time? Isn't he going to the bottom along with the brig? Who are you
afraid of when we get into the boat?"

This sort of appeal produced the desired effect; the men became ashamed
of themselves, and retracted their refusal.

Just as we pushed off from the sinking ship Alfred made an effort to
break from me, but I held him firm, and he never repeated the attempt.
He sat by me with drooping head, still and silent, while the sailors
rowed away from the vessel; still and silent when, with one accord, they
paused at a little distance off, and we all waited and watched to see
the brig sink; still and silent, even when that sinking happened, when
the laboring hull plunged slowly into a hollow of the sea--hesitated,
as it seemed, for one moment, rose a little again, then sank to rise no
more.

Sank with her dead freight--sank, and snatched forever from our
power the corpse which we had discovered almost by a miracle--those
jealously-preserved remains, on the safe-keeping of which rested so
strangely the hopes and the love-destinies of two living beings! As the
last signs of the ship in the depths of the waters.


I felt Monkton trembling all over as he sat close at my side, and heard
him repeating to himself, sadly, and many times over, the name of "Ada."

I tried to turn his thoughts to another subject, but it was useless. He
pointed over the sea to where the brig had once been, and where nothing
was left to look at but the rolling waves.

"The empty place will now remain empty forever in Wincot vault."

As he said these words, he fixed his eyes for a moment sadly and
earnestly on my face, then looked away, leaned his cheek on his hand,
and spoke no more.

We were sighted long before nightfall by a trading vessel, were taken on
board, and landed at Cartagena in Spain. Alfred never held up his head,
and never once spoke to me of his own accord the whole time we were at
sea in the merchantman. I observed, however, with alarm, that he talked
often and incoherently to himself--constantly muttering the lines of the
old prophecy--constantly referring to the fatal place that was empty in
Wincot vault--constantly repeating in broken accents, which it affected
me inexpressibly to hear, the name of the poor girl who was awaiting his
return to England. Nor were these the only causes for the apprehension
that I now felt on his account. Toward the end of our voyage he began
to suffer from alternations of fever-fits and shivering-fits, which I
ignorantly imagined to be attacks of ague. I was soon undeceived. We had
hardly been a day on shore before he became so much worse that I secured
the best medical assistance Cartagena could afford. For a day or two the
doctors differed, as usual, about the nature of his complaint, but ere
long alarming symptoms displayed themselves. The medical men declared
that his life was in danger, and told me that his disease was brain
fever.

Shocked and grieved as I was, I hardly knew how to act at first under
the fresh responsibility now laid upon me. Ultimately I decided on
writing to the old priest who had been Alfred's tutor, and who, as I
knew, still resided at Wincot Abbey. I told this gentleman all that had
happened, begged him to break my melancholy news as gently as possible
to Miss Elmslie, and assured him of my resolution to remain with Monkton
to the last.

After I had dispatched my letter, and had sent to Gibraltar to secure
the best English medical advice that could be obtained, I felt that I
had done my best, and that nothing remained but to wait and hope.

Many a sad and anxious hour did I pass by my poor friend's bedside. Many
a time did I doubt whether I had done right in giving any encouragement
to his delusion. The reasons for doing so which had suggested themselves
to me after my first interview with him seemed, however, on reflection,
to be valid reasons still. The only way of hastening his return to
England and to Miss Elmslie, who was pining for that return, was the
way I had taken. It was not my fault that a disaster which no man could
foresee had overthrown all his projects and all mine. But, now that the
calamity had happened and was irretrievable, how, in the event of his
physical recovery, was his moral malady to be combated?

When I reflected on the hereditary taint in his mental organization, on
that first childish fright of Stephen Monkton from which he had never
recovered, on the perilously-secluded life that he had led at the Abbey,
and on his firm persuasion of the reality of the apparition by which
he believed himself to be constantly followed, I confess I despaired of
shaking his superstitious faith in every word and line of the old family
prophecy. If the series of striking coincidences which appeared to
attest its truth had made a strong and lasting impression on _me_ (and
this was assuredly the case), how could I wonder that they had produced
the effect of absolute conviction on _his_ mind, constituted as it was?
If I argued with him, and he answered me, how could I rejoin? If he
said, "The prophecy points at the last of the family: _I_ am the last of
the family. The prophecy mentions an empty place in Wincot vault;
there is such an empty place there at this moment. On the faith of the
prophecy I told you that Stephen Monkton's body was unburied, and you
found that it was unburied"--if he said this, what use would it be for
me to reply, "These are only strange coincidences after all?"

The more I thought of the task that lay before me, if he recovered, the
more I felt inclined to despond. The oftener the English physician who
attended on him said to me, "He may get the better of the fever, but
he has a fixed idea, which never leaves him night or day, which has
unsettled his reason, and which will end in killing him, unless you or
some of his friends can remove it"--the oftener I heard this, the more
acutely I felt my own powerlessness, the more I shrank from every idea
that was connected with the hopeless future.

I had only expected to receive my answer from Wincot in the shape of a
letter. It was consequently a great surprise, as well as a great relief,
to be informed one day that two gentlemen wished to speak with me, and
to find that of these two gentlemen the first was the old priest, and
the second a male relative of Mrs. Elmslie.

Just before their arrival the fever symptoms had disappeared, and Alfred
had been pronounced out of danger. Both the priest and his companion
were eager to know when the sufferer would be strong enough to travel.
They had come to Cartagena expressly to take him home with them, and
felt far more hopeful than I did of the restorative effects of his
native air. After all the questions connected with the first important
point of the journey to England had been asked and answered, I ventured
to make some inquiries after Miss Elmslie. Her relative informed me that
she was suffering both in body and in mind from excess of anxiety
on Alfred's account. They had been obliged to deceive her as to the
dangerous nature of his illness in order to deter her from accompanying
the priest and her relation on their mission to Spain.

Slowly and imperfectly, as the weeks wore on, Alfred regained something
of his former physical strength, but no alteration appeared in his
illness as it affected his mind.

From the very first day of his advance toward recovery, it had been
discovered that the brain fever had exercised the strangest influence
over his faculties of memory. All recollection of recent events was gone
from him. Everything connected with Naples, with me, with his journey
to Italy, had dropped in some mysterious manner entirely out of his
remembrance. So completely had all late circumstances passed from his
memory that, though he recognized the old priest and his own servant
easily on the first days of his convalescence, he never recognized me,
but regarded me with such a wistful, doubting expression, that I felt
inexpressibly pained when I approached his bedside. All his questions
were about Miss Elmslie and Wincot Abbey, and all his talk referred to
the period when his father was yet alive.

The doctors augured good rather than ill from this loss of memory of
recent incidents, saying that it would turn out to be temporary, and
that it answered the first great healing purpose of keeping his mind at
ease. I tried to believe them--tried to feel as sanguine, when the day
came for his departure, as the old friends felt who were taking him
home. But the effort was too much for me. A foreboding that I should
never see him again oppressed my heart, and the tears came into my eyes
as I saw the worn figure of my poor friend half helped, half lifted into
the traveling-carriage, and borne away gently on the road toward home.

He had never recognized me, and the doctors had begged that I would give
him, for some time to come, as few opportunities as possible of doing
so. But for this request I should have accompanied him to England. As it
was, nothing better remained for me to do than to change the scene, and
recruit as I best could my energies of body and mind, depressed of late
by much watching and anxiety. The famous cities of Spain were not new to
me, but I visited them again and revived old impressions of the Alhambra
and Madrid. Once or twice I thought of making a pilgrimage to the East,
but late events had sobered and altered me. That yearning, unsatisfied
feeling which we call "homesickness" began to prey upon my heart, and I
resolved to return to England.

I went back by way of Paris, having settled with the priest that he
should write to me at my banker's there as soon as he could after Alfred
had returned to Wincot. If I had gone to the East, the letter would have
been forwarded to me. I wrote to prevent this; and, on my arrival at
Paris, stopped at the banker's before I went to my hotel.

The moment the letter was put into my hands, the black border on the
envelope told me the worst. He was dead.

There was but one consolation--he had died calmly, almost happily,
without once referring to those fatal chances which had wrought the
fulfillment of the ancient prophecy. "My beloved pupil," the old priest
wrote, "seemed to rally a little the first few days after his return,
but he gained no real strength, and soon suffered a slight relapse
of fever. After this he sank gradually and gently day by day, and so
departed from us on the last dread journey. Miss Elmslie (who knows that
I am writing this) desires me to express her deep and lasting gratitude
for all your kindness to Alfred. She told me when we brought him back
that she had waited for him as his promised wife, and that she would
nurse him now as a wife should; and she never left him. His face was
turned toward her, his hand was clasped in hers when he died. It will
console you to know that he never mentioned events at Naples, or the
shipwreck that followed them, from the day of his return to the day of
his death."

Three days after reading the letter I was at Wincot, and heard all the
details of Alfred's last moments from the priest. I felt a shock which
it would not be very easy for me to analyze or explain when I heard that
he had been buried, at his own desire, in the fatal Abbey vault.

The priest took me down to see the place--a grim, cold, subterranean
building, with a low roof, supported on heavy Saxon arches. Narrow
niches, with the ends only of coffins visible within them, ran down each
side of the vault. The nails and silver ornaments flashed here and there
as my companion moved past them with a lamp in his hand. At the lower
end of the place he stopped, pointed to a niche, and said, "He lies
there, between his father and mother." I looked a little further on,
and saw what appeared at first like a long dark tunnel. "That is only an
empty niche," said the priest, following me. "If the body of Mr. Stephen
Monkton had been brought to Wincot, his coffin would have been placed
there."

A chill came over me, and a sense of dread which I am ashamed of having
felt now, but which I could not combat then. The blessed light of day
was pouring down gayly at the other end of the vault through the open
door. I turned my back on the empty niche, and hurried into the sunlight
and the fresh air.

As I walked across the grass glade leading down to the vault, I heard
the rustle of a woman's dress behind me, and turning round, saw a young
lady advancing, clad in deep mourning. Her sweet, sad face, her manner
as she held out her hand, told me who it was in an instant.


"I heard that you were here," she said, "and I wished--" Her voice
faltered a little. My heart ached as I saw how her lip trembled, but
before I could say anything she recovered herself and went on: "I wished
to take your hand, and thank you for your brotherly kindness to Alfred;
and I wanted to tell you that I am sure in all you did you acted
tenderly and considerately for the best. Perhaps you may be soon going
away from home again, and we may not meet any more. I shall never, never
forget that you were kind to him when he wanted a friend, and that you
have the greatest claim of any one on earth to be gratefully remembered
in my thoughts as long as I live."

The inexpressible tenderness of her voice, trembling a little all the
while she spoke, the pale beauty of her face, the artless candor in her
sad, quiet eyes, so affected me that I could not trust myself to answer
her at first except by gesture. Before I recovered my voice she had
given me her hand once more and had left me.

I never saw her again. The chances and changes of life kept us apart.
When I last heard of her, years and years ago, she was faithful to the
memory of the dead, and was Ada Elmslie still for Alfred Monkton's sake.


THE FIFTH DAY.


STILL cloudy, but no rain to keep our young lady indoors. The paper, as
usual, without interest to _me_.

To-day Owen actually vanquished his difficulties and finished his story.
I numbered it Eight, and threw the corresponding number (as I had done
the day before in Morgan's case) into the china bowl.

Although I could discover no direct evidence against her, I strongly
suspected The Queen of Hearts of tampering with the lots on the fifth
evening, to irritate Morgan by making it his turn to read again, after
the shortest possible interval of repose. However that might be,
the number drawn was certainly Seven, and the story to be read was
consequently the story which my brother had finished only two days
before.

If I had not known that it was part of Morgan's character always to do
exactly the reverse of what might be expected from him, I should have
been surprised at the extraordinary docility he exhibited the moment his
manuscript was placed in his hands.

"My turn again?" he said. "How very satisfactory! I was anxious to
escape from this absurd position of mine as soon as possible, and here
is the opportunity most considerately put into my hands. Look out, all
of you! I won't waste another moment. I mean to begin instantly."

"Do tell me," interposed Jessie, mischievously, "shall I be very much
interested to-night'?'

"Not you!" retorted Morgan. "You will be very much frightened instead.
You hair is uncommonly smooth at the present moment, but it will be all
standing on end before I've done. Don't blame me, miss, if you are an
object when you go to bed to-night!"

With this curious introductory speech he began to read. I was obliged
to interrupt him to say the few words of explanation which the story
needed.

"Before my brother begins," I said, "it may be as well to mention that
he is himself the doctor who is supposed to relate this narrative. The
events happened at a time of his life when he had left London, and had
established himself in medical practice in one of our large northern
towns."

With that brief explanation, I apologized for interrupting the reader,
and Morgan began once more.




BROTHER MORGAN'S STORY of THE DEAD HAND


WHEN this present nineteenth century was younger by a good many years
than it is now, a certain friend of mine, named Arthur Holliday,
happened to arrive in the town of Doncaster exactly in the middle of the
race-week, or, in other words, in the middle of the month of September.

He was one of those reckless, rattle-pated, open-hearted, and
open-mouthed young gentlemen who possess the gift of familiarity in its
highest perfection, and who scramble carelessly along the journey of
life, making friends, as the phrase is, wherever they go. His father was
a rich manufacturer, and had bought landed property enough in one of
the midland counties to make all the born squires in his neighborhood
thoroughly envious of him. Arthur was his only son, possessor in
prospect of the great estate and the great business after his father's
death; well supplied with money, and not too rigidly looked after during
his father's lifetime. Report, or scandal, whichever you please, said
that the old gentleman had been rather wild in his youthful days, and
that, unlike most parents, he was not disposed to be violently indignant
when he found that his son took after him. This may be true or not. I
myself only knew the elder Mr. Holliday when he was getting on in years,
and then he was as quiet and as respectable a gentleman as ever I met
with.

Well, one September, as I told you, young Arthur comes to Doncaster,
having decided all of a sudden, in his hare-brained way, that he would
go to the races. He did not reach the town till toward the close of
evening, and he went at once to see about his dinner and bed at the
principal hotel. Dinner they were ready enough to give him, but as for a
bed, they laughed when he mentioned it. In the race-week at Doncaster
it is no uncommon thing for visitors who have not bespoken apartments
to pass the night in their carriages at the inn doors. As for the lower
sort of strangers, I myself have often seen them, at that full time,
sleeping out on the doorsteps for want of a covered place to creep
under. Rich as he was, Arthur's chance of getting a night's lodging
(seeing that he had not written beforehand to secure one) was more than
doubtful. He tried the second hotel, and the third hotel, and two of the
inferior inns after that, and was met everywhere with the same form of
answer. No accommodation for the night of any sort was left. All the
bright golden sovereigns in his pocket would not buy him a bed at
Doncaster in the race-week.

To a young fellow of Arthur's temperament, the novelty of being turned
away into the street like a penniless vagabond, at every house where he
asked for a lodging, presented itself in the light of a new and highly
amusing piece of experience. He went on with his carpet-bag in his hand,
applying for a bed at every place of entertainment for travelers that
he could find in Doncaster, until he wandered into the outskirts of the
town.

By this time the last glimmer of twilight had faded out, the moon was
rising dimly in a mist, the wind was getting cold, the clouds were
gathering heavily, and there was every prospect that it was soon going
to rain!

The look of the night had rather a lowering effect on young Holliday's
spirits. He began to contemplate the houseless situation in which he was
placed from the serious rather than the humorous point of view, and he
looked about him for another public house to inquire at with something
very like downright anxiety in his mind on the subject of a lodging for
the night. The suburban part of the town toward which he had now strayed
was hardly lighted at all, and he could see nothing of the houses as he
passed them, except that they got progressively smaller and dirtier the
further he went. Down the winding road before him shone the dull gleam
of an oil lamp, the one faint lonely light that struggled ineffectually
with the foggy darkness all round him. He resolved to go on as far as
this lamp, and then, if it showed him nothing in the shape of an inn,
to return to the central part of the town, and to try if he could not
at least secure a chair to sit down on through the night at one of the
principal hotels.

As he got near the lamp he heard voices, and, walking close under it,
found that it lighted the entrance to a narrow court, on the wall of
which was painted a long hand in faded flesh-color, pointing, with a
lean forefinger, to this inscription:

THE TWO ROBINS.

Arthur turned into the court without hesitation to see what The Two
Robins could do for him. Four or five men were standing together round
the door of the house, which was at the bottom of the court, facing the
entrance from the street. The men were all listening to one other man,
better dressed than the rest, who was telling his audience something, in
a low voice, in which they were apparently very much interested.

On entering the passage, Arthur was passed by a stranger with a knapsack
in his hand, who was evidently leaving the house.

"No," said the traveler with the knapsack, turning round and addressing
himself cheerfully to a fat, sly-looking, bald-headed man, with a
dirty white apron on, who had followed him down the passage, "no, Mr.
Landlord, I am not easily scared by trifles; but I don't mind confessing
that I can't quite stand _that_."

It occurred to young Holliday, the moment he heard these words, that the
stranger had been asked an exorbitant price for a bed at The Two Robins,
and that he was unable or unwilling to pay it. The moment his back was
turned, Arthur, comfortably conscious of his own well-filled pockets,
addressed himself in a great hurry, for fear any other benighted
traveler should slip in and forestall him, to the sly-looking landlord
with the dirty apron and the bald head.

"If you have got a bed to let," he said, "and if that gentleman who has
just gone out won't pay your price for it, I will."

The sly landlord looked hard at Arthur. "Will you, sir?" he asked, in a
meditative, doubtful way.

"Name your price," said young Holliday, thinking that the landlord's
hesitation sprang from some boorish distrust of him. "Name your price,
and I'll give you the money at once, if you like."

"Are you game for five shillings?" inquired the landlord, rubbing his
stubby double chin and looking up thoughtfully at the ceiling above him.

Arthur nearly laughed in the man's face; but, thinking it prudent to
control himself, offered the five shillings as seriously as he could.
The sly landlord held out his hand, then suddenly drew it back again.

"You're acting all fair and aboveboard by me," he said, "and, before
I take your money, I'll do the same by you. Look here; this is how it
stands. You can have a bed all to yourself for five shillings, but you
can't have more than a half share of the room it stands in. Do you see
what I mean, young gentleman?"

"Of course I do," returned Arthur, a little irritably. "You mean that it
is a double-bedded room, and that one of the beds is occupied?"

The land lord nodded his head, and rubbed his double chin harder than
ever. Arthur hesitated, and mechanically moved back a step or two toward
the door. The idea of sleeping in the same room with a total stranger
did not present an attractive prospect to him. He felt more than half
inclined to drop his five shillings into his pocket and to go out into
the street once more.

"Is it yes or no?" asked the landlord. "Settle it as quick as you can,
because there's lots of people wanting a bed at Doncaster to-night
besides you."

Arthur looked toward the court and heard the rain falling heavily in
the street outside. He thought he would ask a question or two before he
rashly decided on leaving the shelter of The Two Robins.

"What sort of man is it who has got the other bed?" he inquired. "Is he
a gentleman? I mean, is he a quiet, well-behaved person?"

"The quietest man I ever came across," said the landlord, rubbing his
fat hands stealthily one over the other. "As sober as a judge, and as
regular as clock-work in his habits. It hasn't struck nine, not ten
minutes ago, and he's in his bed already. I don't know whether that
comes up to your notion of a quiet man: it goes a long way ahead of
mine, I can tell you."

"Is he asleep, do you think?" asked Arthur.

"I know he's asleep," returned the landlord; "and, what's more, he's
gone off so fast that I'll warrant you don't wake him. This way, sir,"
said the landlord, speaking over young Holliday's shoulder, as if he was
addressing some new guest who was approaching the house.

"Here you are," said Arthur, determined to be beforehand with the
stranger, whoever he might be. "I'll take the bed." And he handed the
five shillings to the landlord, who nodded, dropped the money carelessly
into his waistcoat pocket, and lighted a candle.

"Come up and see the room," said the host of The Two Robins, leading the
way to the staircase quite briskly, considering how fat he was.

They mounted to the second floor of the house. The landlord half opened
a door fronting the landing, then stopped, and turned round to Arthur.

"It's a fair bargain, mind, on my side as well as on yours," he
said. "You give me five shillings, and I give you in return a clean,
comfortable bed; and I warrant, beforehand, that you won't be interfered
with, or annoyed in anyway, by the man who sleeps in the same room
with you." Saying those words, he looked hard, for a moment, in young
Holliday's face, and then led the way into the room.

It was larger and cleaner than Arthur had expected it would be. The
two beds stood parallel with each other, a space of about six feet
intervening between them. They were both of the same medium size, and
both had the same plain white curtains, made to draw, if necessary, all
round them.

The occupied bed was the bed nearest the window. The curtains were all
drawn round it except the half curtain at the bottom, on the side of the
bed furthest from the window. Arthur saw the feet of the sleeping man
raising the scanty clothes into a sharp little eminence, as if he was
lying flat on his back. He took the candle, and advanced softly to draw
the curtain--stopped half way, and listened for a moment--then turned to
the landlord.

"He is a very quiet sleeper," said Arthur. "Yes," said the landlord,
"very quiet." Young Holliday advanced with the candle, and looked in at
the man cautiously.

"How pale he is," said Arthur.

"Yes," returned the landlord, "pale enough, isn't he?"

Arthur looked closer at the man. The bedclothes were drawn up to
his chin, and they lay perfectly still over the region of his chest.
Surprised and vaguely startled as he noticed this, Arthur stooped down
closer over the stranger, looked at his ashy, parted lips, listened
breathlessly for an instant, looked again at the strangely still face,
and the motionless lips and chest, and turned round suddenly on the
landlord with his own cheeks as pale for the moment as the hollow cheeks
of the man on the bed.

"Come here," he whispered, under his breath. "Come here, for God's sake!
The man's not asleep--he is dead."

"You have found that out sooner than I thought you would," said the
landlord, composedly. "Yes, he's dead, sure enough. He died at five
o'clock to-day."

"How did he die? Who is he?" asked Arthur, staggered for the moment by
the audacious coolness of the answer.

"As to who is he," rejoined the landlord, "I know no more about him than
you do. There are his books, and letters, and things all sealed up in
that brown paper parcel for the coroner's inquest to open to-morrow
or next day. He's been here a week, paying his way fairly enough,
and stopping indoors, for the most part, as if he was ailing. My girl
brought him up his tea at five to-day, and as he was pouring of it out,
he fell down in a faint, or a fit, or a compound of both, for anything I
know. We couldn't bring him to, and I said he was dead. And, the doctor
couldn't bring him to, and the doctor said he was dead. And there he is.
And the coroner's inquest's coming as soon as it can. And that's as much
as I know about it."

Arthur held the candle close to the man's lips. The flame still burned
straight up as steadily as ever. There was a moment of silence, and the
rain pattered drearily through it against the panes of the window.

"If you haven't got nothing more to say to me," continued the landlord,
"I suppose I may go. You don't expect your five shillings back, do you?
There's the bed I promised you, clean and comfortable. There's the man
I warranted not to disturb you, quiet in this world forever. If you're
frightened to stop alone with him, that's not my lookout. I've kept my
part of the bargain, and I mean to keep the money. I'm not Yorkshire
myself, young gentleman, but I've lived long enough in these parts to
have my wits sharpened, and I shouldn't wonder if you found out the way
to brighten up yours next time you come among us."

With these words the landlord turned toward the door, and laughed to
himself softly, in high satisfaction at his own sharpness.

Startled and shocked as he was, Arthur had by this time sufficiently
recovered himself to feel indignant at the trick that had been played on
him, and at the insolent manner in which the landlord exulted in it.

"Don't laugh," he said sharply, "till you are quite sure you have got
the laugh against me. You shan't have the five shillings for nothing, my
man. I'll keep the bed."

"Will you?" said the landlord. "Then I wish you a good night's rest."
With that brief farewell he went out and shut the door after him.

A good night's rest! The words had hardly been spoken, the door had
hardly been closed, before Arthur half repented the hasty words that had
just escaped him. Though not naturally over-sensitive, and not wanting
in courage of the moral as well as the physical sort, the presence of
the dead man had an instantaneously chilling effect on his mind when he
found himself alone in the room--alone, and bound by his own rash words
to stay there till the next morning. An older man would have thought
nothing of those words, and would have acted, without reference to them,
as his calmer sense suggested. But Arthur was too young to treat the
ridicule even of his inferiors with contempt--too young not to fear the
momentary humiliation of falsifying his own foolish boast more than he
feared the trial of watching out the long night in the same chamber with
the dead.

"It is but a few hours," he thought to himself, "and I can get away the
first thing in the morning."

He was looking toward the occupied bed as that idea passed through his
mind, and the sharp, angular eminence made in the clothes by the dead
man's upturned feet again caught his eye. He advanced and drew the
curtains, purposely abstaining, as he did so, from looking at the face
of the corpse, lest he might unnerve himself at the outset by fastening
some ghastly impression of it on his mind. He drew the curtain very
gently, and sighed involuntarily as he closed it.

"Poor fellow," he said, almost as sadly as if he had known the man. "Ah!
poor fellow!"

He went next to the window. The night was black, and he could see
nothing from it. The rain still pattered heavily against the glass. He
inferred, from hearing it, that the window was at the back of the house,
remembering that the front was sheltered from the weather by the court
and the buildings over it.

While he was still standing at the window--for even the dreary rain
was a relief, because of the sound it made; a relief, also, because
it moved, and had some faint suggestion, in consequence, of life and
companionship in it--while he was standing at the window, and looking
vacantly into the black darkness outside, he heard a distant church
clock strike ten. Only ten! How was he to pass the time till the house
was astir the next morning?

Under any other circumstances he would have gone down to the
public-house parlor, would have called for his grog, and would have
laughed and talked with the company assembled as familiarly as if he had
known them all his life. But the very thought of whiling away the time
in this manner was now distasteful to him. The new situation in which he
was placed seemed to have altered him to himself already. Thus far
his life had been the common, trifling, prosaic, surface-life of a
prosperous young man, with no troubles to conquer and no trials to face.
He had lost no relation whom he loved, no friend whom he treasured.
Till this night, what share he had of the immortal inheritance that is
divided among us all had lain dormant within him. Till this night, Death
and he had not once met, even in thought.

He took a few turns up and down the room, then stopped. The noise
made by his boots on the poorly-carpeted floor jarred on his ear. He
hesitated a little, and ended by taking the boots off, and walking
backward and forward noiselessly.

All desire to sleep or to rest had left him. The bare thought of lying
down on the unoccupied bed instantly drew the picture on his mind of a
dreadful mimicry of the position of the dead man. Who was he? What was
the story of his past life? Poor he must have been, or he would not have
stopped at such a place as the Two Robins Inn; and weakened, probably,
by long illness, or he could hardly have died in the manner which
the landlord had described. Poor, ill, lonely--dead in a strange
place--dead, with nobody but a stranger to pity him. A sad story; truly,
on the mere face of it, a very sad story.

While these thoughts were passing through his mind, he had stopped
insensibly at the window, close to which stood the foot of the bed with
the closed curtains. At first he looked at it absently; then he became
conscious that his eyes were fixed on it; and then a perverse desire
took possession of him to do the very thing which he had resolved not to
do up to this time--to look at the dead man.

He stretched out his hand toward the curtains, but checked himself in
the very act of undrawing them, turned his back sharply on the bed, and
walked toward the chimney-piece, to see what things were placed on it,
and to try if he could keep the dead man out of his mind in that way.

There was a pewter inkstand on the chimney-piece, with some mildewed
remains of ink in the bottle. There were two coarse china ornaments of
the commonest kind; and there was a square of embossed card, dirty and
fly-blown, with a collection of wretched riddles printed on it, in all
sorts of zigzag directions, and in variously colored inks. He took
the card and went away to read it at the table on which the candle was
placed, sitting down with his back resolutely turned to the curtained
bed.

He read the first riddle, the second, the third, all in one corner of
the card, then turned it round impatiently to look at another. Before
he could begin reading the riddles printed here the sound of the church
clock stopped him.

Eleven.

He had got through an hour of the time in the room with the dead man.

Once more he looked at the card. It was not easy to make out the letters
printed on it in consequence of the dimness of the light which the
landlord had left him--a common tallow candle, furnished with a pair of
heavy old-fashioned steel snuffers. Up to this time his mind had been
too much occupied to think of the light. He had left the wick of the
candle unsnuffed till it had risen higher than the flame, and had burned
into an odd pent-house shape at the top, from which morsels of the
charred cotton fell off from time to time in little flakes. He took up
the snuffers now and trimmed the wick. The light brightened directly,
and the room became less dismal.

Again he turned to the riddles, reading them doggedly and resolutely,
now in one corner of the card, now in another. All his efforts,
however, could not fix his attention on them. He pursued his occupation
mechanically, deriving no sort of impression from what he was reading.
It was as if a shadow from the curtained bed had got between his mind
and the gayly printed letters--a shadow that nothing could dispel. At
last he gave up the struggle, threw the card from him impatiently, and
took to walking softly up and down the room again.

The dead man, the dead man, the _hidden_ dead man on the bed!

There was the one persistent idea still haunting him. Hidden! Was it
only the body being there, or was it the body being there _concealed,_
that was preying on his mind? He stopped at the window with that doubt
in him, once more listening to the pattering rain, once more looking out
into the black darkness.

Still the dead man!

The darkness forced his mind back upon itself, and set his memory
at work, reviving with a painfully vivid distinctness the momentary
impression it had received from his first sight of the corpse. Before
long the face seemed to be hovering out in the middle of the darkness,
confronting him through the window, with the paleness whiter--with
the dreadful dull line of light between the imperfectly-closed eyelids
broader than he had seen it--with the parted lips slowly dropping
further and further away from each other--with the features growing
larger and moving closer, till they seemed to fill the window, and to
silence the rain, and to shut out the night.

The sound of a voice shouting below stairs woke him suddenly from the
dream of his own distempered fancy. He recognized it as the voice of the
landlord.

"Shut up at twelve, Ben," he heard it say. "I'm off to bed."

He wiped away the damp that had gathered on his forehead, reasoned with
himself for a little while, and resolved to shake his mind free of
the ghastly counterfeit which still clung to it by forcing himself
to confront, if it was only for a moment, the solemn reality. Without
allowing himself an instant to hesitate, he parted the curtains at the
foot of the bed, and looked through.

There was the sad, peaceful, white face, with the awful mystery of
stillness on it, laid back upon the pillow. No stir, no change there! He
only looked at it for a moment before he closed the curtains again, but
that moment steadied him, calmed him, restored him--mind and body--to
himself. He returned to his old occupation of walking up and down the
room, persevering in it this time till the clock struck again.

Twelve.

As the sound of the clock-bell died away, it was succeeded by the
confused noise downstairs of the drinkers in the taproom leaving the
house. The next sound, after an interval of silence, was caused by the
barring of the door and the closing of the shutters at the back of the
inn. Then the silence followed again, and was disturbed no more.

He was alone now--absolutely, hopelessly alone with the dead man till
the next morning.

The wick of the candle wanted trimming again. He took up the snuffers,
but paused suddenly on the very point of using them, and looked
attentively at the candle--then back, over his shoulder, at the
curtained bed--then again at the candle. It had been lighted for the
first time to show him the way upstairs, and three parts of it, at
least, were already consumed. In another hour it would be burned out.
In another hour, unless he called at once to the man who had shut up the
inn for a fresh candle, he would be left in the dark.

Strongly as his mind had been affected since he had entered the room,
his unreasonable dread of encountering ridicule and of exposing his
courage to suspicion had not altogether lost its influence over him even
yet.

He lingered irresolutely by the table, waiting till he could prevail on
himself to open the door, and call from the landing, to the man who had
shut up the inn. In his present hesitating frame of mind, it was a
kind of relief to gain a few moments only by engaging in the trifling
occupation of snuffing the candle. His hand trembled a little, and the
snuffers were heavy and awkward to use. When he closed them on the wick,
he closed them a hair-breadth too low. In an instant the candle was out,
and the room was plunged in pitch darkness.

The one impression which the absence of light immediately produced on
his mind was distrust of the curtained bed--distrust which shaped
itself into no distinct idea, but which was powerful enough, in its very
vagueness, to bind him down to his chair, to make his heart beat fast,
and to set him listening intently. No sound stirred in the room, but the
familiar sound of the rain against the window, louder and sharper now
than he had heard it yet.

Still the vague distrust, the inexpressible dread possessed him, and
kept him in his chair. He had put his carpet-bag on the table when he
first entered the room, and he now took the key from his pocket, reached
out his hand softly, opened the bag, and groped in it for his traveling
writing-case, in which he knew that there was a small store of matches.
When he had got one of the matches he waited before he struck it on the
coarse wooden table, and listened intently again without knowing why.
Still there was no sound in the room but the steady, ceaseless rattling
sound of the rain.

He lighted the candle again without another moment of delay, and, on the
instant of its burning up, the first object in the room that his eyes
sought for was the curtained bed.

Just before the light had been put out he had looked in that direction,
and had seen no change, no disarrangement of any sort in the folds of
the closely-drawn curtains.

When he looked at the bed now, he saw hanging over the side of it a long
white hand.

It lay perfectly motionless midway on the side of the bed, where the
curtain at the head and the curtain at the foot met. Nothing more was
visible. The clinging curtains hid everything but the long white hand.

He stood looking at it, unable to stir, unable to call out--feeling
nothing, knowing nothing--every faculty he possessed gathered up and
lost in the one seeing faculty. How long that first panic held him he
never could tell afterward. It might have been only for a moment--it
might have been for many minutes together. How he got to the
bed--whether he ran to it headlong, or whether he approached it slowly;
how he wrought himself up to unclose the curtains and look in, he never
has remembered, and never will remember to his dying day. It is enough
that he did go to the bed, and that he did look inside the curtains.

The man had moved. One of his arms was outside the clothes; his face was
turned a little on the pillow; his eyelids were wide open. Changed as to
position and as to one of the features, the face was otherwise fearfully
and wonderfully unaltered. The dead paleness and the dead quiet were on
it still.

One glance showed Arthur this--one glance before he flew breathlessly to
the door and alarmed the house.

The man whom the landlord called "Ben" was the first to appear on the
stairs. In three words Arthur told him what had happened, and sent him
for the nearest doctor.

I, who tell you this story, was then staying with a medical friend of
mine, in practice at Doncaster, taking care of his patients for him
during his absence in London; and I, for the time being, was the nearest
doctor. They had sent for me from the inn when the stranger was taken
ill in the afternoon, but I was not at home, and medical assistance
was sought for elsewhere. When the man from The Two Robins rang the
night-bell, I was just thinking of going to bed. Naturally enough, I did
not believe a word of his story about "a dead man who had come to life
again." However, I put on my hat, armed myself with one or two bottles
of restorative medicine, and ran to the inn, expecting to find nothing
more remarkable, when I got there, than a patient in a fit.

My surprise at finding that the man had spoken the literal truth was
almost, if not quite, equaled by my astonishment at finding myself face
to face with Arthur Holliday as soon as I entered the bedroom. It was
no time then for giving or seeking explanations. We just shook hands
amazedly, and then I ordered everybody but Arthur out of the room, and
hurried to the man on the bed.

The kitchen fire had not been long out. There was plenty of hot water
in the boiler, and plenty of flannel to be had. With these, with my
medicines, and with such help as Arthur could render under my direction,
I dragged the man literally out of the jaws of death. In less than an
hour from the time when I had been called in, he was alive and talking
in the bed on which he had been laid out to wait for the coroner's
inquest.

You will naturally ask me what had been the matter with him, and I might
treat you, in reply, to a long theory, plentifully sprinkled with what
the children call hard words. I prefer telling you that, in this case,
cause and effect could not be satisfactorily joined together by any
theory whatever. There are mysteries in life and the conditions of it
which human science has not fathomed yet; and I candidly confess to you
that, in bringing that man back to existence, I was, morally speaking,
groping haphazard in the dark. I know (from the testimony of the doctor
who attended him in the afternoon) that the vital machinery, so far
as its action is appreciable by our senses, had, in this case,
unquestionably stopped, and I am equally certain (seeing that I
recovered him) that the vital principle was not extinct. When I add that
he had suffered from a long and complicated illness, and that his whole
nervous system was utterly deranged, I have told you all I really know
of the physical condition of my dead-alive patient at the Two Robins
Inn.

When he "came to," as the phrase goes, he was a startling object to look
at, with his colorless face, his sunken cheeks, his wild black eyes, and
his long black hair. The first question he asked me about himself when
he could speak made me suspect that I had been called in to a man in my
own profession. I mentioned to him my surmise, and he told me that I was
right.

He said he had come last from Paris, where he had been attached to
a hospital; that he had lately returned to England, on his way to
Edinburgh, to continue his studies; that he had been taken ill on
the journey; and that he had stopped to rest and recover himself at
Doncaster. He did not add a word about his name, or who he was, and of
course I did not question him on the subject. All I inquired when he
ceased speaking was what branch of the profession he intended to follow.

"Any branch," he said, bitterly, "which will put bread into the mouth of
a poor man."

At this, Arthur, who had been hitherto watching him in silent curiosity,
burst out impetuously in his usual good-humored way:

"My dear fellow" (everybody was "my dear fellow" with Arthur), "now you
have come to life again, don't begin by being down-hearted about your
prospects. I'll answer for it I can help you to some capital thing in
the medical line, or, if I can't, I know my father can."

The medical student looked at him steadily.

"Thank you," he said, coldly; then added, "May I ask who your father
is?"

"He's well enough known all about this part of the country," replied
Arthur. "He is a great manufacturer, and his name is Holliday."

My hand was on the man's wrist during this brief conversation. The
instant the name of Holliday was pronounced I felt the pulse under my
fingers flutter, stop, go on suddenly with a bound, and beat afterward
for a minute or two at the fever rate.

"How did you come here?" asked the stranger, quickly, excitably,
passionately almost.

Arthur related briefly what had happened from the time of his first
taking the bed at the inn.

"I am indebted to Mr. Holliday's son, then, for the help that has saved
my life," said the medical student, speaking to himself, with a singular
sarcasm in his voice. "Come here!"

He held out, as he spoke, his long, white, bony right hand.

"With all my heart," said Arthur, taking his hand cordially. "I may
confess it now," he continued, laughing, "upon my honor, you almost
frightened me out of my wits."

The stranger did not seem to listen. His wild black eyes were fixed with
a look of eager interest on Arthur's face, and his long bony fingers
kept tight hold of Arthur's hand. Young Holliday, on his side, returned
the gaze, amazed and puzzled by the medical student's odd language and
manners. The two faces were close together; I looked at them, and, to my
amazement, I was suddenly impressed by the sense of a likeness between
them--not in features or complexion, but solely in expression. It must
have been a strong likeness, or I should certainly not have found it
out, for I am naturally slow at detecting resemblances between faces.

"You have saved my life," said the strange man, still looking hard in
Arthur's face, still holding tightly by his hand. "If you had been my
own brother, you could not have done more for me than that."

He laid a singularly strong emphasis on those three words "my own
brother," and a change passed over his face as he pronounced them--a
change that no language of mine is competent to describe.

"I hope I have not done being of service to you yet," said Arthur. "I'll
speak to my father as soon as I get home."

"You seem to be fond and proud of your father," said the medical
student. "I suppose, in return, he is fond and proud of you?"

"Of course he is," answered Arthur, laughing. "Is there anything
wonderful in that? Isn't _your_ father fond--"

The stranger suddenly dropped young Holliday's hand and turned his face
away.

"I beg your pardon," said Arthur. "I hope I have not unintentionally
pained you. I hope you have not lost your father?"

"I can't well lose what I have never had," retorted the medical student,
with a harsh mocking laugh.

"What you have never had!"

The strange man suddenly caught Arthur's hand again, suddenly looked
once more hard in his face.

"Yes," he said, with a repetition of the bitter laugh. "You have
brought a poor devil back into the world who has no business there. Do I
astonish you? Well, I have a fancy of my own for telling you what men in
my situation generally keep a secret. I have no name and no father. The
merciful law of society tells me I am nobody's son! Ask your father if
he will be my father too, and help me on in life with the family name."

Arthur looked at me more puzzled than ever.

I signed to him to say nothing, and then laid my fingers again on the
man's wrist. No. In spite of the extraordinary speech that he had just
made, he was not, as I had been disposed to suspect, beginning to get
light-headed. His pulse, by this time, had fallen back to a quiet,
slow beat, and his skin was moist and cool. Not a symptom of fever or
agitation about him.

Finding that neither of us answered him, he turned to me, and began
talking of the extraordinary nature of his case, and asking my advice
about the future course of medical treatment to which he ought to
subject himself. I said the matter required careful thinking over, and
suggested that I should send him a prescription a little later. He told
me to write it at once, as he would most likely be leaving Doncaster in
the morning before I was up. It was quite useless to represent to him
the folly and danger of such a proceeding as this. He heard me politely
and patiently, but held to his resolution, without offering any reasons
or explanations, and repeated to me that, if I wished to give him a
chance of seeing my prescription, I must write it at once.

Hearing this, Arthur volunteered the loan of a traveling writing-case,
which he said he had with him, and, bringing it to the bed, shook the
note-paper out of the pocket of the case forthwith in his usual careless
way. With the paper there fell out on the counterpane of the bed a
small packet of sticking-plaster, and a little water-color drawing of a
landscape.

The medical student took up the drawing and looked at it. His eye fell
on some initials neatly written in cipher in one corner. He started
and trembled; his pale face grew whiter than ever; his wild black eyes
turned on Arthur, and looked through and through him.

"A pretty drawing," he said, in a remarkably quiet tone of voice.

"Ah! and done by such a pretty girl," said Arthur. "Oh, such a pretty
girl! I wish it was not a landscape--I wish it was a portrait of her!"

"You admire her very much?"

Arthur, half in jest, half in earnest, kissed his hand for answer.

"Love at first sight," said young Holliday, putting the drawing away
again. "But the course of it doesn't run smooth. It's the old story.
She's monopolized, as usual; trammeled by a rash engagement to some poor
man who is never likely to get money enough to marry her. It was lucky
I heard of it in time, or I should certainly have risked a declaration
when she gave me that drawing. Here, doctor, here is pen, ink, and paper
all ready for you."

"When she gave you that drawing? Gave it? gave it?"

He repeated the words slowly to himself, and suddenly closed his eyes. A
momentary distortion passed across his face, and I saw one of his hands
clutch up the bedclothes and squeeze them hard. I thought he was going
to be ill again, and begged that there might be no more talking. He
opened his eyes when I spoke, fixed them once more searchingly on
Arthur, and said, slowly and distinctly:

"You like her, and she likes you. The poor man may die out of your way.
Who can tell that she may not give you herself as well as her drawing,
after all?"

Before young Holliday could answer he turned to me, and said in a
whisper: "Now for the prescription." From that time, though he spoke to
Arthur again, he never looked at him more.

When I had written the prescription, he examined it, approved of it, and
then astonished us both by abruptly wishing us good-night. I offered to
sit up with him, and he shook his head. Arthur offered to sit up with
him, and he said, shortly, with his face turned away, "No." I insisted
on having somebody left to watch him. He gave way when he found I was
determined, and said he would accept the services of the waiter at the
inn.

"Thank you both," he said, as we rose to go. "I have one last favor to
ask--not of you, doctor, for I leave you to exercise your professional
discretion, but of Mr. Holliday." His eyes, while he spoke, still rested
steadily on me, and never once turned toward Arthur. "I beg that Mr.
Holliday will not mention to any one, least of all to his father, the
events that have occurred and the words that have passed in this room. I
entreat him to bury me in his memory as, but for him, I might have been
buried in my grave. I cannot give my reason for making this strange
request. I can only implore him to grant it."

His voice faltered for the first time, and he hid his face on the
pillow. Arthur, completely bewildered, gave the required pledge. I took
young Holliday away with me immediately afterward to the house of my
friend, determining to go back to the inn and to see the medical student
again before he had left in the morning.

I returned to the inn at eight o'clock, purposely abstaining from waking
Arthur, who was sleeping off the past night's excitement on one of my
friend's sofas. A suspicion had occurred to me, as soon as I was alone
in my bedroom, which made me resolve that Holliday and the stranger
whose life he had saved should not meet again, if I could prevent it.

I have already alluded to certain reports or scandals which I knew of
relating to the early life of Arthur's father. While I was thinking, in
my bed, of what had passed at the inn; of the change in the student's
pulse when he heard the name of Holliday; of the resemblance of
expression that I had discovered between his face and Arthur's; of the
emphasis he had laid on those three words, "my own brother," and of his
incomprehensible acknowledgment of his own illegitimacy--while I was
thinking of these things, the reports I have mentioned suddenly flew
into my mind, and linked themselves fast to the chain of my previous
reflections. Something within me whispered, "It is best that those two
young men should not meet again." I felt it before I slept; I felt
it when I woke; and I went as I told you, alone to the inn the next
morning.

I had missed my only opportunity of seeing my nameless patient again. He
had been gone nearly an hour when I inquired for him.

I have now told you everything that I know for certain in relation to
the man whom I brought back to life in the double-bedded room of the
inn at Doncaster. What I have next to add is matter for inference and
surmise, and is not, strictly speaking, matter of fact.

I have to tell you, first, that the medical student turned out to be
strangely and unaccountably right in assuming it as more than probable
that Arthur Holliday would marry the young lady who had given him the
water-color drawing of the landscape. That marriage took place a little
more than a year after the events occurred which I have just been
relating.

The young couple came to live in the neighborhood in which I was then
established in practice. I was present at the wedding, and was rather
surprised to find that Arthur was singularly reserved with me, both
before and after his marriage, on the subject of the young lady's prior
engagement. He only referred to it once when we were alone, merely
telling me, on that occasion, that his wife had done all that honor and
duty required of her in the matter, and that the engagement had been
broken off with the full approval of her parents. I never heard more
from him than this. For three years he and his wife lived together
happily. At the expiration of that time the symptoms of a serious
illness first declared themselves in Mrs. Arthur Holliday. It turned out
to be a long, lingering, hopeless malady. I attended her throughout. We
had been great friends when she was well, and we became more attached to
each other than ever when she was ill. I had many long and interesting
conversations with her in the intervals when she suffered least. The
result of one of those conversations I may briefly relate, leaving you
to draw any inferences from it that you please.

The interview to which I refer occurred shortly before her death.

I called one evening as usual, and found her alone, with a look in her
eyes which told me she had been crying. She only informed me at first
that she had been depressed in spirits, but by little and little she
became more communicative, and confessed to me that she had been looking
over some old letters which had been addressed to her, before she had
seen Arthur, by a man to whom she had been engaged to be married. I
asked her how the engagement came to be broken off. She replied that it
had not been broken off, but that it had died out in a very mysterious
way. The person to whom she was engaged--her first love, she called
him--was very poor, and there was no immediate prospect of their being
married. He followed my profession, and went abroad to study. They had
corresponded regularly until the time when, as she believed, he had
returned to England. From that period she heard no more of him. He was
of a fretful, sensitive temperament, and she feared that she might have
inadvertently done or said something to offend him. However that might
be, he had never written to her again, and after waiting a year she had
married Arthur. I asked when the first estrangement had begun, and found
that the time at which she ceased to hear anything of her first lover
exactly corresponded with the time at which I had been called in to my
mysterious patient at The Two Robins Inn.

A fortnight after that conversation she died. In course of time Arthur
married again. Of late years he has lived principally in London, and I
have seen little or nothing of him.

I have some years to pass over before I can approach to anything like
a conclusion of this fragmentary narrative. And even when that later
period is reached, the little that I have to say will not occupy your
attention for more than a few minutes.

One rainy autumn evening, while I was still practicing as a country
doctor, I was sitting alone, thinking over a case then under my charge,
which sorely perplexed me, when I heard a low knock at the door of my
room.

"Come in," I cried, looking up curiously to see who wanted me.

After a momentary delay, the lock moved, and a long, white, bony hand
stole round the door as it opened, gently pushing it over a fold in the
carpet which hindered it from working freely on the hinges. The hand
was followed by a man whose face instantly struck me with a very strange
sensation. There was something familiar to me in the look of him, and
yet it was also something that suggested the idea of change.

He quietly introduced himself as "Mr. Lorn," presented to me some
excellent professional recommendations, and proposed to fill the place,
then vacant, of my assistant. While he was speaking I noticed it as
singular that we did not appear to be meeting each other like strangers,
and that, while I was certainly startled at seeing him, he did not
appear to be at all startled at seeing me.

It was on the tip of my tongue to say that I thought I had met with him
before. But there was something in his face, and something in my own
recollections--I can hardly say what--which unaccountably restrained me
from speaking and which as unaccountably attracted me to him at once,
and made me feel ready and glad to accept his proposal.

He took his assistant's place on that very day. We got on together as if
we had been old friends from the first; but, throughout the whole time
of his residence in my house, he never volunteered any confidences on
the subject of his past life, and I never approached the forbidden topic
except by hints, which he resolutely refused to understand.

I had long had a notion that my patient at the inn might have been a
natural son of the elder Mr. Holliday's, and that he might also have
been the man who was engaged to Arthur's first wife. And now another
idea occurred to me, that Mr. Lorn was the only person in existence who
could, if he chose, enlighten me on both those doubtful points. But he
never did choose, and I was never enlightened. He remained with me
till I removed to London to try my fortune there as a physician for the
second time, and then he went his way and I went mine, and we have never
seen one another since.

I can add no more. I may have been right in my suspicion, or I may have
been wrong. All I know is that, in those days of my country practice,
when I came home late, and found my assistant asleep, and woke him, he
used to look, in coming to, wonderfully like the stranger at Doncaster
as he raised himself in the bed on that memorable night.

THE SIXTH DAY

AN oppressively mild temperature, and steady, soft, settled rain--dismal
weather for idle people in the country. Miss Jessie, after looking
longingly out of the window, resigned herself to circumstances, and gave
up all hope of a ride. The gardener, the conservatory, the rabbits,
the raven, the housekeeper, and, as a last resource, even the neglected
piano, were all laid under contribution to help her through the time. It
was a long day, but thanks to her own talent for trifling, she contrived
to occupy it pleasantly enough.

Still no news of my son. The time was getting on now, and it was surely
not unreasonable to look for some tidings of him.

To-day Morgan and I both finished our third and last stories. I
corrected my brother's contribution with no very great difficulty on
this occasion, and numbered it Nine. My own story came next, and was
thus accidentally distinguished as the last of the series--Number Ten.
When I dropped the two corresponding cards into the bowl, the thought
that there would be now no more to add seemed to quicken my prevailing
sense of anxiety on the subject of George's return. A heavy depression
hung upon my spirits, and I went out desperately in the rain to shake my
mind free of oppressing influences by dint of hard bodily exercise.

The number drawn this evening was Three. On the production of the
corresponding manuscript it proved to be my turn to read again.

"I can promise you a little variety to-night," I said, addressing our
fair guest, "if I can promise nothing else. This time it is not a story
of my own writing that I am about to read, but a copy of a very curious
correspondence which I found among my professional papers."

Jessie's countenance fell. "Is there no story in it?" she asked, rather
discontentedly.

"Certainly there is a story in it," I replied--"a story of a much
lighter kind than any we have yet read, and which may, on that account,
prove acceptable, by way of contrast and relief, even if it fails to
attract you by other means. I obtained the original correspondence, I
must tell you, from the office of the Detective Police of London."

Jessie's face brightened. "That promises something to begin with," she
said.

"Some years since," I continued, "there was a desire at headquarters to
increase the numbers and efficiency of the Detective Police, and I
had the honor of being one of the persons privately consulted on that
occasion. The chief obstacle to the plan proposed lay in the difficulty
of finding new recruits. The ordinary rank and file of the police of
London are sober, trustworthy, and courageous men, but as a body they
are sadly wanting in intelligence. Knowing this, the authorities took
into consideration a scheme, which looked plausible enough on paper, for
availing themselves of the services of that proverbially sharp class
of men, the experienced clerks in attorney's offices. Among the persons
whose advice was sought on this point, I was the only one who
dissented from the arrangement proposed. I felt certain that the really
experienced clerks intrusted with conducting private investigations
and hunting up lost evidence, were too well paid and too independently
situated in their various offices to care about entering the ranks of
the Detective Police, and submitting themselves to the rigid discipline
of Scotland Yard, and I ventured to predict that the inferior clerks
only, whose discretion was not to be trusted, would prove to be the men
who volunteered for detective employment. My advice was not taken and
the experiment of enlisting the clerks was tried in two or three cases.
I was naturally interested in the result, and in due course of time I
applied for information in the right quarter. In reply, the originals of
the letters of which I am now about to read the copies were sent to me,
with an intimation that the correspondence in this particular instance
offered a fair specimen of the results of the experiment in the other
cases. The letters amused me, and I obtained permission to copy them
before I sent them back. You will now hear, therefore, by his own
statement, how a certain attorney's clerk succeeded in conducting a very
delicate investigation, and how the regular members of the Detective
Police contrived to help him through his first experiment."




BROTHER GRIFFITH'S STORY of THE BITER BIT.


_Extracted from the Correspondence of the London Police_.

FROM CHIEF INSPECTOR THEAKSTONE, OF THE DETECTIVE POLICE, TO SERGEANT
BULMER, OF THE SAME FORCE.

London, 4th July, 18--.


SERGEANT BULMER--This is to inform you that you are wanted to assist in
looking up a case of importance, which will require all the attention of
an experienced member of the force. The matter of the robbery on which
you are now engaged you will please to shift over to the young man who
brings you this letter. You will tell him all the circumstances of the
case, just as they stand; you will put him up to the progress you have
made (if any) toward detecting the person or persons by whom the money
has been stolen; and you will leave him to make the best he can of the
matter now in your hands. He is to have the whole responsibility of the
case, and the whole credit of his success if he brings it to a proper
issue.

So much for the orders that I am desired to communicate to you.

A word in your ear, next, about this new man who is to take your place.
His name is Matthew Sharpin, and he is to have the chance given him
of dashing into our office at one jump--supposing he turns out strong
enough to take it. You will naturally ask me how he comes by this
privilege. I can only tell you that he has some uncommonly strong
interest to back him in certain high quarters, which you and I had
better not mention except under our breaths. He has been a lawyer's
clerk, and he is wonderfully conceited in his opinion of himself, as
well as mean and underhand, to look at. According to his own account, he
leaves his old trade and joins ours of his own free will and preference.
You will no more believe that than I do. My notion is, that he has
managed to ferret out some private information in connection with
the affairs of one of his master's clients, which makes him rather an
awkward customer to keep in the office for the future, and which, at the
same time, gives him hold enough over his employer to make it dangerous
to drive him into a corner by turning him away. I think the giving him
this unheard-of chance among us is, in plain words, pretty much like
giving him hush money to keep him quiet. However that may be, Mr.
Matthew Sharpin is to have the case now in your hands, and if he
succeeds with it he pokes his ugly nose into our office as sure as fate.
I put you up to this, sergeant, so that you may not stand in your
own light by giving the new man any cause to complain of you at
headquarters, and remain yours,

FRANCIS THEAKSTONE.


FROM MR. MATTHEW SHARPIN TO CHIEF INSPECTOR THEAKSTONE.

London, 5th July, 18--.

DEAR SIR--Having now been favored with the necessary instructions from
Sergeant Bulmer, I beg to remind you of certain directions which I have
received relating to the report of my future proceedings which I am to
prepare for examination at headquarters.

The object of my writing, and of your examining what I have written
before you send it to the higher authorities, is, I am informed, to give
me, as an untried hand, the benefit of your advice in case I want it
(which I venture to think I shall not) at any stage of my proceedings.
As the extraordinary circumstances of the case on which I am now engaged
make it impossible for me to absent myself from the place where the
robbery was committed until I have made some progress toward discovering
the thief, I am necessarily precluded from consulting you personally.
Hence the necessity of my writing down the various details, which might
perhaps be better communicated by word of mouth. This, if I am not
mistaken, is the position in which we are now placed. I state my own
impressions on the subject in writing, in order that we may clearly
understand each other at the outset; and have the honor to remain your
obedient servant,

MATTHEW SHARPIN.


FROM CHIEF INSPECTOR THEAKSTONE TO MR. MATTHEW SHARPIN.

London, 5th July, 18--.

SIR--You have begun by wasting time, ink, and paper. We both of us
perfectly well knew the position we stood in toward each other when I
sent you with my letter to Sergeant Bulmer. There was not the least need
to repeat it in writing. Be so good as to employ your pen in future on
the business actually in hand.

You have now three separate matters on which to write me. First, you
have to draw up a statement of your instructions received from Sergeant
Bulmer, in order to show us that nothing has escaped your memory, and
that you are thoroughly acquainted with all the circumstances of the
case which has been intrusted to you. Secondly, you are to inform me
what it is you propose to do. Thirdly, you are to report every inch of
your progress (if you make any) from day to day, and, if need be, from
hour to hour as well. This is _your_ duty. As to what _my_ duty may be,
when I want you to remind me of it, I will write and tell you so. In the
meantime, I remain yours,


FRANCIS THEAKSTONE.


FROM MR. MATTHEW SHARPIN TO CHIEF INSPECTOR THEAKSTONE.

London, 6th July, 18--.

SIR--You are rather an elderly person, and as such, naturally inclined
to be a little jealous of men like me, who are in the prime of their
lives and their faculties. Under these circumstances, it is my duty
to be considerate toward you, and not to bear too hardly on your small
failings. I decline, therefore, altogether to take offense at the tone
of your letter; I give you the full benefit of the natural generosity of
my nature; I sponge the very existence of your surly communication out
of my memory--in short, Chief Inspector Theakstone, I forgive you, and
proceed to business.

My first duty is to draw up a full statement of the instructions I have
received from Sergeant Bulmer. Here they are at your service, according
to my version of them.

At Number Thirteen Rutherford Street, Soho, there is a stationer's shop.
It is kept by one Mr. Yatman. He is a married man, but has no family.
Besides Mr. and Mrs. Yatman, the other inmates in the house are a
lodger, a young single man named Jay, who occupies the front room on
the second floor--a shopman, who sleeps in one of the attics, and a
servant-of-all-work, whose bed is in the back kitchen. Once a week a
charwoman comes to help this servant. These are all the persons who, on
ordinary occasions, have means of access to the interior of the house,
placed, as a matter of course, at their disposal. Mr. Yatman has been in
business for many years, carrying on his affairs prosperously enough
to realize a handsome independence for a person in his position.
Unfortunately for himself, he endeavored to increase the amount of his
property by speculating. He ventured boldly in his investments; luck
went against him; and rather less than two years ago he found himself a
poor man again. All that was saved out of the wreck of his property was
the sum of two hundred pounds.

Although Mr. Yatman did his best to meet his altered circumstances, by
giving up many of the luxuries and comforts to which he and his wife had
been accustomed, he found it impossible to retrench so far as to allow
of putting by any money from the income produced by his shop. The
business has been declining of late years, the cheap advertising
stationers having done it injury with the public. Consequently, up
to the last week, the only surplus property possessed by Mr. Yatman
consisted of the two hundred pounds which had been recovered from the
wreck of his fortune. This sum was placed as a deposit in a joint-stock
bank of the highest possible character.

Eight days ago Mr. Yatman and his lodger, Mr. Jay, held a conversation
on the subject of the commercial difficulties which are hampering trade
in all directions at the present time. Mr. Jay (who lives by supplying
the newspapers with short paragraphs relating to accidents, offenses,
and brief records of remarkable occurrences in general--who is, in
short, what they call a penny-a-liner) told his landlord that he had
been in the city that day and heard unfavorable rumors on the subject
of the joint-stock banks. The rumors to which he alluded had already
reached the ears of Mr. Yatman from other quarters, and the confirmation
of them by his lodger had such an effect on his mind--predisposed as it
was to alarm by the experience of his former losses--that he resolved to
go at once to the bank and withdraw his deposit. It was then getting on
toward the end of the afternoon, and he arrived just in time to receive
his money before the bank closed.

He received the deposit in bank-notes of the following amounts: one
fifty-pound note, three twenty-pound notes, six ten-pound notes, and six
five-pound notes. His object in drawing the money in this form was
to have it ready to lay out immediately in trifling loans, on good
security, among the small tradespeople of his district, some of whom
are sorely pressed for the very means of existence at the present time.
Investments of this kind seemed to Mr. Yatman to be the most safe and
the most profitable on which he could now venture.

He brought the money back in an envelope placed in his breast pocket,
and asked his shopman, on getting home, to look for a small, flat, tin
cash-box, which had not been used for years, and which, as Mr. Yatman
remembered it, was exactly of the right size to hold the bank-notes. For
some time the cash-box was searched for in vain. Mr. Yatman called to
his wife to know if she had any idea where it was. The question was
overheard by the servant-of-all-work, who was taking up the tea-tray at
the time, and by Mr. Jay, who was coming downstairs on his way out
to the theater. Ultimately the cash-box was found by the shopman. Mr.
Yatman placed the bank-notes in it, secured them by a padlock, and
put the box in his coat pocket. It stuck out of the coat pocket a very
little, but enough to be seen. Mr. Yatman remained at home, upstairs,
all that evening. No visitors called. At eleven o'clock he went to bed,
and put the cash-box under his pillow.

When he and his wife woke the next morning the box was gone. Payment of
the notes was immediately stopped at the Bank of England, but no news of
the money has been heard of since that time.

So far the circumstances of the case are perfectly clear. They point
unmistakably to the conclusion that the robbery must have been committed
by some person living in the house. Suspicion falls, therefore, upon the
servant-of-all-work, upon the shopman, and upon Mr. Jay. The two first
knew that the cash-box was being inquired for by their master, but did
not know what it was he wanted to put into it. They would assume, of
course, that it was money. They both had opportunities (the servant when
she took away the tea, and the shopman when he came, after shutting up,
to give the keys of the till to his master) of seeing the cash-box
in Mr. Yatman's pocket, and of inferring naturally, from its position
there, that he intended to take it into his bedroom with him at night.

Mr. Jay, on the other hand, had been told, during the afternoon's
conversation on the subject of joint-stock banks, that his landlord had
a deposit of two hundred pounds in one of them. He also knew that Mr.
Yatman left him with the intention of drawing that money out; and
he heard the inquiry for the cash-box afterward, when he was coming
downstairs. He must, therefore, have inferred that the money was in the
house, and that the cash-box was the receptacle intended to contain
it. That he could have had any idea, however, of the place in which Mr.
Yatman intended to keep it for the night is impossible, seeing that he
went out before the box was found, and did not return till his landlord
was in bed. Consequently, if he committed the robbery, he must have gone
into the bedroom purely on speculation.

Speaking of the bedroom reminds me of the necessity of noticing the
situation of it in the house, and the means that exist of gaining easy
access to it at any hour of the night.

The room in question is the back room on the first floor. In consequence
of Mrs. Yatman's constitutional nervousness on the subject of fire,
which makes her apprehend being burned alive in her room, in case of
accident, by the hampering of the lock if the key is turned in it, her
husband has never been accustomed to lock the bedroom door. Both he and
his wife are, by their own admission, heavy sleepers; consequently,
the risk to be run by any evil-disposed persons wishing to plunder the
bedroom was of the most trifling kind. They could enter the room by
merely turning the handle of the door; and, if they moved with ordinary
caution, there was no fear of their waking the sleepers inside. This
fact is of importance. It strengthens our conviction that the money must
have been taken by one of the inmates of the house, because it tends
to show that the robbery, in this case, might have been committed by
persons not possessed of the superior vigilance and cunning of the
experienced thief.

Such are the circumstances, as they were related to Sergeant Bulmer,
when he was first called in to discover the guilty parties, and, if
possible, to recover the lost bank-notes. The strictest inquiry which
he could institute failed of producing the smallest fragment of evidence
against any of the persons on whom suspicion naturally fell. Their
language and behavior on being informed of the robbery was perfectly
consistent with the language and behavior of innocent people. Sergeant
Bulmer felt from the first that this was a case for private inquiry
and secret observation. He began by recommending Mr. and Mrs. Yatman to
affect a feeling of perfect confidence in the innocence of the persons
living under their roof, and he then opened the campaign by employing
himself in following the goings and comings, and in discovering the
friends, the habits, and the secrets of the maid-of-all-work.

Three days and nights of exertion on his own part, and on that of others
who were competent to assist his investigations, were enough to satisfy
him that there was no sound cause for suspicion against the girl.

He next practiced the same precaution in relation to the shopman.
There was more difficulty and uncertainty in privately clearing up this
person's character without his knowledge, but the obstacles were at last
smoothed away with tolerable success; and, though there is not the same
amount of certainty in this case which there was in the case of the
girl, there is still fair reason for supposing that the shopman has had
nothing to do with the robbery of the cash-box.

As a necessary consequence of these proceedings, the range of suspicion
now becomes limited to the lodger, Mr. Jay.

When I presented your letter of introduction to Sergeant Bulmer, he
had already made some inquiries on the subject of this young man. The
result, so far, has not been at all favorable. Mr. Jay's habits are
irregular; he frequents public houses, and seems to be familiarly
acquainted with a great many dissolute characters; he is in debt to most
of the tradespeople whom he employs; he has not paid his rent to Mr.
Yatman for the last month; yesterday evening he came home excited by
liquor, and last week he was seen talking to a prize-fighter; in
short, though Mr. Jay does call himself a journalist, in virtue of his
penny-a-line contributions to the newspapers, he is a young man of low
tastes, vulgar manners, and bad habits. Nothing has yet been discovered
in relation to him which redounds to his credit in the smallest degree.

I have now reported, down to the very last details, all the particulars
communicated to me by Sergeant Bulmer. I believe you will not find an
omission anywhere; and I think you will admit, though you are prejudiced
against me, that a clearer statement of facts was never laid before you
than the statement I have now made. My next duty is to tell you what I
propose to do now that the case is confided to my hands.

In the first place, it is clearly my business to take up the case at
the point where Sergeant Bulmer has left it. On his authority, I am
justified in assuming that I have no need to trouble myself about
the maid-of-all-work and the shopman. Their characters are now to be
considered as cleared up. What remains to be privately investigated is
the question of the guilt or innocence of Mr. Jay. Before we give up
the notes for lost, we must make sure, if we can, that he knows nothing
about them.

This is the plan that I have adopted, with the full approval of Mr. and
Mrs. Yatman, for discovering whether Mr. Jay is or is not the person who
has stolen the cash-box:

I propose to-day to present myself at the house in the character of a
young man who is looking for lodgings. The back room on the second floor
will be shown to me as the room to let, and I shall establish myself
there to-night as a person from the country who has come to London to
look for a situation in a respectable shop or office.

By this means I shall be living next to the room occupied by Mr. Jay.
The partition between us is mere lath and plaster. I shall make a small
hole in it, near the cornice, through which I can see what Mr. Jay does
in his room, and hear every word that is said when any friend happens
to call on him. Whenever he is at home, I shall be at my post of
observation; whenever he goes out, I shall be after him. By employing
these means of watching him, I believe I may look forward to
the discovery of his secret--if he knows anything about the lost
bank-notes--as to a dead certainty.

What you may think of my plan of observation I cannot undertake to
say. It appears to me to unite the invaluable merits of boldness
and simplicity. Fortified by this conviction, I close the present
communication with feelings of the most sanguine description in regard
to the future, and remain your obedient servant,

MATTHEW SHARPIN.


FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.

7th July.

SIR--As you have not honored me with any answer to my last
communication, I assume that, in spite of your prejudices against me, it
has produced the favorable impression on your mind which I ventured
to anticipate. Gratified and encouraged beyond measure by the token of
approval which your eloquent silence conveys to me, I proceed to report
the progress that has been made in the course of the last twenty-four
hours.

I am now comfortably established next door to Mr. Jay, and I am
delighted to say that I have two holes in the partition instead of one.
My natural sense of humor has led me into the pardonable extravagance
of giving them both appropriate names. One I call my peep-hole, and the
other my pipe-hole. The name of the first explains itself; the name of
the second refers to a small tin pipe or tube inserted in the hole,
and twisted so that the mouth of it comes close to my ear while I am
standing at my post of observation. Thus, while I am looking at Mr. Jay
through my peep-hole, I can hear every word that may be spoken in his
room through my pipe-hole.

Perfect candor--a virtue which I have possessed from my
childhood--compels me to acknowledge, before I go any further, that
the ingenious notion of adding a pipe-hole to my proposed peep-hole
originated with Mrs. Yatman. This lady--a most intelligent and
accomplished person, simple, and yet distinguished in her manners, has
entered into all my little plans with an enthusiasm and intelligence
which I cannot too highly praise. Mr. Yatman is so cast down by his loss
that he is quite incapable of affording me any assistance. Mrs. Yatman,
who is evidently most tenderly attached to him, feels her husband's
sad condition of mind even more acutely than she feels the loss of the
money, and is mainly stimulated to exertion by her desire to assist in
raising him from the miserable state of prostration into which he has
now fallen.

"The money, Mr. Sharpin," she said to me yesterday evening, with tears
in her eyes, "the money may be regained by rigid economy and strict
attention to business. It is my husband's wretched state of mind that
makes me so anxious for the discovery of the thief. I may be wrong,
but I felt hopeful of success as soon as you entered the house; and I
believe that, if the wretch who robbed us is to be found, you are the
man to discover him." I accepted this gratifying compliment in the
spirit in which it was offered, firmly believing that I shall be found,
sooner or later, to have thoroughly deserved it.

Let me now return to business--that is to say, to my peep-hole and my
pipe-hole.

I have enjoyed some hours of calm observation of Mr. Jay. Though rarely
at home, as I understand from Mrs. Yatman, on ordinary occasions, he has
been indoors the whole of this day. That is suspicious, to begin with.
I have to report, further, that he rose at a late hour this morning
(always a bad sign in a young man), and that he lost a great deal
of time, after he was up, in yawning and complaining to himself of
headache. Like other debauched characters, he ate little or nothing for
breakfast. His next proceeding was to smoke a pipe--a dirty clay pipe,
which a gentleman would have been ashamed to put between his lips. When
he had done smoking he took out pen, ink and paper, and sat down to
write with a groan--whether of remorse for having taken the bank-notes,
or of disgust at the task before him, I am unable to say. After writing
a few lines (too far away from my peep-hole to give me a chance of
reading over his shoulder), he leaned back in his chair, and amused
himself by humming the tunes of popular songs. I recognized "My Mary
Anne," "Bobbin' Around," and "Old Dog Tray," among other melodies.
Whether these do or do not represent secret signals by which he
communicates with his accomplices remains to be seen. After he had
amused himself for some time by humming, he got up and began to walk
about the room, occasionally stopping to add a sentence to the paper
on his desk. Before long he went to a locked cupboard and opened it. I
strained my eyes eagerly, in expectation of making a discovery. I saw
him take something carefully out of the cupboard--he turned round--and
it was only a pint bottle of brandy! Having drunk some of the liquor,
this extremely indolent reprobate lay down on his bed again, and in five
minutes was fast asleep.

After hearing him snoring for at least two hours, I was recalled to
my peep-hole by a knock at his door. He jumped up and opened it with
suspicious activity.

A very small boy, with a very dirty face, walked in, said: "Please, sir,
they're waiting for you," sat down on a chair with his legs a long way
from the ground, and instantly fell asleep! Mr. Jay swore an oath, tied
a wet towel round his head, and, going back to his paper, began to cover
it with writing as fast as his fingers could move the pen. Occasionally
getting up to dip the towel in water and tie it on again, he continued
at this employment for nearly three hours; then folded up the leaves
of writing, woke the boy, and gave them to him, with this remarkable
expression: "Now, then, young sleepy-head, quick march! If you see the
governor, tell him to have the money ready for me when I call for
it." The boy grinned and disappeared. I was sorely tempted to follow
"sleepy-head," but, on reflection, considered it safest still to keep my
eye on the proceedings of Mr. Jay.

In half an hour's time he put on his hat and walked out. Of course I put
on my hat and walked out also. As I went downstairs I passed Mrs.
Yatman going up. The lady has been kind enough to undertake, by previous
arrangement between us, to search Mr. Jay's room while he is out of
the way, and while I am necessarily engaged in the pleasing duty of
following him wherever he goes. On the occasion to which I now refer,
he walked straight to the nearest tavern and ordered a couple of
mutton-chops for his dinner. I placed myself in the next box to him, and
ordered a couple of mutton-chops for my dinner. Before I had been in the
room a minute, a young man of highly suspicious manners and appearance,
sitting at a table opposite, took his glass of porter in his hand and
joined Mr. Jay. I pretended to be reading the newspaper, and listened,
as in duty bound, with all my might.

"Jack has been here inquiring after you," says the young man.

"Did he leave any message?" asks Mr. Jay.

"Yes," says the other. "He told me, if I met with you, to say that he
wished very particularly to see you to-night, and that he would give you
a look in at Rutherford Street at seven o'clock."

"All right," says Mr. Jay. "I'll get back in time to see him."

Upon this, the suspicious-looking young man finished his porter, and
saying that he was rather in a hurry, took leave of his friend (perhaps
I should not be wrong if I said his accomplice?), and left the room.

At twenty-five minutes and a half past six--in these serious cases it
is important to be particular about time--Mr. Jay finished his chops and
paid his bill. At twenty-six minutes and three-quarters I finished
my chops and paid mine. In ten minutes more I was inside the house in
Rutherford Street, and was received by Mrs. Yatman in the passage.
That charming woman's face exhibited an expression of melancholy and
disappointment which it quite grieved me to see.

"I am afraid, ma'am," says I, "that you have not hit on any little
criminating discovery in the lodger's room?"

She shook her head and sighed. It was a soft, languid, fluttering
sigh--and, upon my life, it quite upset me. For the moment I forgot
business, and burned with envy of Mr. Yatman.

"Don't despair, ma'am," I said, with an insinuating mildness which
seemed to touch her. "I have heard a mysterious conversation--I know of
a guilty appointment--and I expect great things from my peep-hole and
my pipe-hole to-night. Pray don't be alarmed, but I think we are on the
brink of a discovery."

Here my enthusiastic devotion to business got the better part of my
tender feelings. I looked--winked--nodded--left her.

When I got back to my observatory, I found Mr. Jay digesting his
mutton-chops in an armchair, with his pipe in his mouth. On his table
were two tumblers, a jug of water, and the pint bottle of brandy. It was
then close upon seven o'clock. As the hour struck the person described
as "Jack" walked in.

He looked agitated--I am happy to say he looked violently agitated. The
cheerful glow of anticipated success diffused itself (to use a strong
expression) all over me, from head to foot. With breathless interest
I looked through my peep-hole, and saw the visitor--the "Jack" of this
delightful case--sit down, facing me, at the opposite side of the table
to Mr. Jay. Making allowance for the difference in expression which
their countenances just now happened to exhibit, these two abandoned
villains were so much alike in other respects as to lead at once to the
conclusion that they were brothers. Jack was the cleaner man and the
better dressed of the two. I admit that, at the outset. It is, perhaps,
one of my failings to push justice and impartiality to their utmost
limits. I am no Pharisee; and where Vice has its redeeming point, I say,
let Vice have its due--yes, yes, by all manner of means, let Vice have
its due.

"What's the matter now, Jack?" says Mr. Jay.

"Can't you see it in my face?" says Jack. "My dear fellow, delays are
dangerous. Let us have done with suspense, and risk it, the day after
to-morrow."

"So soon as that?" cries Mr. Jay, looking very much astonished. "Well,
I'm ready, if you are. But, I say, Jack, is somebody else ready, too?
Are you quite sure of that?"

He smiled as he spoke--a frightful smile--and laid a very strong
emphasis on those two words, "Somebody else." There is evidently a third
ruffian, a nameless desperado, concerned in the business.

"Meet us to-morrow," says Jack, "and judge for yourself. Be in the
Regent's Park at eleven in the morning, and look out for us at the
turning that leads to the Avenue Road."

"I'll be there," says Mr. Jay. "Have a drop of brandy-and-water? What
are you getting up for? You're not going already?"

"Yes, I am," says Jack. "The fact is, I'm so excited and agitated that I
can't sit still anywhere for five minutes together. Ridiculous as it may
appear to you, I'm in a perpetual state of nervous flutter. I can't, for
the life of me, help fearing that we shall be found out. I fancy that
every man who looks twice at me in the street is a spy--"

At these words I thought my legs would have given way under me. Nothing
but strength of mind kept me at my peep-hole--nothing else, I give you
my word of honor.

"Stuff and nonsense!" cries Mr. Jay, with all the effrontery of a
veteran in crime. "We have kept the secret up to this time, and we will
manage cleverly to the end. Have a drop of brandy-and-water, and you
will feel as certain about it as I do."

Jack steadily refused the brandy-and-water, and steadily persisted in
taking his leave.

"I must try if I can't walk it off," he said. "Remember to-morrow
morning--eleven o'clock, Avenue Road, side of the Regent's Park."

With those words he went out. His hardened relative laughed desperately
and resumed the dirty clay pipe.

I sat down on the side of my bed, actually quivering with excitement.

It is clear to me that no attempt has yet been made to change the stolen
bank-notes, and I may add that Sergeant Bulmer was of that opinion also
when he left the case in my hands. What is the natural conclusion to
draw from the conversation which I have just set down? Evidently that
the confederates meet to-morrow to take their respective shares in the
stolen money, and to decide on the safest means of getting the notes
changed the day after. Mr. Jay is, beyond a doubt, the leading criminal
in this business, and he will probably run the chief risk--that of
changing the fifty-pound note. I shall, therefore, still make it my
business to follow him--attending at the Regent's Park to-morrow, and
doing my best to hear what is said there. If another appointment is
made for the day after, I shall, of course, go to it. In the meantime, I
shall want the immediate assistance of two competent persons (supposing
the rascals separate after their meeting) to follow the two minor
criminals. It is only fair to add that, if the rogues all retire
together, I shall probably keep my subordinates in reserve. Being
naturally ambitious, I desire, if possible, to have the whole credit of
discovering this robbery to myself.

8th July.

I have to acknowledge, with thanks, the speedy arrival of my two
subordinates--men of very average abilities, I am afraid; but,
fortunately, I shall always be on the spot to direct them.

My first business this morning was necessarily to prevent possible
mistakes by accounting to Mr. and Mrs. Yatman for the presence of two
strangers on the scene. Mr. Yatman (between ourselves, a poor, feeble
man) only shook his head and groaned. Mrs. Yatman (that superior woman)
favored me with a charming look of intelligence.

"Oh, Mr. Sharpin!" she said, "I am so sorry to see those two men!
Your sending for their assistance looks as if you were beginning to be
doubtful of success."

I privately winked at her (she is very good in allowing me to do so
without taking offense), and told her, in my facetious way, that she
labored under a slight mistake.

"It is because I am sure of success, ma'am, that I send for them. I am
determined to recover the money, not for my own sake only, but for Mr.
Yatman's sake--and for yours."

I laid a considerable amount of stress on those last three words. She
said: "Oh, Mr. Sharpin!" again, and blushed of a heavenly red, and
looked down at her work. I could go to the world's end with that woman
if Mr. Yatman would only die.

I sent off the two subordinates to wait until I wanted them at the
Avenue Road gate of the Regent's Park. Half-an-hour afterward I was
following the same direction myself at the heels of Mr. Jay.

The two confederates were punctual to the appointed time. I blush to
record it, but it is nevertheless necessary to state that the third
rogue--the nameless desperado of my report, or, if you prefer it,
the mysterious "somebody else" of the conversation between the two
brothers--is--a woman! and, what is worse, a young woman! and, what
is more lamentable still, a nice-looking woman! I have long resisted a
growing conviction that, wherever there is mischief in this world, an
individual of the fair sex is inevitably certain to be mixed up in it.
After the experience of this morning, I can struggle against that sad
conclusion no longer. I give up the sex--excepting Mrs. Yatman, I give
up the sex.

The man named "Jack" offered the woman his arm. Mr. Jay placed himself
on the other side of her. The three then walked away slowly among the
trees. I followed them at a respectful distance. My two subordinates, at
a respectful distance, also, followed me.

It was, I deeply regret to say, impossible to get near enough to them
to overhear their conversation without running too great a risk of being
discovered. I could only infer from their gestures and actions that they
were all three talking with extraordinary earnestness on some subject
which deeply interested them. After having been engaged in this way a
full quarter of an hour, they suddenly turned round to retrace their
steps. My presence of mind did not forsake me in this emergency. I
signed to the two subordinates to walk on carelessly and pass them,
while I myself slipped dexterously behind a tree. As they came by me, I
heard "Jack" address these words to Mr. Jay:

"Let us say half-past ten to-morrow morning. And mind you come in a cab.
We had better not risk taking one in this neighborhood."

Mr. Jay made some brief reply which I could not overhear. They walked
back to the place at which they had met, shaking hands there with
an audacious cordiality which it quite sickened me to see. They then
separated. I followed Mr. Jay. My subordinates paid the same delicate
attention to the other two.

Instead of taking me back to Rutherford Street, Mr. Jay led me to
the Strand. He stopped at a dingy, disreputable-looking house, which,
according to the inscription over the door, was a newspaper office,
but which, in my judgment, had all the external appearance of a place
devoted to the reception of stolen goods.

After remaining inside for a few minutes, he came out whistling, with
his finger and thumb in his waistcoat pocket. Some men would now have
arrested him on the spot. I remembered the necessity of catching the two
confederates, and the importance of not interfering with the appointment
that had been made for the next morning. Such coolness as this, under
trying circumstances, is rarely to be found, I should imagine, in a
young beginner, whose reputation as a detective policeman is still to
make.

From the house of suspicious appearance Mr. Jay betook himself to a
cigar-divan, and read the magazines over a cheroot. From the divan he
strolled to the tavern and had his chops. I strolled to the tavern and
had my chops. When he had done he went back to his lodging. When I had
done I went back to mine. He was overcome with drowsiness early in the
evening, and went to bed. As soon as I heard him snoring, I was overcome
with drowsiness and went to bed also.

Early in the morning my two subordinates came to make their report.

They had seen the man named "Jack" leave the woman at the gate of an
apparently respectable villa residence not far from the Regent's Park.
Left to himself, he took a turning to the right, which led to a sort of
suburban street, principally inhabited by shopkeepers. He stopped at
the private door of one of the houses, and let himself in with his own
key--looking about him as he opened the door, and staring suspiciously
at my men as they lounged along on the opposite side of the way. These
were all the particulars which the subordinates had to communicate.
I kept them in my room to attend on me, if needful, and mounted to my
peep-hole to have a look at Mr. Jay.

He was occupied in dressing himself, and was taking extraordinary pains
to destroy all traces of the natural slovenliness of his appearance.
This was precisely what I expected. A vagabond like Mr. Jay knows the
importance of giving himself a respectable look when he is going to
run the risk of changing a stolen bank-note. At five minutes past ten
o'clock he had given the last brush to his shabby hat and the last
scouring with bread-crumb to his dirty gloves. At ten minutes past ten
he was in the street, on his way to the nearest cab-stand, and I and my
subordinates were close on his heels.

He took a cab and we took a cab. I had not overheard them appoint a
place of meeting when following them in the Park on the previous day,
but I soon found that we were proceeding in the old direction of the
Avenue Road gate. The cab in which Mr. Jay was riding turned into the
Park slowly. We stopped outside, to avoid exciting suspicion. I got out
to follow the cab on foot. Just as I did so, I saw it stop, and detected
the two confederates approaching it from among the trees. They got in,
and the cab was turned about directly. I ran back to my own cab and told
the driver to let them pass him, and then to follow as before.

The man obeyed my directions, but so clumsily as to excite their
suspicions. We had been driving after them about three minutes
(returning along the road by which we had advanced) when I looked out
of the window to see how far they might be ahead of us. As I did this,
I saw two hats popped out of the windows of their cab, and two faces
looking back at me. I sank into my place in a cold sweat; the expression
is coarse, but no other form of words can describe my condition at that
trying moment.

"We are found out!" I said, faintly, to my two subordinates. They stared
at me in astonishment. My feelings changed instantly from the depth of
despair to the height of indignation.

"It is the cabman's fault. Get out, one of you," I said, with
dignity--"get out, and punch his head."

Instead of following my directions (I should wish this act of
disobedience to be reported at headquarters) they both looked out of the
window. Before I could pull them back they both sat down again. Before
I could express my just indignation, they both grinned, and said to me:
"Please to look out, sir!"

I did look out. Their cab had stopped.

Where?

At a church door!

What effect this discovery might have had upon the ordinary run of men
I don't know. Being of a strong religious turn myself, it filled me
with horror. I have often read of the unprincipled cunning of criminal
persons, but I never before heard of three thieves attempting to double
on their pursuers by entering a church! The sacrilegious audacity of
that proceeding is, I should think, unparalleled in the annals of crime.

I checked my grinning subordinates by a frown. It was easy to see what
was passing in their superficial minds. If I had not been able to look
below the surface, I might, on observing two nicely dressed men and one
nicely dressed woman enter a church before eleven in the morning on a
week day, have come to the same hasty conclusion at which my inferiors
had evidently arrived. As it was, appearances had no power to impose on
_me_. I got out, and, followed by one of my men, entered the church. The
other man I sent round to watch the vestry door. You may catch a weasel
asleep, but not your humble servant, Matthew Sharpin!

We stole up the gallery stairs, diverged to the organ-loft, and peered
through the curtains in front. There they were, all three, sitting in a
pew below--yes, incredible as it may appear, sitting in a pew below!


Before I could determine what to do, a clergyman made his appearance
in full canonicals from the vestry door, followed by a clerk. My
brain whirled and my eyesight grew dim. Dark remembrances of robberies
committed in vestries floated through my mind. I trembled for the
excellent man in full canonicals--I even trembled for the clerk.

The clergyman placed himself inside the altar rails. The three
desperadoes approached him. He opened his book and began to read. What?
you will ask.

I answer, without the slightest hesitation, the first lines of the
Marriage Service.

My subordinate had the audacity to look at me, and then to stuff his
pocket-handkerchief into his mouth. I scorned to pay any attention to
him. After I had discovered that the man "Jack" was the bridegroom, and
that the man Jay acted the part of father, and gave away the bride, I
left the church, followed by my men, and joined the other subordinate
outside the vestry door. Some people in my position would now have felt
rather crestfallen, and would have begun to think that they had made a
very foolish mistake. Not the faintest misgiving of any kind troubled
me. I did not feel in the slightest degree depreciated in my own
estimation. And even now, after a lapse of three hours, my mind remains,
I am happy to say, in the same calm and hopeful condition.

As soon as I and my subordinates were assembled together outside the
church, I intimated my intention of still following the other cab in
spite of what had occurred. My reason for deciding on this course will
appear presently. The two subordinates appeared to be astonished at my
resolution. One of them had the impertinence to say to me:

"If you please, sir, who is it that we are after? A man who has stolen
money, or a man who has stolen a wife?"

The other low person encouraged him by laughing. Both have deserved an
official reprimand, and both, I sincerely trust, will be sure to get it.

When the marriage ceremony was over, the three got into their cab and
once more our vehicle (neatly hidden round the corner of the church,
so that they could not suspect it to be near them) started to follow
theirs.

We traced them to the terminus of the Southwestern Railway. The
newly-married couple took tickets for Richmond, paying their fare with
a half sovereign, and so depriving me of the pleasure of arresting them,
which I should certainly have done if they had offered a bank-note. They
parted from Mr. Jay, saying: "Remember the address--14 Babylon Terrace.
You dine with us to-morrow week." Mr. Jay accepted the invitation, and
added, jocosely, that he was going home at once to get off his clean
clothes, and to be comfortable and dirty again for the rest of the day.
I have to report that I saw him home safely, and that he is comfortable
and dirty again (to use his own disgraceful language) at the present
moment.

Here the affair rests, having by this time reached what I may call its
first stage.

I know very well what persons of hasty judgment will be inclined to say
of my proceedings thus far. They will assert that I have been deceiving
myself all through in the most absurd way; they will declare that the
suspicious conversations which I have reported referred solely to the
difficulties and dangers of successfully carrying out a runaway match;
and they will appeal to the scene in the church as offering undeniable
proof of the correctness of their assertions. So let it be. I dispute
nothing up to this point. But I ask a question, out of the depths of my
own sagacity as a man of the world, which the bitterest of my enemies
will not, I think, find it particularly easy to answer.

Granted the fact of the marriage, what proof does it afford me of
the innocence of the three persons concerned in that clandestine
transaction? It gives me none. On the contrary, it strengthens my
suspicions against Mr. Jay and his confederates, because it suggests a
distinct motive for their stealing the money. A gentleman who is going
to spend his honeymoon at Richmond wants money; and a gentleman who is
in debt to all his tradespeople wants money. Is this an unjustifiable
imputation of bad motives? In the name of outraged Morality, I deny it.
These men have combined together, and have stolen a woman. Why should
they not combine together and steal a cash-box? I take my stand on the
logic of rigid Virtue, and I defy all the sophistry of Vice to move me
an inch out of my position.

Speaking of virtue, I may add that I have put this view of the case
to Mr. and Mrs. Yatman. That accomplished and charming woman found it
difficult at first to follow the close chain of my reasoning. I am
free to confess that she shook her head, and shed tears, and joined
her husband in premature lamentation over the loss of the two hundred
pounds. But a little careful explanation on my part, and a little
attentive listening on hers, ultimately changed her opinion. She now
agrees with me that there is nothing in this unexpected circumstance of
the clandestine marriage which absolutely tends to divert suspicion from
Mr. Jay, or Mr. "Jack," or the runaway lady. "Audacious hussy" was the
term my fair friend used in speaking of her; but let that pass. It is
more to the purpose to record that Mrs. Yatman has not lost confidence
in me, and that Mr. Yatman promises to follow her example, and do his
best to look hopefully for future results.

I have now, in the new turn that circumstances have taken, to await
advice from your office. I pause for fresh orders with all the composure
of a man who has got two strings to his bow. When I traced the three
confederates from the church door to the railway terminus, I had two
motives for doing so. First, I followed them as a matter of official
business, believing them still to have been guilty of the robbery.
Secondly, I followed them as a matter of private speculation, with a
view of discovering the place of refuge to which the runaway couple
intended to retreat, and of making my information a marketable commodity
to offer to the young lady's family and friends. Thus, whatever happens,
I may congratulate myself beforehand on not having wasted my time. If
the office approves of my conduct, I have my plan ready for further
proceedings. If the office blames me, I shall take myself off, with
my marketable information, to the genteel villa residence in the
neighborhood of the Regent's Park. Anyway, the affair puts money into my
pocket, and does credit to my penetration as an uncommonly sharp man.

I have only one word more to add, and it is this: If any individual
ventures to assert that Mr. Jay and his confederates are innocent of
all share in the stealing of the cash-box, I, in return, defy that
individual--though he may even be Chief Inspector Theakstone himself--to
tell me who has committed the robbery at Rutherford Street, Soho.

Strong in that conviction, I have the honor to be your very obedient
servant,

MATTHEW SHARPIN.


FROM CHIEF INSPECTOR THEAKSTONE TO SERGEANT BULMER.

Birmingham, July 9th.


SERGEANT BULMER--That empty-headed puppy, Mr. Matthew Sharpin, has made
a mess of the case at Rutherford Street, exactly as I expected he would.
Business keeps me in this town, so I write to you to set the matter
straight. I inclose with this the pages of feeble scribble-scrabble
which the creature Sharpin calls a report. Look them over; and when you
have made your way through all the gabble, I think you will agree with
me that the conceited booby has looked for the thief in every direction
but the right one. You can lay your hand on the guilty person in five
minutes, now. Settle the case at once; forward your report to me at this
place, and tell Mr. Sharpin that he is suspended till further notice.

Yours, FRANCIS THEAKSTONE.


FROM SERGEANT BULMER TO CHIEF INSPECTOR THEAKSTONE.

London, July 10th.


INSPECTOR THEAKSTONE--Your letter and inclosure came safe to hand. Wise
men, they say, may always learn something even from a fool. By the time
I had got through Sharpin's maundering report of his own folly, I saw my
way clear enough to the end of the Rutherford Street case, just as you
thought I should. In half an hour's time I was at the house. The first
person I saw there was Mr. Sharpin himself.

"Have you come to help me?" says he.

"Not exactly," says I. "I've come to tell you that you are suspended
till further notice."

"Very good," says he, not taken down by so much as a single peg in his
own estimation. "I thought you would be jealous of me. It's very natural
and I don't blame you. Walk in, pray, and make yourself at home. I'm off
to do a little detective business on my own account, in the neighborhood
of the Regent's Park. Ta--ta, sergeant, ta--ta!"

With those words he took himself out of the way, which was exactly what
I wanted him to do.

As soon as the maid-servant had shut the door, I told her to inform her
master that I wanted to say a word to him in private. She showed me into
the parlor behind the shop, and there was Mr. Yatman all alone, reading
the newspaper.

"About this matter of the robbery, sir," says I.

He cut me short, peevishly enough, being naturally a poor, weak,
womanish sort of man.

"Yes, yes, I know," says he. "You have come to tell me that your
wonderfully clever man, who has bored holes in my second floor
partition, has made a mistake, and is off the scent of the scoundrel who
has stolen my money."

"Yes, sir," says I. "That _is_ one of the things I came to tell you. But
I have got something else to say besides that."

"Can you tell me who the thief is?" says he, more pettish than ever.

"Yes, sir," says I, "I think I can."

He put down the newspaper, and began to look rather anxious and
frightened.

"Not my shopman?" says he. "I hope, for the man's own sake, it's not my
shopman."

"Guess again, sir," says I.

"That idle slut, the maid?" says he.

"She is idle, sir," says I, "and she is also a slut; my first inquiries
about her proved as much as that. But she's not the thief."

"Then, in the name of Heaven, who is?" says he.

"Will you please to prepare yourself for a very disagreeable surprise,
sir?" says I. "And, in case you lose your temper, will you excuse my
remarking that I am the stronger man of the two, and that if you allow
yourself to lay hands on me, I may unintentionally hurt you, in pure
self-defense."

He turned as pale as ashes, and pushed his chair two or three feet away
from me.

"You have asked me to tell you, sir, who has taken your money," I went
on. "If you insist on my giving you an answer--"

"I do insist," he said, faintly. "Who has taken it?"

"Your wife has taken it," I said, very quietly, and very positively at
the same time.

He jumped out of the chair as if I had put a knife into him, and struck
his fist on the table so heavily that the wood cracked again.

"Steady, sir," says I. "Flying into a passion won't help you to the
truth."

"It's a lie!" says he, with another smack of his fist on the table--"a
base, vile, infamous lie! How dare you--"

He stopped, and fell back into the chair again, looked about him in a
bewildered way, and ended by bursting out crying.

"When your better sense comes back to you, sir," says I, "I am sure you
will be gentleman enough to make an apology for the language you have
just used. In the meantime, please to listen, if you can, to a word of
explanation. Mr. Sharpin has sent in a report to our inspector of the
most irregular and ridiculous kind, setting down not only all his own
foolish doings and sayings, but the doings and sayings of Mrs. Yatman
as well. In most cases, such a document would have been fit only for the
waste paper basket; but in this particular case it so happens that Mr.
Sharpin's budget of nonsense leads to a certain conclusion, which the
simpleton of a writer has been quite innocent of suspecting from the
beginning to the end. Of that conclusion I am so sure that I will
forfeit my place if it does not turn out that Mrs. Yatman has been
practicing upon the folly and conceit of this young man, and that she
has tried to shield herself from discovery by purposely encouraging him
to suspect the wrong persons. I tell you that confidently; and I will
even go further. I will undertake to give a decided opinion as to why
Mrs. Yatman took the money, and what she has done with it, or with a
part of it. Nobody can look at that lady, sir, without being struck by
the great taste and beauty of her dress--"

As I said those last words, the poor man seemed to find his powers of
speech again. He cut me short directly as haughtily as if he had been a
duke instead of a stationer.

"Try some other means of justifying your vile calumny against my
wife," says he. "Her milliner's bill for the past year is on my file of
receipted accounts at this moment."

"Excuse me, sir," says I, "but that proves nothing. Milliners, I must
tell you, have a certain rascally custom which comes within the daily
experience of our office. A married lady who wishes it can keep two
accounts at her dressmaker's; one is the account which her husband
sees and pays; the other is the private account, which contains all the
extravagant items, and which the wife pays secretly, by installments,
whenever she can. According to our usual experience, these installments
are mostly squeezed out of the housekeeping money. In your case,
I suspect, no installments have been paid; proceedings have been
threatened; Mrs. Yatman, knowing your altered circumstances, has felt
herself driven into a corner, and she has paid her private account out
of your cash-box."

"I won't believe it," says he. "Every word you speak is an abominable
insult to me and to my wife."

"Are you man enough, sir," says I, taking him up short, in order to save
time and words, "to get that receipted bill you spoke of just now off
the file, and come with me at once to the milliner's shop where Mrs.
Yatman deals?"

He turned red in the face at that, got the bill directly, and put on his
hat. I took out of my pocket-book the list containing the numbers of the
lost notes, and we left the house together immediately.

Arrived at the milliner's (one of the expensive West-End houses, as I
expected), I asked for a private interview, on important business, with
the mistress of the concern. It was not the first time that she and I
had met over the same delicate investigation. The moment she set eyes on
me she sent for her husband. I mentioned who Mr. Yatman was, and what we
wanted.

"This is strictly private?" inquires the husband. I nodded my head.

"And confidential?" says the wife. I nodded again.

"Do you see any objection, dear, to obliging the sergeant with a sight
of the books?" says the husband.

"None in the world, love, if you approve of it," says the wife.

All this while poor Mr. Yatman sat looking the picture of astonishment
and distress, quite out of place at our polite conference. The books
were brought, and one minute's look at the pages in which Mrs. Yatman's
name figured was enough, and more than enough, to prove the truth of
every word that I had spoken.

There, in one book, was the husband's account which Mr. Yatman had
settled; and there, in the other, was the private account, crossed off
also, the date of settlement being the very day after the loss of the
cash-box. This said private account amounted to the sum of a hundred
and seventy-five pounds, odd shillings, and it extended over a period
of three years. Not a single installment had been paid on it. Under the
last line was an entry to this effect: "Written to for the third time,
June 23d." I pointed to it, and asked the milliner if that meant "last
June." Yes, it did mean last June; and she now deeply regretted to say
that it had been accompanied by a threat of legal proceedings.

"I thought you gave good customers more than three years' credit?" says
I.

The milliner looks at Mr. Yatman, and whispers to me, "Not when a lady's
husband gets into difficulties."

She pointed to the account as she spoke. The entries after the time when
Mr. Yatman's circumstances became involved were just as extravagant,
for a person in his wife's situation, as the entries for the year
before that period. If the lady had economized in other things, she had
certainly not economized in the matter of dress.

There was nothing left now but to examine the cash-book, for form's
sake. The money had been paid in notes, the amounts and numbers of which
exactly tallied with the figures set down in my list.

After that, I thought it best to get Mr. Yatman out of the house
immediately. He was in such a pitiable condition that I called a cab and
accompanied him home in it. At first he cried and raved like a child;
but I soon quieted him; and I must add, to his credit, that he made me
a most handsome apology for his language as the cab drew up at his
house door. In return, I tried to give him some advice about how to
set matters right for the future with his wife. He paid very little
attention to me, and went upstairs muttering to himself about a
separation. Whether Mrs. Yatman will come cleverly out of the scrape
or not seems doubtful. I should say myself that she would go into
screeching hysterics, and so frighten the poor man into forgiving her.
But this is no business of ours. So far as we are concerned, the case
is now at an end, and the present report may come to a conclusion along
with it.

I remain, accordingly, yours to command,

THOMAS BULMER.

_P.S_.--I have to add that, on leaving Rutherford Street, I met Mr.
Matthew Sharpin coming to pack up his things.

"Only think!" says he, rubbing his hands in great spirits, "I've been to
the genteel villa residence, and the moment I mentioned my business they
kicked me out directly. There were two witnesses of the assault, and
it's worth a hundred pounds to me if it's worth a farthing."

"I wish you joy of your luck," says I.

"Thank you," says he. "When may I pay you the same compliment on finding
the thief?"

"Whenever you like," says I, "for the thief is found."

"Just what I expected," says he. "I've done all the work, and now you
cut in and claim all the credit--Mr. Jay, of course."

"No," says I.

"Who is it then?" says he.

"Ask Mrs. Yatman," says I. "She's waiting to tell you."

"All right! I'd much rather hear it from that charming woman than from
you," says he, and goes into the house in a mighty hurry.

What do you think of that, Inspector Theakstone? Would you like to stand
in Mr. Sharpin's shoes? I shouldn't, I can promise you.

FROM CHIEF INSPECTOR THEAKSTONE TO MR. MATTHEW SHARPIN.

July 12th.

SIR--Sergeant Bulmer has already told you to consider yourself suspended
until further notice. I have now authority to add that your services
as a member of the Detective police are positively declined. You will
please to take this letter as notifying officially your dismissal from
the force.

I may inform you, privately, that your rejection is not intended to cast
any reflections on your character. It merely implies that you are not
quite sharp enough for our purposes. If we _are_ to have a new recruit
among us, we should infinitely prefer Mrs. Yatman.

Your obedient servant,

FRANCIS THEAKSTONE.


NOTE ON THE PRECEDING CORRESPONDENCE, ADDED BY MR. THEAKSTONE.

The inspector is not in a position to append any explanations of
importance to the last of the letters. It has been discovered that Mr.
Matthew Sharpin left the house in Rutherford Street five minutes after
his interview outside of it with Sergeant Bulmer, his manner expressing
the liveliest emotions of terror and astonishment, and his left cheek
displaying a bright patch of red, which looked as if it might have been
the result of what is popularly termed a smart box on the ear. He was
also heard by the shopman at Rutherford Street to use a very shocking
expression in reference to Mrs. Yatman, and was seen to clinch his fist
vindictively as he ran round the corner of the street. Nothing more has
been heard of him; and it is conjectured that he has left London with
the intention of offering his valuable services to the provincial
police.

On the interesting domestic subject of Mr. and Mrs. Yatman still less
is known. It has, however, been positively ascertained that the medical
attendant of the family was sent for in a great hurry on the day when
Mr. Yatman returned from the milliner's shop. The neighboring chemist
received, soon afterward, a prescription of a soothing nature to make up
for Mrs. Yatman. The day after, Mr. Yatman purchased some smelling-salts
at the shop, and afterward appeared at the circulating library to ask
for a novel descriptive of high life that would amuse an invalid lady.
It has been inferred from these circumstances that he has not thought it
desirable to carry out his threat of separating from his wife, at least
in the present (presumed) condition of that lady's sensitive nervous
system.


THE SEVENTH DAY.

FINE enough for our guest to go out again. Long, feathery lines of white
cloud are waving upward in the sky, a sign of coming wind.

There was a steamer telegraphed yesterday from the West Indies. When the
next vessel is announced from abroad, will it be George's ship?

I don't know how my brothers feel to-day, but the sudden cessation of my
own literary labors has left me still in bad spirits. I tried to occupy
my mind by reading, but my attention wandered. I went out into the
garden, but it looked dreary; the autumn flowers were few and far
between--the lawn was soaked and sodden with yesterday's rain. I
wandered into Owen's room. He had returned to his painting, but was not
working, as it struck me, with his customary assiduity and his customary
sense of enjoyment.

We had a long talk together about George and Jessie and the future. Owen
urged me to risk speaking of my son in her presence once more, on
the chance of making her betray herself on a second occasion, and I
determined to take his advice. But she was in such high spirits when she
came home to dinner on this Seventh Day, and seemed so incapable, for
the time being, of either feeling or speaking seriously, that I thought
it wiser to wait till her variable mood altered again with the next wet
day.

The number drawn this evening was Eight, being the number of the story
which it had cost Owen so much labor to write. He looked a little
fluttered and anxious as he opened the manuscript. This was the first
occasion on which his ability as a narrator was to be brought to the
test, and I saw him glance nervously at Jessie's attentive face.

"I need not trouble you with much in the way of preface," he said. "This
is the story of a very remarkable event in the life of one of my brother
clergymen. He and I became acquainted through being associated with each
other in the management of a Missionary Society. I saw him for the last
time in London when he was about to leave his country and his friends
forever, and was then informed of the circumstances which have afforded
the material for this narrative."




BROTHER OWEN'S STORY of THE PARSON'S SCRUPLE.



CHAPTER I.


IF you had been in the far West of England about thirteen years since,
and if you had happened to take up one of the Cornish newspapers on a
certain day of the month, which need not be specially mentioned, you
would have seen this notice of a marriage at the top of a column:


On the third instant, at the parish church, the Reverend Alfred Carling,
Rector of Penliddy, to Emily Harriet, relict of the late Fergus Duncan,
Esq., of Glendarn, N. B.


The rector's marriage did not produce a very favorable impression in
the town, solely in consequence of the unaccountable private and
unpretending manner in which the ceremony had been performed. The
middle-aged bride and bridegroom had walked quietly to church one
morning, had been married by the curate before any one was aware of it,
and had embarked immediately afterward in the steamer for Tenby, where
they proposed to pass their honeymoon. The bride being a stranger at
Penliddy, all inquiries about her previous history were fruitless,
and the townspeople had no alternative but to trust to their own
investigations for enlightenment when the rector and his wife came home
to settle among their friends.

After six weeks' absence Mr. and Mrs. Carling returned, and the simple
story of the rector's courtship and marriage was gathered together in
fragments, by inquisitive friends, from his own lips and from the lips
of his wife.

Mr. Carling and Mrs. Duncan had met at Torquay. The rector, who had
exchanged houses and duties for the season with a brother clergyman
settled at Torquay, had called on Mrs. Duncan in his clerical capacity,
and had come away from the interview deeply impressed and interested
by the widow's manners and conversation. The visits were repeated; the
acquaintance grew into friendship, and the friendship into love--ardent,
devoted love on both sides.

Middle-aged man though he was, this was Mr. Carling's first attachment,
and it was met by the same freshness of feeling on the lady's part. Her
life with her first husband had not been a happy one. She had made the
fatal mistake of marrying to please her parents rather than herself, and
had repented it ever afterward. On her husband's death his family had
not behaved well to her, and she had passed her widowhood, with her only
child, a daughter, in the retirement of a small Scotch town many miles
away from the home of her married life. After a time the little girl's
health had begun to fail, and, by the doctor's advice, she had migrated
southward to the mild climate of Torquay. The change had proved to be
of no avail; and, rather more than a year since, the child had died.
The place where her darling was buried was a sacred place to her and
she remained a resident at Torquay. Her position in the world was now
a lonely one. She was herself an only child; her father and mother were
both dead; and, excepting cousins, her one near relation left alive was
a maternal uncle living in London.

These particulars were all related simply and unaffectedly before Mr.
Carling ventured on the confession of his attachment. When he made
his proposal of marriage, Mrs. Duncan received it with an excess
of agitation which astonished and almost alarmed the inexperienced
clergyman. As soon as she could speak, she begged with extraordinary
earnestness and anxiety for a week to consider her answer, and requested
Mr. Carling not to visit her on any account until the week had expired.

The next morning she and her maid departed for London. They did not
return until the week for consideration had expired. On the eighth day
Mr. Carling called again and was accepted.

The proposal to make the marriage as private as possible came from the
lady. She had been to London to consult her uncle (whose health, she
regretted to say, would not allow him to travel to Cornwall to give
his niece away at the altar), and he agreed with Mrs. Duncan that
the wedding could not be too private and unpretending. If it was made
public, the family of her first husband would expect cards to be sent
to them, and a renewal of intercourse, which would be painful on both
sides, might be the consequence. Other friends in Scotland, again, would
resent her marrying a second time at her age, and would distress her
and annoy her future husband in many ways. She was anxious to break
altogether with her past existence, and to begin a new and happier life
untrammeled by any connection with former times and troubles. She
urged these points, as she had received the offer of marriage, with
an agitation which was almost painful to see. This peculiarity in her
conduct, however, which might have irritated some men, and rendered
others distrustful, had no unfavorable effect on Mr. Carling. He set it
down to an excess of sensitiveness and delicacy which charmed him. He
was himself--though he never would confess it--a shy, nervous man by
nature. Ostentation of any sort was something which he shrank from
instinctively, even in the simplest affairs of daily life; and his
future wife's proposal to avoid all the usual ceremony and publicity of
a wedding was therefore more than agreeable to him--it was a positive
relief.

The courtship was kept secret at Torquay, and the marriage was
celebrated privately at Penliddy. It found its way into the local
newspapers as a matter of course, but it was not, as usual in such
cases, also advertised in the _Times_. Both husband and wife were
equally happy in the enjoyment of their new life, and equally unsocial
in taking no measures whatever to publish it to others.

Such was the story of the rector's marriage. Socially, Mr. Carling's
position was but little affected either way by the change in his life.
As a bachelor, his circle of friends had been a small one, and when he
married he made no attempt to enlarge it. He had never been popular with
the inhabitants of his parish generally. Essentially a weak man, he was,
like other weak men, only capable of asserting himself positively in
serious matters by running into extremes. As a consequence of this
moral defect, he presented some singular anomalies in character. In the
ordinary affairs of life he was the gentlest and most yielding of men,
but in all that related to strictness of religious principle he was the
sternest and the most aggressive of fanatics. In the pulpit he was a
preacher of merciless sermons--an interpreter of the Bible by the letter
rather than by the spirit, as pitiless and gloomy as one of the
Puritans of old; while, on the other hand, by his own fireside he was
considerate, forbearing, and humble almost to a fault. As a necessary
result of this singular inconsistency of character, he was feared, and
sometimes even disliked, by the members of his congregation who only
knew him as their pastor, and he was prized and loved by the small
circle of friends who also knew him as a man.

Those friends gathered round him more closely and more affectionately
than ever after his marriage, not on his own account only, but
influenced also by the attractions that they found in the society of
his wife. Her refinement and gentleness of manner; her extraordinary
accomplishments as a musician; her unvarying sweetness of temper, and
her quick, winning, womanly intelligence in conversation, charmed every
one who approached her. She was quoted as a model wife and woman by all
her husband's friends, and she amply deserved the character that they
gave her. Although no children came to cheer it, a happier and a more
admirable married life has seldom been witnessed in this world than the
life which was once to be seen in the rectory house at Penliddy.

With these necessary explanations, that preliminary part of my narrative
of which the events may be massed together generally, for brevity's
sake, comes to a close. What I have next to tell is of a deeper and a
more serious interest, and must be carefully related in detail.

The rector and his wife had lived together without, as I honestly
believe, a harsh word or an unkind look once passing between them for
upward of two years, when Mr. Carling took his first step toward the
fatal future that was awaiting him by devoting his leisure hours to the
apparently simple and harmless occupation of writing a pamphlet.

He had been connected for many years with one of our great Missionary
Societies, and had taken as active a part as a country clergyman could
in the management of its affairs. At the period of which I speak,
certain influential members of the society had proposed a plan
for greatly extending the sphere of its operations, trusting to a
proportionate increase in the annual subscriptions to defray the
additional expenses of the new movement. The question was not now
brought forward for the first time. It had been agitated eight years
previously, and the settlement of it had been at that time deferred to a
future opportunity. The revival of the project, as usual in such cases,
split the working members of the society into two parties; one party
cautiously objecting to run any risks, the other hopefully declaring
that the venture was a safe one, and that success was sure to attend it.
Mr. Carling sided enthusiastically with the members who espoused this
latter side of the question, and the object of his pamphlet was to
address the subscribers to the society on the subject, and so to
interest them in it as to win their charitable support, on a larger
scale than usual, to the new project.

He had worked hard at his pamphlet, and had got more than half way
through it, when he found himself brought to a stand-still for want of
certain facts which had been produced on the discussion of the question
eight years since, and which were necessary to the full and fair
statement of his case.

At first he thought of writing to the secretary of the society for
information; but, remembering that he had not held his office more than
two years, he had thought it little likely that this gentleman would be
able to help him, and looked back to his own Diary of the period to see
if he had made any notes in it relating to the original discussion
of the affair. He found a note referring in general terms only to the
matter in hand, but alluding at the end to a report in the _Times_ of
the proceedings of a deputation from the society which had waited on
a member of the government of that day, and to certain letters to
the editor which had followed the publication of the report. The note
described these letters as "very important," and Mr. Carling felt, as he
put his Diary away again, that the successful conclusion of his pamphlet
now depended on his being able to get access to the back numbers of the
_Times_ of eight years since.

It was winter time when he was thus stopped in his work, and the
prospect of a journey to London (the only place he knew of at which
files of the paper were to be found) did not present many attractions;
and yet he could see no other and easier means of effecting his object.
After considering for a little while and arriving at no positive
conclusion, he left the study, and went into the drawing-room to consult
his wife.

He found her working industriously by the blazing fire. She looked so
happy and comfortable--so gentle and charming in her pretty little lace
cap, and her warm brown morning-dress, with its bright cherry-colored
ribbons, and its delicate swan's down trimming circling round her neck
and nestling over her bosom, that he stooped and kissed her with the
tenderness of his bridegroom days before he spoke. When he told her of
the cause that had suspended his literary occupation, she listened, with
the sensation of the kiss still lingering in her downcast eyes and
her smiling lips, until he came to the subject of his Diary and its
reference to the newspaper.

As he mentioned the name of the _Times_ she altered and looked him
straight in the face gravely.

"Can you suggest any plan, love," he went on, "which may save me the
necessity of a journey to London at this bleak time of the year? I must
positively have this information, and, so far as I can see, London is
the only place at which I can hope to meet with a file of the _Times_."

"A file of the _Times?_" she repeated.

"Yes--of eight years since," he said.

The instant the words passed his lips he saw her face overspread by
a ghastly paleness; her eyes fixed on him with a strange mixture of
rigidity and vacancy in their look; her hands, with her work held tight
in them, dropped slowly on her lap, and a shiver ran through her from
head to foot.

He sprang to his feet, and snatched the smelling-salts from her
work-table, thinking she was going to faint. She put the bottle from
her, when he offered it, with a hand that thrilled him with the deadly
coldness of its touch, and said, in a whisper:

"A sudden chill, dear--let me go upstairs and lie down."

He took her to her room. As he laid her down on the bed, she caught his
hand, and said, entreatingly:

"You won't go to London, darling, and leave me here ill?"

He promised that nothing should separate him from her until she was well
again, and then ran downstairs to send for the doctor. The doctor came,
and pronounced that Mrs. Carling was only suffering from a nervous
attack; that there was not the least reason to be alarmed; and that,
with proper care, she would be well again in a few days.

Both husband and wife had a dinner engagement in the town for that
evening. Mr. Carling proposed to write an apology and to remain with his
wife. But she would not hear of his abandoning the party on her account.
The doctor also recommended that his patient should be left to her
maid's care, to fall asleep under the influence of the quieting medicine
which he meant to give her. Yielding to this advice, Mr. Carling did his
best to suppress his own anxieties, and went to the dinner-party.



CHAPTER II.


AMONG the guests whom the rector met was a gentleman named Rambert, a
single man of large fortune, well known in the neighborhood of Penliddy
as the owner of a noble country-seat and the possessor of a magnificent
library.

Mr. Rambert (with whom Mr. Carling was well acquainted) greeted him at
the dinner-party with friendly expressions of regret at the time that
had elapsed since they had last seen each other, and mentioned that
he had recently been adding to his collection of books some rare old
volumes of theology, which he thought the rector might find it useful
to look over. Mr. Carling, with the necessity of finishing his
pamphlet uppermost in his mind, replied, jestingly, that the species of
literature which he was just then most interested in examining happened
to be precisely of the sort which (excepting novels, perhaps) had least
affinity to theological writing. The necessary explanation followed this
avowal as a matter of course, and, to Mr. Carling's great delight, his
friend turned on him gayly with the most surprising and satisfactory of
answers:

"You don't know half the resources of my miles of bookshelves," he said,
"or you would never have thought of going to London for what you can
get from me. A whole side of one of my rooms upstairs is devoted to
periodical literature. I have reviews, magazines, and three weekly
newspapers, bound, in each case, from the first number; and, what is
just now more to your purpose, I have the _Times_ for the last fifteen
years in huge half-yearly volumes. Give me the date to-night, and you
shall have the volume you want by two o'clock to-morrow afternoon."

The necessary information was given at once, and, with a great sense
of relief, so far as his literary anxieties were concerned, Mr. Carling
went home early to see what the quieting medicine had done for his wife.

She had dozed a little, but had not slept. However, she was evidently
better, for she was able to take an interest in the sayings and doings
at the dinner-party, and questioned her husband about the guests and the
conversation with all a woman's curiosity about the minutest matters.
She lay with her face turned toward him and her eyes meeting his, until
the course of her inquiries drew an answer from him, which informed her
of his fortunate discovery in relation to Mr. Rambert's library, and of
the prospect it afforded of his resuming his labors the next day.

When he mentioned this circumstance, she suddenly turned her head on the
pillow so that her face was hidden from him, and he could see through
the counterpane that the shivering, which he had observed when her
illness had seized her in the morning, had returned again.

"I am only cold," she said, in a hurried way, with her face under the
clothes.

He rang for the maid, and had a fresh covering placed on the bed.
Observing that she seemed unwilling to be disturbed, he did not remove
the clothes from her face when he wished her goodnight, but pressed his
lips on her head, and patted it gently with his hand. She shrank at
the touch as if it hurt her, light as it was, and he went downstairs,
resolved to send for the doctor again if she did not get to rest on
being left quiet. In less than half an hour afterward the maid came down
and relieved his anxiety by reporting that her mistress was asleep.

The next morning he found her in better spirits. Her eyes, she said,
felt too weak to bear the light, so she kept the bedroom darkened. But
in other respects she had little to complain of.

After answering her husband's first inquiries, she questioned him about
his plans for the day. He had letters to write which would occupy him
until twelve o'clock. At two o'clock he expected the volume of the
_Times_ to arrive, and he should then devote the rest of the afternoon
to his work. After hearing what his plans were, Mrs. Carling suggested
that he should ride out after he had done his letters, so as to get some
exercise at the fine part of the day; and she then reminded him that a
longer time than usual had elapsed since he had been to see a certain
old pensioner of his, who had nursed him as a child, and who was now
bedridden, in a village at some distance, called Tringweighton. Although
the rector saw no immediate necessity for making this charitable
visit, the more especially as the ride to the village and back, and the
intermediate time devoted to gossip, would occupy at least two hours and
a half, he assented to his wife's proposal, perceiving that she urged it
with unusual earnestness, and being unwilling to thwart her, even in a
trifle, at a time when she was ill.

Accordingly, his horse was at the door at twelve precisely. Impatient to
get back to the precious volume of the _Times,_ he rode so much faster
than usual, and so shortened his visit to the old woman, that he was
home again by a quarter past two. Ascertaining from the servant who
opened the door that the volume had been left by Mr. Rambert's messenger
punctually at two, he ran up to his wife's room to tell her about his
visit before he secluded himself for the rest of the afternoon over his
work. On entering the bedroom he found it still darkened, and he was
struck by a smell of burned paper in it.

His wife (who was now dressed in her wrapper and lying on the sofa)
accounted for the smell by telling him that she had fancied the room
felt close, and that she had burned some paper--being afraid of the cold
air if she opened the window--to fumigate it. Her eyes were evidently
still weak, for she kept her hand over them while she spoke. After
remaining with her long enough to relate the few trivial events of his
ride, Mr. Carling descended to his study to occupy himself at last with
the volume of the _Times_.

It lay on his table in the shape of a large flat brown paper package.
On proceeding to undo the covering, he observed that it had been very
carelessly tied up. The strings were crooked and loosely knotted, and
the direction bearing his name and address, instead of being in the
middle of the paper, was awkwardly folded over at the edge of the
volume. However, his business was with the inside of the parcel; so
he tossed away the covering and the string, and began at once to hunt
through the volume for the particular number of the paper which he
wished first to consult.

He soon found it, with the report of the speeches delivered by the
members of the deputation, and the answer returned by the minister.
After reading through the report, and putting a mark in the place where
it occurred, he turned to the next day's number of the paper, to see
what further hints on the subject the letters addressed to the editor
might happen to contain.

To his inexpressible vexation and amazement, he found that one number of
the paper was missing.

He bent the two sides of the volume back, looked closely between the
leaves, and saw immediately that the missing number had been cut out.

A vague sense of something like alarm began to mingle with his first
feeling of disappointment. He wrote at once to Mr. Rambert, mentioning
the discovery he had just made, and sent the note off by his groom, with
orders to the man to wait for an answer.

The reply with which the servant returned was almost insolent in the
shortness and coolness of its tone. Mr. Rambert had no books in his
library which were not in perfect condition. The volume of the _Times_
had left his house perfect, and whatever blame might attach to the
mutilation of it rested therefore on other shoulders than those of the
owner.

Like many other weak men, Mr. Carling was secretly touchy on the subject
of his dignity. After reading the note and questioning his servants, who
were certain that the volume had not been touched till he had opened it,
he resolved that the missing number of the _Times_ should be procured
at any expense and inserted in its place; that the volume should be sent
back instantly without a word of comment; and that no more books from
Mr. Rambert's library should enter his house.

He walked up and down the study considering what first step he should
take to effect the purpose in view. Under the quickening influence of
his irritation, an idea occurred to him, which, if it had only entered
his mind the day before, might probably have proved the means of saving
him from placing himself under an obligation to Mr. Rambert. He resolved
to write immediately to his bookseller and publisher in London (who knew
him well as an old and excellent customer), mentioning the date of
the back number of the _Times_ that was required, and authorizing the
publisher to offer any reward he judged necessary to any person who
might have the means of procuring it at the office of the paper or
elsewhere. This letter he wrote and dispatched in good time for the
London post, and then went upstairs to see his wife and to tell her what
had happened. Her room was still darkened and she was still on the
sofa. On the subject of the missing number she said nothing, but of
Mr. Rambert and his note she spoke with the most sovereign contempt. Of
course the pompous old fool was mistaken, and the proper thing to do was
to send back the volume instantly and take no more notice of him.

"It shall be sent back," said Mr. Carling, "but not till the missing
number is replaced." And he then told her what he had done.

The effect of that simple piece of information on Mrs. Carling was so
extraordinary and so unaccountable that her husband fairly stood aghast.
For the first time since their marriage he saw her temper suddenly in a
flame. She started up from the sofa and walked about the room as if
she had lost her senses, upbraiding him for making the weakest of
concessions to Mr. Rambert's insolent assumption that the rector was to
blame. If she could only have laid hands on that letter, she would have
consulted her husband's dignity and independence by putting it in the
fire! She hoped and prayed the number of the paper might not be found!
In fact, it was certain that the number, after all these years, could
not possibly be hunted up. The idea of his acknowledging himself to be
in the wrong in that way, when he knew himself to be in the right! It
was almost ridiculous--no, it was _quite_ ridiculous! And she threw
herself back on the sofa, and suddenly burst out laughing.

At the first word of remonstrance which fell from her husband's lips her
mood changed again in an instant. She sprang up once more, kissed him
passionately, with the tears streaming from her eyes, and implored him
to leave her alone to recover herself. He quitted the room so seriously
alarmed about her that he resolved to go to the doctor privately and
question him on the spot. There was an unspeakable dread in his mind
that the nervous attack from which she had been pronounced to be
suffering might be a mere phrase intended to prepare him for the future
disclosure of something infinitely and indescribably worse.

The doctor, on hearing Mr. Carling's report, exhibited no surprise
and held to his opinion. Her nervous system was out of order, and her
husband had been needlessly frightened by a hysterical paroxysm. If she
did not get better in a week, change of scene might then be tried. In
the meantime, there was not the least cause for alarm.

On the next day she was quieter, but she hardly spoke at all. At night
she slept well, and Mr. Carling's faith in the medical man revived
again.

The morning after was the morning which would bring the answer from the
publisher in London. The rector's study was on the ground floor, and
when he heard the postman's knock, being especially anxious that morning
about his correspondence, he went out into the hall to receive his
letters the moment they were put on the table.

It was not the footman who had answered the door, as usual, but Mrs.
Carling's maid. She had taken the letters from the postman, and she was
going away with them upstairs.

He stopped her, and asked her why she did not put the letters on the
hall table as usual. The maid, looking very much confused, said that her
mistress had desired that whatever the postman had brought that morning
should be carried up to her room. He took the letters abruptly from the
girl, without asking any more questions, and went back into his study.

Up to this time no shadow of a suspicion had fallen on his mind.
Hitherto there had been a simple obvious explanation for every unusual
event that had occurred during the last three or four days; but this
last circumstance in connection with the letters was not to be accounted
for. Nevertheless, even now, it was not distrust of his wife that was
busy at his mind--he was too fond of her and too proud of her to feel
it--the sensation was more like uneasy surprise. He longed to go and
question her, and get a satisfactory answer, and have done with it. But
there was a voice speaking within him that had never made itself heard
before--a voice with a persistent warning in it, that said, Wait; and
look at your letters first.

He spread them out on the table with hands that trembled he knew not
why. Among them was the back number of the _Times_ for which he had
written to London, with a letter from the publisher explaining the means
by which the copy had been procured.

He opened the newspaper with a vague feeling of alarm at finding that
those letters to the editor which he had been so eager to read, and
that perfecting of the mutilated volume which he had been so anxious to
accomplish, had become objects of secondary importance in his mind. An
inexplicable curiosity about the general contents of the paper was now
the one moving influence which asserted itself within him, he spread
open the broad sheet on the table.

The first page on which his eye fell was the page on the right-hand
side. It contained those very letters--three in number--which he had
once been so anxious to see. He tried to read them, but no effort could
fix his wandering attention. He looked aside to the opposite page, on
the left hand. It was the page that contained the leading articles.

They were three in number. The first was on foreign politics; the second
was a sarcastic commentary on a recent division in the House of Lords;
the third was one of those articles on social subjects which have
greatly and honorably helped to raise the reputation of the _Times_
above all contest and all rivalry.

The lines of this third article which first caught his eye comprised the
opening sentence of the second paragraph, and contained these words:

It appears, from the narrative which will be found in another part of
our columns, that this unfortunate woman married, in the spring of
the year 18--, one Mr. Fergus Duncan, of Glendarn, in the Highlands of
Scotland...


The letters swam and mingled together under his eyes before he could
go on to the next sentence. His wife exhibited as an object for public
compassion in the _Times_ newspaper! On the brink of the dreadful
discovery that was advancing on him, his mind reeled back, and a deadly
faintness came over him. There was water on a side-table--he drank a
deep draught of it--roused himself--seized on the newspaper with both
hands, as if it had been a living thing that could feel the desperate
resolution of his grasp, and read the article through, sentence by
sentence, word by word.

The subject was the Law of Divorce, and the example quoted was the
example of his wife.

At that time England stood disgracefully alone as the one civilized
country in the world having a divorce law for the husband which was not
also a divorce law for the wife. The writer in the _Times_ boldly and
eloquently exposed this discreditable anomaly in the administration of
justice; hinted delicately at the unutterable wrongs suffered by Mrs.
Duncan; and plainly showed that she was indebted to the accident of
having been married in Scotland, and to her consequent right of appeal
to the Scotch tribunals, for a full and final release from the tie that
bound her to the vilest of husbands, which the English law of that day
would have mercilessly refused.

He read that. Other men might have gone on to the narrative extracted
from the Scotch newspaper. But at the last word of the article _he_
stopped.

The newspaper, and the unread details which it contained, lost all hold
on his attention in an instant, and in their stead, living and burning
on his mind, like the Letters of Doom on the walls of Belshazzar, there
rose up in judgment against him the last words of a verse in the Gospel
of Saint Luke--

_"Whosoever marrieth her that is put away from her husband, commiteth
adultery."_

He had preached from these words, he had warned his hearers, with the
whole strength of the fanatical sincerity that was in him, to beware of
prevaricating with the prohibition which that verse contained, and to
accept it as literally, unreservedly, finally forbidding the marriage of
a divorced woman. He had insisted on that plain interpretation of plain
words in terms which had made his congregation tremble. And now he stood
alone in the secrecy of his own chamber self-convicted of the deadly sin
which he had denounced--he stood, as he had told the wicked among his
hearers that they would stand at the Last Day, before the Judgment Seat.

He was unconscious of the lapse of time; he never knew whether it was
many minutes or few before the door of his room was suddenly and softly
opened. It did open, and his wife came in.

In her white dress, with a white shawl thrown over her shoulders; her
dark hair, so neat and glossy at other times, hanging tangled about her
colorless cheeks, and heightening the glassy brightness of terror in
her eyes--so he saw her; the woman put away from her husband--the woman
whose love had made his life happy and had stained his soul with a
deadly sin.

She came on to within a few paces of him without a word or a tear, or
a shadow of change passing over the dreadful rigidity of her face. She
looked at him with a strange look; she pointed to the newspaper crumpled
in his hand with a strange gesture; she spoke to him in a strange voice.

"You know it!" she said.

His eyes met hers--she shrank from them--turned--and laid her arms and
her head heavily against the wall.

"Oh, Alfred," she said, "I was so lonely in the world, and I was so fond
of you!"

The woman's delicacy, the woman's trembling tenderness welled up from
her heart, and touched her voice with a tone of its old sweetness as she
murmured those simple words.

She said no more. Her confession of her fault, her appeal to their past
love for pardon, were both poured forth in that one sentence. She left
it to his own heart to tell him the rest. How anxiously her vigilant
love had followed his every word and treasured up his every opinion in
the days when they first met; how weakly and falsely, and yet with how
true an affection for him, she had shrunk from the disclosure which she
knew but too well would have separated them even at the church door;
how desperately she had fought against the coming discovery which
threatened to tear her from the bosom she clung to, and to cast her out
into the world with the shadow of her own shame to darken her life to
the end--all this she left him to feel; for the moment which might
part them forever was the moment when she knew best how truly, how
passionately he had loved her.

His lips trembled as he stood looking at her in silence, and the slow,
burning tears dropped heavily, one by one, down his cheeks. The natural
human remembrance of the golden days of their companionship, of the
nights and nights when that dear head--turned away from him now in
unutterable misery and shame--had nestled itself so fondly and so
happily on his breast, fought hard to silence his conscience, to root
out his dreadful sense of guilt, to tear the words of Judgment from
their ruthless hold on his mind, to claim him in the sweet names of Pity
and of Love. If she had turned and looked at him at that moment,
their next words would have been spoken in each other's arms. But the
oppression of her despair under his silence was too heavy for her, and
she never moved.

He forced himself to look away from her; he struggled hard to break the
silence between them.

"God forgive you, Emily!" he said.

As her name passed his lips, his voice failed him, and the torture at
his heart burst its way out in sobs. He hurried to the door to spare
her the terrible reproof of the grief that had now mastered him. When he
passed her she turned toward him with a faint cry.

He caught her as she sank forward, and saved her from dropping on the
floor. For the last time his arms closed round her. For the last time
his lips touched hers--cold and insensible to him now. He laid her on
the sofa and went out.

One of the female servants was crossing the hall. The girl started as
she met him, and turned pale at the sight of his face. He could not
speak to her, but he pointed to the study door. He saw her go into the
room, and then left the house.

He never entered it more, and he and his wife never met again.


Later on that last day, a sister of Mr. Carling's--a married woman
living in the town--came to the rectory. She brought an open note with
her, addressed to the unhappy mistress of the house. It contained these
few lines, blotted and stained with tears:

May God grant us both the time for repentance! If I had loved you less,
I might have trusted myself to see you again. Forgive me, and pity
me, and remember me in your prayers, as I shall forgive, and pity, and
remember you.


He had tried to write more, but the pen had dropped from his hand. His
sister's entreaties had not moved him. After giving her the note to
deliver, he had solemnly charged her to be gentle in communicating the
tidings that she bore, and had departed alone for London. He heard all
remonstrances with patience. He did not deny that the deception of which
his wife had been guilty was the most pardonable of all concealments of
the truth, because it sprang from her love for him; but he had the same
hopeless answer for every one who tried to plead with him--the verse
from the Gospel of Saint Luke.

His purpose in traveling to London was to make the necessary
arrangements for his wife's future existence, and then to get employment
which would separate him from his home and from all its associations.
A missionary expedition to one of the Pacific Islands accepted him as a
volunteer. Broken in body and spirit, his last look of England from the
deck of the ship was his last look at land. A fortnight afterward, his
brethren read the burial-service over him on a calm, cloudless evening
at sea. Before he was committed to the deep, his little pocket Bible,
which had been a present from his wife, was, in accordance with his
dying wishes, placed open on his breast, so that the inscription, "To my
dear Husband," might rest over his heart.

His unhappy wife still lives. When the farewell lines of her husband's
writing reached her she was incapable of comprehending them. The mental
prostration which had followed the parting scene was soon complicated
by physical suffering--by fever on the brain. To the surprise of all who
attended her, she lived through the shock, recovering with the complete
loss of one faculty, which, in her situation, poor thing, was a mercy
and a gain to her--the faculty of memory. From that time to this she has
never had the slightest gleam of recollection of anything that happened
before her illness. In her happy oblivion, the veriest trifles are as
new and as interesting to her as if she was beginning her existence
again. Under the tender care of the friends who now protect her, she
lives contentedly the life of a child. When her last hour comes, may she
die with nothing on her memory but the recollection of their kindness!

THE EIGHTH DAY.

THE wind that I saw in the sky yesterday has come. It sweeps down our
little valley in angry howling gusts, and drives the heavy showers
before it in great sheets of spray.

There are some people who find a strangely exciting effect produced on
their spirits by the noise, and rush, and tumult of the elements on a
stormy day. It has never been so with me, and it is less so than ever
now. I can hardly bear to think of my son at sea in such a tempest as
this. While I can still get no news of his ship, morbid fancies beset
me which I vainly try to shake off. I see the trees through my window
bending before the wind. Are the masts of the good ship bending like
them at this moment? I hear the wash of the driving rain. Is _he_
hearing the thunder of the raging waves? If he had only come back last
night!--it is vain to dwell on it, but the thought will haunt me--if he
had only come back last night!

I tried to speak cautiously about him again to Jessie, as Owen had
advised me; but I am so old and feeble now that this ill-omened storm
has upset me, and I could not feel sure enough of my own self-control to
venture on matching myself to-day against a light-hearted, lively girl,
with all her wits about her. It is so important that I should not betray
George--it would be so inexcusable on my part if his interests suffered,
even accidentally, in my hands.

This was a trying day for our guest. Her few trifling indoor resources
had, as I could see, begun to lose their attractions for her at last.
If we were not now getting to the end of the stories, and to the end,
therefore, of the Ten Days also, our chance of keeping her much longer
at the Glen Tower would be a very poor one.

It was, I think, a great relief for us all to be summoned together this
evening for a definite purpose. The wind had fallen a little as it got
on toward dusk. To hear it growing gradually fainter and fainter in
the valley below added immeasurably to the comforting influence of the
blazing fire and the cheerful lights when the shutters were closed for
the night.

The number drawn happened to be the last of the series--Ten--and the
last also of the stories which I had written. There were now but two
numbers left in the bowl. Owen and Morgan had each one reading more to
accomplish before our guest's stay came to an end, and the manuscripts
in the Purple Volume were all exhausted.

"This new story of mine," I said, "is not, like the story I last read,
a narrative of adventure happening to myself, but of adventures that
happened to a lady of my acquaintance. I was brought into contact, in
the first instance, with one of her male relatives, and, in the second
instance, with the lady herself, by certain professional circumstances
which I need not particularly describe. They involved a dry question
of wills and title-deeds in no way connected with this story, but
sufficiently important to interest me as a lawyer. The case came to
trial at the Assizes on my circuit, and I won it in the face of some
very strong points, very well put, on the other side. I was in poor
health at the time, and my exertions so completely knocked me up that I
was confined to bed in my lodgings for a week or more--"

"And the grateful lady came and nursed you, I suppose," said the Queen
of Hearts, in her smart, off-hand way.

"The grateful lady did something much more natural in her position, and
much more useful in mine," I answered--"she sent her servant to attend
on me. He was an elderly man, who had been in her service since the
time of her first marriage, and he was also one of the most sensible and
well-informed persons whom I have ever met with in his station of life.
From hints which he dropped while he was at my bedside, I discovered
for the first time that his mistress had been unfortunate in her second
marriage, and that the troubles of that period of her life had ended
in one of the most singular events which had happened in that part of
England for many a long day past. It is hardly necessary to say that,
before I allowed the man to enter into any particulars, I stipulated
that he should obtain his mistress's leave to communicate what he knew.
Having gained this, and having further surprised me by mentioning that
he had been himself connected with all the circumstances, he told me the
whole story in the fullest detail. I have now tried to reproduce it as
nearly as I could in his own language. Imagine, therefore, that I am
just languidly recovering in bed, and that a respectable elderly man, in
quiet black costume, is sitting at my pillow and speaking to me in these
terms--"

Thus ending my little preface, I opened the manuscript and began my last
story.




BROTHER GRIFFITH'S STORY of A PLOT IN PRIVATE LIFE.



CHAPTER I.


THE first place I got when I began going out to service was not a very
profitable one. I certainly gained the advantage of learning my business
thoroughly, but I never had my due in the matter of wages. My master
was made a bankrupt, and his servants suffered with the rest of his
creditors.

My second situation, however, amply compensated me for my want of luck
in the first. I had the good fortune to enter the service of Mr. and
Mrs. Norcross. My master was a very rich gentleman. He had the Darrock
house and lands in Cumberland, an estate also in Yorkshire, and a very
large property in Jamaica, which produced, at that time and for some
years afterward, a great income. Out in the West Indies he met with
a pretty young lady, a governess in an English family, and, taking a
violent fancy to her, married her, though she was a good five-and-twenty
years younger than himself. After the wedding they came to England, and
it was at this time that I was lucky enough to be engaged by them as a
servant.

I lived with my new master and mistress three years. They had no
children. At the end of that period Mr. Norcross died. He was sharp
enough to foresee that his young widow would marry again, and he
bequeathed his property so that it all went to Mrs. Norcross first, and
then to any children she might have by a second marriage, and, failing
that, to relations and friends of his own. I did not suffer by my
master's death, for his widow kept me in her service. I had attended on
Mr. Norcross all through his last illness, and had made myself useful
enough to win my mistress's favor and gratitude. Besides me she also
retained her maid in her service--a quadroon woman named Josephine, whom
she brought with her from the West Indies. Even at that time I disliked
the half-breed's wheedling manners, and her cruel, tawny face, and
wondered how my mistress could be so fond of her as she was. Time showed
that I was right in distrusting this woman. I shall have much more to
say about her when I get further advanced with my story.

Meanwhile I have next to relate that my mistress broke up the rest of
her establishment, and, taking me and the lady's maid with her, went to
travel on the Continent.

Among other wonderful places we visited Paris, Genoa, Venice, Florence,
Rome, and Naples, staying in some of those cities for months together.
The fame of my mistress's riches followed her wherever she went; and
there were plenty of gentlemen, foreigners as well as Englishmen, who
were anxious enough to get into her good graces and to prevail on her to
marry them. Nobody succeeded, however, in producing any very strong or
lasting impression on her; and when we came back to England, after more
than two years of absence, Mrs. Norcross was still a widow, and showed
no signs of wanting to change her condition.

We went to the house on the Yorkshire estate first; but my mistress did
not fancy some of the company round about, so we moved again to Darrock
Hall, and made excursions from time to time in the lake district,
some miles off. On one of these trips Mrs. Norcross met with some old
friends, who introduced her to a gentleman of their party bearing the
very common and very uninteresting name of Mr. James Smith.

He was a tall, fine young man enough, with black hair, which grew very
long, and the biggest, bushiest pair of black whiskers I ever saw.
Altogether he had a rakish, unsettled look, and a bounceable way of
talking which made him the prominent person in company. He was poor
enough himself, as I heard from his servant, but well connected--a
gentleman by birth and education, though his manners were so free. What
my mistress saw to like in him I don't know; but when she asked her
friends to stay with her at Darrock, she included Mr. James Smith in
the invitation. We had a fine, gay, noisy time of it at the Hall, the
strange gentleman, in particular, making himself as much at home as if
the place belonged to him. I was surprised at Mrs. Norcross putting
up with him as she did, but I was fairly thunderstruck some months
afterward when I heard that she and her free-and-easy visitor were
actually going to be married! She had refused offers by dozens abroad,
from higher, and richer, and better-behaved men. It seemed next to
impossible that she could seriously think of throwing herself away upon
such a hare-brained, headlong, penniless young gentleman as Mr. James
Smith.

Married, nevertheless, they were, in due course of time; and, after
spending the honeymoon abroad, they came back to Darrock Hall.

I soon found that my new master had a very variable temper. There were
some days when he was as easy, and familiar, and pleasant with his
servants as any gentleman need be. At other times some devil within
him seemed to get possession of his whole nature. He flew into violent
passions, and took wrong ideas into his head, which no reasoning or
remonstrance could remove. It rather amazed me, considering how gay
he was in his tastes, and how restless his habits were, that he should
consent to live at such a quiet, dull place as Darrock. The reason
for this, however, soon came out. Mr. James Smith was not much of a
sportsman; he cared nothing for indoor amusements, such as reading,
music, and so forth; and he had no ambition for representing the county
in parliament. The one pursuit that he was really fond of was yachting.
Darrock was within sixteen miles of a sea-port town, with an excellent
harbor, and to this accident of position the Hall was entirely indebted
for recommending itself as a place of residence to Mr. James Smith.

He had such an untiring enjoyment and delight in cruising about at sea,
and all his ideas of pleasure seemed to be so closely connected with his
remembrance of the sailing trips he had taken on board different yachts
belonging to his friends, that I verily believe his chief object in
marrying my mistress was to get the command of money enough to keep a
vessel for himself. Be that as it may, it is certain that he prevailed
on her, some time after their marriage, to make him a present of a fine
schooner yacht, which was brought round from Cowes to our coast-town,
and kept always waiting ready for him in the harbor.

His wife required some little persuasion before she could make up her
mind to let him have the vessel. She suffered so much from sea-sickness
that pleasure-sailing was out of the question for her; and, being very
fond of her husband, she was naturally unwilling that he should engage
in an amusement which took him away from her. However, Mr. James Smith
used his influence over her cleverly, promising that he would never
go away without first asking her leave, and engaging that his terms of
absence at sea should never last for more than a week or ten days at a
time. Accordingly, my mistress, who was the kindest and most unselfish
woman in the world, put her own feelings aside, and made her husband
happy in the possession of a vessel of his own.

While my master was away cruising, my mistress had a dull time of it at
the Hall. The few gentlefolks there were in our part of the county lived
at a distance, and could only come to Darrock when they were asked to
stay there for some days together. As for the village near us, there was
but one person living in it whom my mistress could think of asking to
the Hall, and that person was the clergyman who did duty at the church.

This gentleman's name was Mr. Meeke. He was a single man, very
young, and very lonely in his position. He had a mild, melancholy,
pasty-looking face, and was as shy and soft-spoken as a little
girl--altogether, what one may call, without being unjust or severe, a
poor, weak creature, and, out of all sight, the very worst preacher I
ever sat under in my life. The one thing he did, which, as I heard, he
could really do well, was playing on the fiddle. He was uncommonly fond
of music--so much so that he often took his instrument out with him when
he went for a walk. This taste of his was his great recommendation to
my mistress, who was a wonderfully fine player on the piano, and who was
delighted to get such a performer as Mr. Meeke to play duets with her.
Besides liking his society for this reason, she felt for him in his
lonely position; naturally enough, I think, considering how often she
was left in solitude herself. Mr. Meeke, on his side, when he got
over his first shyness, was only too glad to leave his lonesome little
parsonage for the fine music-room at the Hall, and for the company of
a handsome, kind-hearted lady, who made much of him, and admired his
fiddle-playing with all her heart. Thus it happened that, whenever my
master was away at sea, my mistress and Mr. Meeke were always together,
playing duets as if they had their living to get by it. A more harmless
connection than the connection between those two never existed in this
world; and yet, innocent as it was, it turned out to be the first cause
of all the misfortunes that afterward happened.

My master's treatment of Mr. Meeke was, from the first, the very
opposite of my mistress's. The restless, rackety, bounceable Mr. James
Smith felt a contempt for the weak, womanish, fiddling little parson,
and, what was more, did not care to conceal it. For this reason, Mr.
Meeke (who was dreadfully frightened by my master's violent language and
rough ways) very seldom visited at the Hall except when my mistress was
alone there. Meaning no wrong, and therefore stooping to no concealment,
she never thought of taking any measures to keep Mr. Meeke out of the
way when he happened to be with her at the time of her husband's coming
home, whether it was only from a riding excursion in the neighborhood
or from a cruise in the schooner. In this way it so turned out that
whenever my master came home, after a long or short absence, in nine
cases out of ten he found the parson at the Hall.

At first he used to laugh at this circumstance, and to amuse himself
with some coarse jokes at the expense of his wife and her companion.
But, after a while, his variable temper changed, as usual. He grew
sulky, rude, angry, and, at last, downright jealous of Mr. Meeke. Though
too proud to confess it in so many words, he still showed the state of
his mind clearly enough to my mistress to excite her indignation. She
was a woman who could be led anywhere by any one for whom she had
a regard, but there was a firm spirit within her that rose at the
slightest show of injustice or oppression, and that resented tyrannical
usage of any sort perhaps a little too warmly. The bare suspicion that
her husband could feel any distrust of her set her all in a flame,
and she took the most unfortunate, and yet, at the same time, the most
natural way for a woman, of resenting it. The ruder her husband was
to Mr. Meeke the more kindly she behaved to him. This led to serious
disputes and dissensions, and thence, in time, to a violent quarrel. I
could not avoid hearing the last part of the altercation between them,
for it took place in the garden-walk, outside the dining-room window,
while I was occupied in laying the table for lunch.

Without repeating their words--which I have no right to do, having heard
by accident what I had no business to hear--I may say generally, to show
how serious the quarrel was, that my mistress charged my master with
having married from mercenary motives, with keeping out of her company
as much as he could, and with insulting her by a suspicion which it
would be hard ever to forgive, and impossible ever to forget. He replied
by violent language directed against herself, and by commanding her
never to open the doors again to Mr. Meeke; she, on her side, declaring
that she would never consent to insult a clergyman and a gentleman in
order to satisfy the whim of a tyrannical husband. Upon that, he called
out, with a great oath, to have his horse saddled directly, declaring
that he would not stop another instant under the same roof with a woman
who had set him at defiance, and warning his wife that he would come
back, if Mr. Meeke entered the house again, and horsewhip him, in spite
of his black coat, all through the village.

With those words he left her, and rode away to the sea-port where his
yacht was lying. My mistress kept up her spirit till he was out of
sight, and then burst into a dreadful screaming passion of tears, which
ended by leaving her so weak that she had to be carried to her bed like
a woman who was at the point of death.

The same evening my master's horse was ridden back by a messenger, who
brought a scrap of notepaper with him addressed to me. It only contained
these lines:

"Pack up my clothes and deliver them immediately to the bearer. You may
tell your mistress that I sail to-night at eleven o'clock for a cruise
to Sweden. Forward my letters to the post-office, Stockholm."

I obeyed the orders given to me except that relating to my mistress. The
doctor had been sent for, and was still in the house. I consulted him
upon the propriety of my delivering the message. He positively forbade
me to do so that night, and told me to give him the slip of paper, and
leave it to his discretion to show it to her or not the next morning.

The messenger had hardly been gone an hour when Mr. Meeke's housekeeper
came to the Hall with a roll of music for my mistress. I told the woman
of my master's sudden departure, and of the doctor being in the house.
This news brought Mr. Meeke himself to the Hall in a great flutter.

I felt so angry with him for being the cause--innocent as he might
be--of the shocking scene which had taken place, that I exceeded
the bounds of my duty, and told him the whole truth. The poor, weak,
wavering, childish creature flushed up red in the face, then turned as
pale as ashes, and dropped into one of the hall chairs crying--literally
crying fit to break his heart. "Oh, William," says he, wringing his
little frail, trembling white hands as helpless as a baby, "oh, William,
what am I to do?"

"As you ask me that question, sir," says I, "you will excuse me, I hope,
if, being a servant, I plainly speak my mind notwithstanding. I know
my station well enough to be aware that, strictly speaking, I have done
wrong, and far exceeded my duty, in telling you as much as I have
told you already; but I would go through fire and water, sir," says I,
feeling my own eyes getting moist, "for my mistress's sake. She has no
relation here who can speak to you; and it is even better that a servant
like me should risk being guilty of an impertinence, than that dreadful
and lasting mischief should arise from the right remedy not being
applied at the right time. This is what I should do, sir, in your place.
Saving your presence, I should leave off crying; and go back home and
write to Mr. James Smith, saying that I would not, as a clergyman, give
him railing for railing, but would prove how unworthily he had suspected
me by ceasing to visit at the Hall from this time forth, rather than
be a cause of dissension between man and wife. If you will put that into
proper language, sir, and will have the letter ready for me in half an
hour's time, I will call for it on the fastest horse in our stables,
and, at my own risk, will give it to my master before he sails
to-night. I have nothing more to say, sir, except to ask your pardon
for forgetting my proper place, and for making bold to speak on a very
serious matter as equal to equal, and as man to man."

To do Mr. Meeke justice, he had a heart, though it was a very small one.
He shook hands with me, and said he accepted my advice as the advice of
a friend, and so went back to his parsonage to write the letter. In half
an hour I called for it on horseback, but it was not ready for me. Mr.
Meeke was ridiculously nice about how he should express himself when he
got a pen into his hand. I found him with his desk littered with rough
copies, in a perfect agony about how to turn his phrases delicately
enough in referring to my mistress. Every minute being precious, I
hurried him as much as I could, without standing on any ceremony. It
took half an hour more, with all my efforts, before he could make up his
mind that the letter would do. I started off with it at a gallop, and
never drew rein till I got to the sea-port town.

The harbor-clock chimed the quarter past eleven as I rode by it, and
when I got down to the jetty there was no yacht to be seen. She had been
cast off from her moorings ten minutes before eleven, and as the clock
struck she had sailed out of the harbor. I would have followed in a
boat, but it was a fine starlight night, with a fresh wind blowing, and
the sailors on the pier laughed at me when I spoke of rowing after a
schooner yacht which had got a quarter of an hour's start of us, with
the wind abeam and the tide in her favor.

I rode back with a heavy heart. All I could do now was to send the
letter to the post-office, Stockholm.

The next day the doctor showed my mistress the scrap of paper with the
message on it from my master, and an hour or two after that, a letter
was sent to her in Mr. Meeke's handwriting, explaining the reason why
she must not expect to see him at the Hall, and referring to me in terms
of high praise as a sensible and faithful man who had spoken the right
word at the right time. I am able to repeat the substance of the letter,
because I heard all about it from my mistress, under very unpleasant
circumstances so far as I was concerned.

The news of my master's departure did not affect her as the doctor had
supposed it would. Instead of distressing her, it roused her spirit
and made her angry; her pride, as I imagine, being wounded by the
contemptuous manner in which her husband had notified his intention of
sailing to Sweden at the end of a message to a servant about packing his
clothes. Finding her in that temper of mind, the letter from Mr. Meeke
only irritated her the more. She insisted on getting up, and as soon
as she was dressed and downstairs, she vented her violent humor on
me, reproaching me for impertinent interference in the affairs of my
betters, and declaring that she had almost made up her mind to turn me
out of my place for it. I did not defend myself, because I respected her
sorrows and the irritation that came from them; also, because I knew the
natural kindness of her nature well enough to be assured that she would
make amends to me for her harshness the moment her mind was composed
again. The result showed that I was right. That same evening she sent
for me and begged me to forgive and forget the hasty words she had
spoken in the morning with a grace and sweetness that would have won the
heart of any man who listened to her.

Weeks passed after this, till it was more than a month since the day of
my master's departure, and no letter in his handwriting came to Darrock
Hall.

My mistress, taking this treatment more angrily than sorrowfully, went
to London to consult her nearest relations, who lived there. On leaving
home she stopped the carriage at the parsonage, and went in (as I
thought, rather defiantly) to say good-by to Mr. Meeke. She had
answered his letter, and received others from him, and had answered them
likewise. She had also, of course, seen him every Sunday at church, and
had always stopped to speak to him after the service; but this was
the first occasion on which she had visited him at his house. As
the carriage stopped, the little parson came out, in great hurry and
agitation, to meet her at the garden gate.

"Don't look alarmed, Mr. Meeke," says my mistress, getting out. "Though
you have engaged not to come near the Hall, I have made no promise to
keep away from the parsonage." With those words she went into the house.

The quadroon maid, Josephine, was sitting with me in the rumble of the
carriage, and I saw a smile on her tawny face as the parson and his
visitor went into the house together. Harmless as Mr. Meeke was, and
innocent of all wrong as I knew my mistress to be, I regretted that she
should be so rash as to despise appearances, considering the situation
she was placed in. She had already exposed herself to be thought of
disrespectfully by her own maid, and it was hard to say what worse
consequences might not happen after that.

Half an hour later we were away on our journey. My mistress stayed
in London two months. Throughout all that long time no letter from my
master was forwarded to her from the country house.



CHAPTER II.

WHEN the two months had passed we returned to Darrock Hall. Nobody there
had received any news in our absence of the whereabouts of my master and
his yacht.

Six more weary weeks elapsed, and in that time but one event happened
at the Hall to vary the dismal monotony of the lives we now led in
the solitary place. One morning Josephine came down after dressing my
mistress with her face downright livid to look at, except on one check,
where there was a mark as red as burning fire. I was in the kitchen at
the time, and I asked what was the matter.

"The matter!" says she, in her shrill voice and her half-foreign
English. "Use your own eyes, if you please, and look at this cheek of
mine. What! have you lived so long a time with your mistress, and don't
you know the mark of her hand yet?"

I was at a loss to understand what she meant, but she soon explained
herself. My mistress, whose temper had been sadly altered for the worse
by the trials and humiliations she had gone through, had got up that
morning more out of humor than usual, and, in answer to her maid's
inquiry as to how she had passed the night, had begun talking about
her weary, miserable life in an unusually fretful and desperate
way. Josephine, in trying to cheer her spirits, had ventured, most
improperly, on making a light, jesting reference to Mr. Meeke, which had
so enraged my mistress that she turned round sharp on the half-breed and
gave her--to use the common phrase--a smart box on the ear. Josephine
confessed that, the moment after she had done this, her better sense
appeared to tell her that she had taken a most improper way of resenting
undue familiarity. She had immediately expressed her regret for having
forgotten herself, and had proved the sincerity of it by a gift of half
a dozen cambric handkerchiefs, presented as a peace-offering on the
spot. After that I thought it impossible that Josephine could bear any
malice against a mistress whom she had served ever since she had been
a girl, and I said as much to her when she had done telling me what had
happened upstairs.

"I! Malice!" cries Miss Josephine, in her hard, sharp, snappish way.
"And why, and wherefore, if you please? If my mistress smacks my cheek
with one hand, she gives me handkerchiefs to wipe it with the other.
My good mistress, my kind mistress, my pretty mistress! I, the servant,
bear malice against her, the mistress! Ah! you bad man, even to think of
such a thing! Ah! fie, fie! I am quite ashamed of you!"

She gave me one look--the wickedest look I ever saw, and burst out
laughing--the harshest laugh I ever heard from a woman's lips. Turning
away from me directly after, she said no more, and never referred to the
subject again on any subsequent occasion.

From that time, however, I noticed an alteration in Miss Josephine;
not in her way of doing her work, for she was just as sharp and careful
about it as ever, but in her manners and habits. She grew amazingly
quiet, and passed almost all her leisure time alone. I could bring no
charge against her which authorized me to speak a word of warning;
but, for all that, I could not help feeling that if I had been in my
mistress's place, I would have followed up the present of the cambric
handkerchiefs by paying her a month's wages in advance, and sending her
away from the house the same evening.

With the exception of this little domestic matter, which appeared
trifling enough at the time, but which led to very serious consequences
afterward, nothing happened at all out of the ordinary way during
the six weary weeks to which I have referred. At the beginning of the
seventh week, however, an event occurred at last.

One morning the postman brought a letter to the Hall addressed to my
mistress. I took it upstairs, and looked at the direction as I put it on
the salver. The handwriting was not my master's; was not, as it appeared
to me, the handwriting of any well-educated person. The outside of the
letter was also very dirty, and the seal a common office-seal of the
usual lattice-work pattern. "This must be a begging-letter," I thought
to myself as I entered the breakfast-room and advanced with it to my
mistress.

She held up her hand before she opened it as a sign to me that she had
some order to give, and that I was not to leave the room till I had
received it. Then she broke the seal and began to read the letter.

Her eyes had hardly been on it a moment before her face turned as pale
as death, and the paper began to tremble in her fingers. She read on to
the end, and suddenly turned from pale to scarlet, started out of her
chair, crumpled the letter up violently in her hand, and took several
turns backward and forward in the room, without seeming to notice me as
I stood by the door. "You villain! you villain! you villain!" I heard
her whisper to herself many times over, in a quick, hissing, fierce
way. Then she stopped, and said on a sudden, "Can it be true?" Then she
looked up, and, seeing me standing at the door, started as if I had been
a stranger, changed color again, and told me, in a stifled voice, to
leave her and come back again in half an hour. I obeyed, feeling certain
that she must have received some very bad news of her husband, and
wondering, anxiously enough, what it might be.

When I returned to the breakfast-room her face was as much discomposed
as ever. Without speaking a word she handed me two sealed letters: one,
a note to be left for Mr. Meeke at the parsonage; the other, a letter
marked "Immediate," and addressed to her solicitor in London, who was
also, I should add, her nearest living relative.

I left one of these letters and posted the other. When I came back I
heard that my mistress had taken to her room. She remained there for
four days, keeping her new sorrow, whatever it was, strictly to herself.
On the fifth day the lawyer from London arrived at the Hall. My mistress
went down to him in the library, and was shut up there with him for
nearly two hours. At the end of that time the bell rang for me.

"Sit down, William," said my mistress, when I came into the room. "I
feel such entire confidence in your fidelity and attachment that I am
about, with the full concurrence of this gentleman, who is my nearest
relative and my legal adviser, to place a very serious secret in your
keeping, and to employ your services on a matter which is as important
to me as a matter of life and death."

Her poor eyes were very red, and her lips quivered as she spoke to me.
I was so startled by what she had said that I hardly knew which chair to
sit in. She pointed to one placed near herself at the table, and seemed
about to speak to me again, when the lawyer interfered.

"Let me entreat you," he said, "not to agitate yourself unnecessarily.
I will put this person in possession of the facts, and, if I omit
anything, you shall stop me and set me right."

My mistress leaned back in her chair and covered her face with her
handkerchief. The lawyer waited a moment, and then addressed himself to
me.

"You are already aware," he said, "of the circumstances under which
your master left this house, and you also know, I have no doubt, that no
direct news of him has reached your mistress up to this time?"

I bowed to him and said I knew of the circumstances so far.

"Do you remember," he went on, "taking a letter to your mistress five
days ago?"

"Yes, sir," I replied; "a letter which seemed to distress and alarm her
very seriously."

"I will read you that letter before we say any more," continued the
lawyer. "I warn you beforehand that it contains a terrible charge
against your master, which, however, is not attested by the writer's
signature. I have already told your mistress that she must not attach
too much importance to an anonymous letter; and I now tell you the same
thing."

Saying that, he took up a letter from the table and read it aloud. I had
a copy of it given to me afterward, which I looked at often enough to
fix the contents of the letter in my memory. I can now repeat them, I
think, word for word.


"MADAM--I cannot reconcile it to my conscience to leave you in total
ignorance of your husband's atrocious conduct toward you. If you have
ever been disposed to regret his absence do so no longer. Hope and pray,
rather, that you and he may never meet face to face again in this world.
I write in great haste and in great fear of being observed. Time fails
me to prepare you as you ought to be prepared for what I have now to
disclose. I must tell you plainly, with much respect for you and sorrow
for your misfortune, that your husband _has married another wife_. I saw
the ceremony performed, unknown to him. If I could not have spoken of
this infamous act as an eye-witness, I would not have spoken of it at
all.

"I dare not acknowledge who I am, for I believe Mr. James Smith
would stick at no crime to revenge himself on me if he ever came to a
knowledge of the step I am now taking, and of the means by which I got
my information; neither have I time to enter into particulars. I simply
warn you of what has happened, and leave you to act on that warning as
you please. You may disbelieve this letter, because it is not signed by
any name. In that case, if Mr. James Smith should ever venture into your
presence, I recommend you to ask him suddenly what he has done with his
_new wife,_ and to see if his countenance does not immediately testify
that the truth has been spoken by

"YOUR UNKNOWN FRIEND."

Poor as my opinion was of my master, I had never believed him to be
capable of such villainy as this, and I could not believe it when the
lawyer had done reading the letter.

"Oh, sir," I said, "surely that is some base imposition? Surely it
cannot be true?"

"That is what I have told your mistress," he answered. "But she says in
return--"

"That I feel it to be true," my mistress broke in, speaking behind the
handkerchief in a faint, smothered voice.

"We need not debate the question," the lawyer went on. "Our business now
is to prove the truth or falsehood of this letter. That must be done
at once. I have written to one of my clerks, who is accustomed to
conducting delicate investigations, to come to this house without loss
of time. He is to be trusted with anything, and he will pursue the
needful inquiries immediately.

"It is absolutely necessary, to make sure of committing no mistakes, that
he should be accompanied by some one who is well acquainted with Mr.
James Smith's habits and personal appearance, and your mistress has
fixed upon you to be that person. However well the inquiry is managed,
it may be attended by much trouble and delay, may necessitate a long
journey, and may involve some personal danger. Are you," said the
lawyer, looking hard at me, "ready to suffer any inconvenience and to
run any risk for your mistress's sake?"

"There is nothing I _can_ do, sir," said I, "that I will not do. I am
afraid I am not clever enough to be of much use; but, so far as troubles
and risks are concerned, I am ready for anything from this moment."

My mistress took the handkerchief from her face, looked at me with her
eyes full of tears, and held out her hand. How I came to do it I don't
know, but I stooped down and kissed the hand she offered me, feeling
half startled, half ashamed at my own boldness the moment after.

"You will do, my man," said the lawyer, nodding his head. "Don't trouble
yourself about the cleverness or the cunning that may be wanted. My
clerk has got head enough for two. I have only one word more to say
before you go downstairs again. Remember that this investigation and the
cause that leads to it must be kept a profound secret. Except us three,
and the clergyman here (to whom your mistress has written word of what
has happened), nobody knows anything about it. I will let my clerk into
the secret when he joins us. As soon as you and he are away from the
house, you may talk about it. Until then, you will close your lips on
the subject."

The clerk did not keep us long waiting. He came as fast as the mail from
London could bring him.

I had expected, from his master's description, to see a serious, sedate
man, rather sly in his looks, and rather reserved in his manner. To my
amazement, this practiced hand at delicate investigations was a brisk,
plump, jolly little man, with a comfortable double chin, a pair of very
bright black eyes, and a big bottle-nose of the true groggy red color.
He wore a suit of black, and a limp, dingy white cravat; took snuff
perpetually out of a very large box; walked with his hands crossed
behind his back; and looked, upon the whole, much more like a parson of
free-and-easy habits than a lawyer's clerk.

"How d'ye do?" says he, when I opened the door to him. "I'm the man you
expect from the office in London. Just say Mr. Dark, will you? I'll sit
down here till you come back; and, young man, if there is such a thing
as a glass of ale in the house, I don't mind committing myself so far as
to say that I'll drink it."

I got him the ale before I announced him. He winked at me as he put it
to his lips.

"Your good health," says he. "I like you. Don't forget that the name's
Dark; and just leave the jug and glass, will you, in case my master
keeps me waiting."

I announced him at once, and was told to show him into the library.

When I got back to the hall the jug was empty, and Mr. Dark was
comforting himself with a pinch of snuff, snorting over it like a
perfect grampus. He had swallowed more than a pint of the strongest old
ale in the house; and, for all the effect it seemed to have had on him,
he might just as well have been drinking so much water.

As I led him along the passage to the library Josephine passed us. Mr.
Dark winked at me again, and made her a low bow.

"Lady's maid," I heard him whisper to himself. "A fine woman to look at,
but a damned bad one to deal with." I turned round on him, rather
angry at his cool ways, and looked hard at him just before I opened the
library door. Mr. Dark looked hard at me. "All right," says he. "I can
show myself in." And he knocks at the door, and opens it, and goes in
with another wicked wink, all in a moment.

Half an hour later the bell rang for me. Mr. Dark was sitting between my
mistress (who was looking at him in amazement) and the lawyer (who was
looking at him with approval). He had a map open on his knee, and a pen
in his hand. Judging by his face, the communication of the secret about
my master did not seem to have made the smallest impression on him.

"I've got leave to ask you a question," says he, the moment I appeared.
"When you found your master's yacht gone, did you hear which way she
had sailed? Was it northward toward Scotland? Speak up, young man, speak
up!"

"Yes," I answered. "The boatmen told me that when I made inquiries at
the harbor."

"Well, sir," says Mr. Dark, turning to the lawyer, "if he said he was
going to Sweden, he seems to have started on the road to it, at all
events. I think I have got my instructions now?"

The lawyer nodded, and looked at my mistress, who bowed her head to him.
He then said, turning to me:

"Pack up your bag for traveling at once, and have a conveyance got ready
to go to the nearest post-town. Look sharp, young man--look sharp!"

"And, whatever happens in the future," added my mistress, her kind voice
trembling a little, "believe, William, that I shall never forget the
proof you now show of your devotion to me. It is still some comfort to
know that I have your fidelity to depend on in this dreadful trial--your
fidelity and the extraordinary intelligence and experience of Mr. Dark."

Mr. Dark did not seem to hear the compliment. He was busy writing, with
his paper upon the map on his knee.

A quarter of an hour later, when I had ordered the dog-cart, and had got
down into the hall with my bag packed, I found him there waiting for
me. He was sitting in the same chair which he had occupied when he first
arrived, and he had another jug of the old ale on the table by his side.

"Got any fishing-rods in the house?" says he, when I put my bag down in
the hall.

"Yes," I replied, astonished at the question. "What do you want with
them?"

"Pack a couple in cases for traveling," says Mr. Dark, "with lines, and
hooks, and fly-books all complete. Have a drop of the ale before you
go--and don't stare, William, don't stare. I'll let the light in on you
as soon as we are out of the house. Off with you for the rods! I want to
be on the road in five minutes."

When I came back with the rods and tackle I found Mr. Dark in the
dog-cart.

"Money, luggage, fishing-rods, papers of directions, copy of anonymous
letter, guide-book, map," says he, running over in his mind the things
wanted for the journey--"all right so far. Drive off."

I took the reins and started the horse. As we left the house I saw my
mistress and Josephine looking after us from two of the windows on the
second floor. The memory of those two attentive faces--one so fair and
so good, the other so yellow and so wicked--haunted my mind perpetually
for many days afterward.

"Now, William," says Mr. Dark, when we were clear of the lodge gates,
"I'm going to begin by telling you that you must step out of your
own character till further notice. You are a clerk in a bank, and I'm
another. We have got our regular holiday, that comes, like Christmas,
once a year, and we are taking a little tour in Scotland to see the
curiosities, and to breathe the sea air, and to get some fishing
whenever we can. I'm the fat cashier who digs holes in a drawerful of
gold with a copper shovel, and you're the arithmetical young man who
sits on a perch behind me and keeps the books. Scotland's a beautiful
country, William. Can you make whisky-toddy? I can; and, what's more,
unlikely as the thing may seem to you, I can actually drink it into the
bargain."

"Scotland!" says I. "What are we going to Scotland for?"

"Question for question," says Mr. Dark. "What are we starting on a
journey for?"

"To find my master," I answered, "and to make sure if the letter about
him is true."

"Very good," says he. "How would you set about doing that, eh?"

"I should go and ask about him at Stockholm in Sweden, where he said his
letters were to be sent."

"Should you, indeed?" says Mr. Dark. "If you were a shepherd, William,
and had lost a sheep in Cumberland, would you begin looking for it at
the Land's End, or would you try a little nearer home?"

"You're attempting to make a fool of me now," says I.

"No," says Mr. Dark, "I'm only letting the light in on you, as I said
I would. Now listen to reason, William, and profit by it as much as you
can. Mr. James Smith says he is going on a cruise to Sweden, and makes
his word good, at the beginning, by starting northward toward the coast
of Scotland. What does he go in? A yacht. Do yachts carry live beasts
and a butcher on board? No. Will joints of meat keep fresh all the
way from Cumberland to Sweden? No. Do gentlemen like living on salt
provisions? No. What follows from these three Noes? That Mr. James
Smith must have stopped somewhere on the way to Sweden to supply his
sea-larder with fresh provisions. Where, in that case, must he stop?
Somewhere in Scotland, supposing he didn't alter his course when he was
out of sight of your seaport. Where in Scotland? Northward on the main
land, or westward at one of the islands? Most likely on the main land,
where the seaside places are largest, and where he is sure of getting
all the stores he wants. Next, what is our business? Not to risk losing
a link in the chain of evidence by missing any place where he has put
his foot on shore. Not to overshoot the mark when we want to hit it in
the bull's-eye. Not to waste money and time by taking a long trip to
Sweden till we know that we must absolutely go there. Where is our
journey of discovery to take us to first, then? Clearly to the north
of Scotland. What do you say to that, Mr. William? Is my catechism all
correct, or has your strong ale muddled my head?"

It was evident by this time that no ale could do that, and I told him
so. He chuckled, winked at me, and, taking another pinch of snuff, said
he would now turn the whole case over in his mind again, and make sure
that he had got all the bearings of it quite clear.

By the time we reached the post-town he had accomplished this mental
effort to his own perfect satisfaction, and was quite ready to compare
the ale at the inn with the ale at Darrock Hall. The dog-cart was left
to be taken back the next morning by the hostler. A post-chaise and
horses were ordered out. A loaf of bread, a Bologna sausage, and two
bottles of sherry were put into the pockets of the carriage; we took our
seats, and started briskly on our doubtful journey.

"One word more of friendly advice," says Mr. Dark, settling himself
comfortably in his corner of the carriage. "Take your sleep, William,
whenever you feel that you can get it. You won't find yourself in bed
again till we get to Glasgow."



CHAPTER III.

ALTHOUGH the events that I am now relating happened many years ago, I
shall still, for caution's sake, avoid mentioning by name the various
places visited by Mr. Dark and myself for the purpose of making
inquiries. It will be enough if I describe generally what we did, and if
I mention in substance only the result at which we ultimately arrived.

On reaching Glasgow, Mr. Dark turned the whole case over in his mind
once more. The result was that he altered his original intention of
going straight to the north of Scotland, considering it safer to make
sure, if possible, of the course the yacht had taken in her cruise along
the western coast.

The carrying out of this new resolution involved the necessity of
delaying our onward journey by perpetually diverging from the direct
road. Three times we were sent uselessly to wild places in the Hebrides
by false reports. Twice we wandered away inland, following gentlemen who
answered generally to the description of Mr. James Smith, but who turned
out to be the wrong men as soon as we set eyes on them. These vain
excursions--especially the three to the western islands--consumed time
terribly. It was more than two months from the day when we had left
Darrock Hall before we found ourselves up at the very top of Scotland at
last, driving into a considerable sea-side town, with a harbor attached
to it. Thus far our journey had led to no results, and I began to
despair of success. As for Mr. Dark, he never got to the end of his
sweet temper and his wonderful patience.

"You don't know how to wait, William," was his constant remark whenever
he heard me complaining. "I do."

We drove into the town toward evening in a modest little gig, and put
up, according to our usual custom, at one of the inferior inns.

"We must begin at the bottom," Mr. Dark used to say. "High company in a
coffee-room won't be familiar with us; low company in a tap-room will."
And he certainly proved the truth of his own words. The like of him for
making intimate friends of total strangers at the shortest notice I have
never met with before or since. Cautious as the Scotch are, Mr. Dark
seemed to have the knack of twisting them round his finger as he
pleased. He varied his way artfully with different men, but there were
three standing opinions of his which he made a point of expressing in
all varieties of company while we were in Scotland. In the first place,
he thought the view of Edinburgh from Arthur's Seat the finest in
the world. In the second place, he considered whisky to be the most
wholesome spirit in the world. In the third place, he believed his late
beloved mother to be the best woman in the world. It may be worthy
of note that, whenever he expressed this last opinion in Scotland, he
invariably added that her maiden name was Macleod.

Well, we put up at a modest little inn near the harbor. I was dead tired
with the journey, and lay down on my bed to get some rest. Mr. Dark,
whom nothing ever fatigued, left me to take his toddy and pipe among the
company in the taproom.

I don't know how long I had been asleep when I was roused by a shake on
my shoulder. The room was pitch dark, and I felt a hand suddenly clapped
over my mouth. Then a strong smell of whisky and tobacco saluted my
nostrils, and a whisper stole into my ear--

"William, we have got to the end of our journey."

"Mr. Dark," I stammered out, "is that you? What, in Heaven's name, do
you mean?"

"The yacht put in here," was the answer, still in a whisper, "and your
blackguard of a master came ashore--"

"Oh, Mr. Dark," I broke in, "don't tell me that the letter is true!"

"Every word of it," says he. "He was married here, and was off again to
the Mediterranean with Number Two a good three weeks before we left your
mistress's house. Hush! don't say a word, Go to sleep again, or strike
a light, if you like it better. Do anything but come downstairs with
me. I'm going to find out all the particulars without seeming to want to
know one of them. Yours is a very good-looking face, William, but it's
so infernally honest that I can't trust it in the tap-room. I'm making
friends with the Scotchmen already. They know my opinion of Arthur's
Seat; they _see_ what I think of whisky; and I rather think it won't be
long before they hear that my mother's maiden name was Macleod."

With those words he slipped out of the room, and left me, as he had
found me, in the dark.

I was far too much agitated by what I had heard to think of going to
sleep again, so I struck a light, and tried to amuse myself as well as I
could with an old newspaper that had been stuffed into my carpet bag.
It was then nearly ten o'clock. Two hours later, when the house shut up,
Mr. Dark came back to me again in high spirits.

"I have got the whole case here," says he, tapping his forehead--"the
whole case, as neat and clean as if it was drawn in a brief. That master
of yours doesn't stick at a trifle, William. It's my opinion that your
mistress and you have not seen the last of him yet."

We were sleeping that night in a double-bedded room. As soon as Mr. Dark
had secured the door and disposed himself comfortably in his bed, he
entered on a detailed narrative of the particulars communicated to him
in the tap-room. The substance of what he told me may be related as
follows:

The yacht had had a wonderful run all the way to Cape Wrath. On rounding
that headland she had met the wind nearly dead against her, and had
beaten every inch of the way to the sea-port town, where she had put in
to get a supply of provisions, and to wait for a change in the wind.

Mr. James Smith had gone ashore to look about him, and to see whether
the principal hotel was the sort of house at which he would like to
stop for a few days. In the course of his wandering about the town, his
attention had been attracted to a decent house, where lodgings were to
be let, by the sight of a very pretty girl sitting at work at the parlor
window. He was so struck by her face that he came back twice to look
at it, determining, the second time, to try if he could not make
acquaintance with her by asking to see the lodgings. He was shown the
rooms by the girl's mother, a very respectable woman, whom he discovered
to be the wife of the master and part owner of a small coasting vessel,
then away at sea. With a little maneuvering he managed to get into the
parlor where the daughter was at work, and to exchange a few words with
her. Her voice and manner completed the attraction of her face. Mr.
James Smith decided, in his headlong way, that he was violently in love
with her, and, without hesitating another instant, he took the lodgings
on the spot for a month certain.

It is unnecessary to say that his designs on the girl were of the most
disgraceful kind, and that he represented himself to the mother and
daughter as a single man. Helped by his advantages of money, position,
and personal appearance, he had made sure that the ruin of the girl
might be effected with very little difficulty; but he soon found that he
had undertaken no easy conquest.

The mother's watchfulness never slept, and the daughter's presence of
mind never failed her. She admired Mr. James Smith's tall figure and
splendid whiskers; she showed the most encouraging partiality for his
society; she smiled at his compliments, and blushed whenever he looked
at her; but, whether it was cunning or whether it was innocence, she
seemed incapable of understanding that his advances toward her were of
any other than an honorable kind. At the slightest approach to undue
familiarity, she drew back with a kind of contemptuous surprise in her
face, which utterly perplexed Mr. James Smith. He had not calculated on
that sort of resistance, and he could not see his way to overcoming it.
The weeks passed; the month for which he had taken the lodgings expired.
Time had strengthened the girl's hold on him till his admiration for her
amounted to downright infatuation, and he had not advanced one step yet
toward the fulfillment of the vicious purpose with which he had entered
the house.

At this time he must have made some fresh attempt on the girl's virtue,
which produced: a coolness between them; for, instead of taking the
lodgings for another term, he removed to his yacht, in the harbor, and
slept on board for two nights.

The wind was now fair, and the stores were on board, but he gave no
orders to the sailing-master to weigh anchor. On the third day, the
cause of the coolness, whatever it was, appears to have been removed,
and he returned to his lodgings on shore. Some of the more inquisitive
among the townspeople observed soon afterward, when they met him in the
street, that he looked rather anxious and uneasy. The conclusion had
probably forced itself upon his mind, by this time, that he must decide
on pursuing one of two courses: either he must resolve to make the
sacrifice of leaving the girl altogether, or he must commit the villainy
of marrying her.

Scoundrel as he was, he hesitated at encountering the risk--perhaps,
also, at being guilty of the crime--involved in this last alternative.
While he was still in doubt, the father's coasting vessel sailed into
the harbor, and the father's presence on the scene decided him at last.
How this new influence acted it was impossible to find out from the
imperfect evidence of persons who were not admitted to the family
councils. The fact, however, was certain that the date of the father's
return and the date of Mr. James Smith's first wicked resolution to
marry the girl might both be fixed, as nearly as possible, at one and
the same time.

Having once made up his mind to the commission of the crime, he
proceeded with all possible coolness and cunning to provide against the
chances of detection.

Returning on board his yacht he announced that he had given up his
intention of cruising to Sweden and that he intended to amuse himself by
a long fishing tour in Scotland. After this explanation, he ordered the
vessel to be laid up in the harbor, gave the sailing-master leave of
absence to return to his family at Cowes, and paid off the whole of
the crew from the mate to the cabin-boy. By these means he cleared
the scene, at one blow, of the only people in the town who knew of the
existence of his unhappy wife. After that the news of his approaching
marriage might be made public without risk of discovery, his own common
name being of itself a sufficient protection in case the event was
mentioned in the Scotch newspapers. All his friends, even his wife
herself, might read a report of the marriage of Mr. James Smith without
having the slightest suspicion of who the bridegroom really was.

A fortnight after the paying off of the crew he was married to the
merchant-captain's daughter. The father of the girl was well known among
his fellow-townsmen as a selfish, grasping man, who was too anxious to
secure a rich son-in-law to object to any proposals for hastening the
marriage. He and his wife, and a few intimate relations had been present
at the ceremony; and after it had been performed the newly-married
couple left the town at once for a honeymoon trip to the Highland lakes.

Two days later, however, they unexpectedly returned, announcing a
complete change in their plans. The bridegroom (thinking, probably,
that he would be safer out of England than in it) had been pleasing
the bride's fancy by his descriptions of the climate and the scenery of
southern parts. The new Mrs. James Smith was all curiosity to see Spain
and Italy; and, having often proved herself an excellent sailor on
board her father's vessel, was anxious to go to the Mediterranean in the
easiest way by sea. Her affectionate husband, having now no other object
in life than to gratify her wishes, had given up the Highland excursion,
and had returned to have his yacht got ready for sea immediately. In
this explanation there was nothing to awaken the suspicions of the
lady's parents. The mother thought Mr. James Smith a model among
bridegrooms. The father lent his assistance to man the yacht at the
shortest notice with as smart a crew as could be picked up about the
town. Principally through his exertions, the vessel was got ready for
sea with extraordinary dispatch. The sails were bent, the provisions
were put on board, and Mr. James Smith sailed for the Mediterranean with
the unfortunate woman who believed herself to be his wife, before Mr.
Dark and myself set forth to look after him from Darrock Hall.

Such was the true account of my master's infamous conduct in Scotland
as it was related to me. On concluding, Mr. Dark hinted that he had
something still left to tell me, but declared that he was too sleepy to
talk any more that night. As soon as we were awake the next morning he
returned to the subject.

"I didn't finish all I had to say last night, did I?" he began.

"You unfortunately told me enough, and more than enough, to prove the
truth of the statement in the anonymous letter," I answered.

"Yes," says Mr. Dark, "but did I tell you who wrote the anonymous
letter?"

"You don't mean to say that you have found that out!" says I.

"I think I have," was the cool answer. "When I heard about your precious
master paying off the regular crew of the yacht I put the circumstance
by in my mind, to be brought out again and sifted a little as soon as
the opportunity offered. It offered in about half an hour. Says I to the
gauger, who was the principal talker in the room: 'How about those
men that Mr. Smith paid off? Did they all go as soon as they got their
money, or did they stop here till they had spent every farthing of it in
the public-houses?' The gauger laughs. 'No such luck,' says he, in the
broadest possible Scotch (which I translate into English, William, for
your benefit); 'no such luck; they all went south, to spend their money
among finer people than us--all, that is to say, with one exception. It
was thought the steward of the yacht had gone along with the rest, when,
the very day Mr. Smith sailed for the Mediterranean, who should turn up
unexpectedly but the steward himself! Where he had been hiding, and why
he had been hiding, nobody could tell.' 'Perhaps he had been imitating
his master, and looking out for a wife,' says I. 'Likely enough,' says
the gauger; 'he gave a very confused account of himself, and he cut all
questions short by going away south in a violent hurry.' That was enough
for me: I let the subject drop. Clear as daylight, isn't it, William?
The steward suspected something wrong--the steward waited and
watched--the steward wrote that anonymous letter to your mistress. We
can find him, if we want him, by inquiring at Cowes; and we can send
to the church for legal evidence of the marriage as soon as we are
instructed to do so. All that we have got to do now is to go back
to your mistress, and see what course she means to take under the
circumstances. It's a pretty case, William, so far--an uncommonly pretty
case, as it stands at present."

We returned to Darrock Hall as fast as coaches and post-horses could
carry us.

Having from the first believed that the statement in the anonymous
letter was true, my mistress received the bad news we brought calmly
and resignedly--so far, at least, as outward appearances went. She
astonished and disappointed Mr. Dark by declining to act in any way on
the information that he had collected for her, and by insisting that the
whole affair should still be buried in the profoundest secrecy. For the
first time since I had known my traveling companion, he became depressed
in spirits on hearing that nothing more was to be done, and, although he
left the Hall with a handsome present, he left it discontentedly.

"Such a pretty case, William," says he, quite sorrowfully, as we shook
hands--"such an uncommonly pretty case--it's a thousand pities to stop
it, in this way, before it's half over!"

"You don't know what a proud lady and what a delicate lady my mistress
is," I answered. "She would die rather than expose her forlorn situation
in a public court for the sake of punishing her husband."

"Bless your simple heart!" says Mr. Dark, "do you really think, now,
that such a case as this can be hushed up?"

"Why not," I asked, "if we all keep the secret?"

"That for the secret!" cries Mr. Dark, snapping his fingers. "Your
master will let the cat out of the bag, if nobody else does."

"My master!" I repeated, in amazement.

"Yes, your master!" says Mr. Dark. "I have had some experience in my
time, and I say you have not seen the last of him yet. Mark my words,
William, Mr. James Smith will come back."

With that prophecy, Mr. Dark fretfully treated himself to a last pinch
of snuff, and departed in dudgeon on his journey back to his master in
London. His last words hung heavily on my mind for days after he had
gone. It was some weeks before I got over a habit of starting whenever
the bell was rung at the front door.



CHAPTER IV.

OUR life at the Hall soon returned to its old, dreary course. The lawyer
in London wrote to my mistress to ask her to come and stay for a little
while with his wife; but she declined the invitation, being averse to
facing company after what had happened to her. Though she tried hard
to keep the real state of her mind concealed from all about her, I,
for one, could see plainly enough that she was pining under the bitter
injury that had been inflicted on her. What effect continued solitude
might have had on her spirits I tremble to think.

Fortunately for herself, it occurred to her, before long, to send and
invite Mr. Meeke to resume his musical practicing with her at the Hall.
She told him--and, as it seemed to me, with perfect truth--that any
implied engagement which he had made with Mr. James Smith was now
canceled, since the person so named had morally forfeited all his claims
as a husband, first, by his desertion of her, and, secondly, by his
criminal marriage with another woman. After stating this view of
the matter, she left it to Mr. Meeke to decide whether the perfectly
innocent connection between them should be resumed or not. The little
parson, after hesitating and pondering in his helpless way, ended by
agreeing with my mistress, and by coming back once more to the Hall with
his fiddle under his arm. This renewal of their old habits might have
been imprudent enough, as tending to weaken my mistress's case in the
eyes of the world, but, for all that, it was the most sensible course
she could take for her own sake. The harmless company of Mr. Meeke, and
the relief of playing the old tunes again in the old way, saved her,
I verily believe, from sinking altogether under the oppression of the
shocking situation in which she was now placed.

So, with the assistance of Mr. Meeke and his fiddle, my mistress got
though the weary time. The winter passed, the spring came, and no fresh
tidings reached us of Mr. James Smith. It had been a long, hard winter
that year, and the spring was backward and rainy. The first really fine
day we had was the day that fell on the fourteenth of March.

I am particular in mentioning this date merely because it is fixed
forever in my memory. As long as there is life in me I shall remember
that fourteenth of March, and the smallest circumstances connected with
it.

The day began ill, with what superstitious people would think a bad
omen. My mistress remained late in her room in the morning, amusing
herself by looking over her clothes, and by setting to rights some
drawers in her cabinet which she had not opened for some time past. Just
before luncheon we were startled by hearing the drawing-room bell
rung violently. I ran up to see what was the matter, and the quadroon,
Josephine, who had heard the bell in another part of the house, hastened
to answer it also. She got into the drawing-room first, and I followed
close on her heels. My mistress was standing alone on the hearth-rug,
with an appearance of great discomposure in her face and manner.

"I have been robbed!" she said, vehemently, "I don't know when or
how; but I miss a pair of bracelets, three rings, and a quantity of
old-fashioned lace pocket-handkerchiefs."

"If you have any suspicions, ma'am," said Josephine, in a sharp, sudden
way, "say who they point at. My boxes, for one, are quite at your
disposal."

"Who asked about your boxes?" said my mistress, angrily. "Be a little
less ready with your answer, if you please, the next time I speak."

She then turned to me, and began explaining the circumstances under
which she had discovered her loss. I suggested that the missing things
should be well searched for first, and then, if nothing came of that,
that I should go for the constable, and place the matter under his
direction.

My mistress agreed to this plan, and the search was undertaken
immediately. It lasted till dinner-time, and led to no results. I then
proposed going for the constable. But my mistress said it was too late
to do anything that day, and told me to wait at table as usual, and to
go on my errand the first thing the next morning. Mr. Meeke was coming
with some new music in the evening, and I suspect she was not willing to
be disturbed at her favorite occupation by the arrival of the constable.

When dinner was over the parson came, and the concert went on as usual
through the evening. At ten o'clock I took up the tray, with the wine,
and soda-water, and biscuits. Just as I was opening one of the bottles
of soda-water, there was a sound of wheels on the drive outside, and a
ring at the bell.

I had unfastened the wires of the cork, and could not put the bottle
down to run at once to the door. One of the female servants answered
it. I heard a sort of half scream--then the sound of a footstep that was
familiar to me.

My mistress turned round from the piano, and looked me hard in the face.

"William," she said, "do you know that step?" Before I could answer the
door was pushed open, and Mr. James Smith walked into the room.

He had his hat on. His long hair flowed down under it over the collar
of his coat; his bright black eyes, after resting an instant on my
mistress, turned to Mr. Meeke. His heavy eyebrows met together, and one
of his hands went up to one of his bushy black whiskers, and pulled at
it angrily.

"You here again!" he said, advancing a few steps toward the little
parson, who sat trembling all over, with his fiddle hugged up in his
arms as if it had been a child.

Seeing her villainous husband advance, my mistress moved, too, so as to
face him. He turned round on her at the first step she took, as quick as
lightning.

"You shameless woman!" he said. "Can you look me in the face in the
presence of that man?" He pointed, as he spoke, to Mr. Meeke.

My mistress never shrank when he turned upon her. Not a sign of fear was
in her face when they confronted each other. Not the faintest flush of
anger came into her cheeks when he spoke. The sense of the insult and
injury that he had inflicted on her, and the consciousness of knowing
his guilty secret, gave her all her self-possession at that trying
moment.

"I ask you again," he repeated, finding that she did not answer him,
"how dare you look me in the face in the presence of that man?"

She raised her steady eyes to his hat, which he still kept on his head.

"Who has taught you to come into a room and speak to a lady with your
hat on?" she asked, in quiet, contemptuous tones. "Is that a habit which
is sanctioned by _your new wife?_"

My eyes were on him as she said those last words. His complexion,
naturally dark and swarthy, changed instantly to a livid yellow white;
his hand caught at the chair nearest to him, and he dropped into it
heavily.

"I don't understand you," he said, after a moment of silence, looking
about the room unsteadily while he spoke.

"You do," said my mistress. "Your tongue lies, but your face speaks the
truth."

He called back his courage and audacity by a desperate effort, and
started up from the chair again with an oath.

The instant before this happened I thought I heard the sound of a
rustling dress in the passage outside, as if one of the women servants
was stealing up to listen outside the door. I should have gone at once
to see whether this was the case or not, but my master stopped me just
after he had risen from the chair.

"Get the bed made in the Red Room, and light a fire there directly," he
said, with his fiercest look and in his roughest tones. "When I ring the
bell, bring me a kettle of boiling water and a bottle of brandy. As for
you," he continued, turning toward Mr. Meeke, who still sat pale and
speechless with his fiddle hugged up in his arms, "leave the house, or
you won't find your cloth any protection to you."

At this insult the blood flew into my mistress's face. Before she could
say anything, Mr. James Smith raised his voice loud enough to drown
hers.

"I won't hear another word from you," he cried out, brutally. "You have
been talking like a mad woman, and you look like a mad woman. You are
out of your senses. As sure as you live, I'll have you examined by the
doctors to-morrow. Why the devil do you stand there, you scoundrel?"
he roared, wheeling round on his heel to me. "Why don't you obey my
orders?"

I looked at my mistress. If she had directed me to knock Mr. James Smith
down, big as he was, I think at that moment I could have done it.

"Do as he tells you, William," she said, squeezing one of her hands
firmly over her bosom, as if she was trying to keep down the rising
indignation in that way. "This is the last order of his giving that I
shall ask you to obey."

"Do you threaten me, you mad--"

He finished the question by a word I shall not repeat.

"I tell you," she answered, in clear, ringing, resolute tones, "that you
have outraged me past all forgiveness and all endurance, and that you
shall never insult me again as you have insulted me to-night."

After saying those words she fixed one steady look on him, then turned
away and walked slowly to the door.

A minute previously Mr. Meeke had summoned courage enough to get up and
leave the room quietly. I noticed him walking demurely away, close to
the wall, with his fiddle held under one tail of his long frock-coat,
as if he was afraid that the savage passions of Mr. James Smith might
be wreaked on that unoffending instrument. He got to the door before my
mistress. As he softly pulled it open, I saw him start, and the rustling
of the gown caught my ear again from the outside.

My mistress followed him into the passage, turning, however, in the
opposite direction to that taken by the little parson, in order to reach
the staircase that led to her own room. I went out next, leaving Mr.
James Smith alone.

I overtook Mr. Meeke in the hall, and opened the door for him.

"I beg your pardon, sir," I said, "but did you come upon anybody
listening outside the music-room when you left it just now?"

"Yes, William," said Mr. Meeke, in a faint voice, "I think it was
Josephine; but I was so dreadfully agitated that I can't be quite
certain about it."

Had she surprised our secret? That was the question I asked myself as I
went away to light the fire in the Red Room. Calling to mind the exact
time at which I had first detected the rustling outside the door, I came
to the conclusion that she had only heard the last part of the quarrel
between my mistress and her rascal of a husband. Those bold words
about the "new wife" had been assuredly spoken before I heard Josephine
stealing up to the door.

As soon as the fire was alight and the bed made, I went back to the
music-room to announce that my orders had been obeyed. Mr. James Smith
was walking up and down in a perturbed way, still keeping his hat on. He
followed me to the Red Room without saying a word.

Ten minutes later he rang for the kettle and the bottle of brandy. When
I took them in I found him unpacking a small carpet-bag, which was the
only luggage he had brought with him. He still kept silence, and did
not appear to take any notice of me. I left him immediately without our
having so much as exchanged a single word.

So far as I could tell, the night passed quietly. The next morning I
heard that my mistress was suffering so severely from a nervous attack
that she was unable to rise from her bed. It was no surprise to me to be
told that, knowing as I did what she had gone through the night before.

About nine o'clock I went with the hot water to the Red Room. After
knocking twice I tried the door, and, finding it not locked, went in
with the jug in my hand.

I looked at the bed--I looked all round the room. Not a sign of Mr.
James Smith was to be seen anywhere.

Judging by appearances, the bed had certainly been occupied. Thrown
across the counterpane lay the nightgown he had worn. I took it up and
saw some spots on it. I looked at them a little closer. They were spots
of blood.



CHAPTER V.

THE first amazement and alarm produced by this discovery deprived me of
my presence of mind. Without stopping to think what I ought to do
first, I ran back to the servants' hall, calling out that something had
happened to my master.

All the household hurried directly into the Red Room, Josephine among
the rest. I was first brought to my senses, as it were, by observing the
strange expression of her countenance when she saw the bed-gown and the
empty room. All the other servants were bewildered and frightened. She
alone, after giving a little start, recovered herself directly. A look
of devilish satisfaction broke out on her face, and she left the room
quickly and quietly, without exchanging a word with any of us. I saw
this, and it aroused my suspicions. There is no need to mention what
they were, for, as events soon showed, they were entirely wide of the
mark.

Having come to myself a little, I sent them all out of the room except
the coachman. We two then examined the place.

The Red Room was usually occupied by visitors. It was on the ground
floor, and looked out into the garden. We found the window-shutters,
which I had barred overnight, open, but the window itself was down. The
fire had been out long enough for the grate to be quite cold. Half the
bottle of brandy had been drunk. The carpet-bag was gone. There were no
marks of violence or struggling anywhere about the bed or the room.
We examined every corner carefully, but made no other discoveries than
these.

When I returned to the servants' hall, bad news of my mistress was
awaiting me there. The unusual noise and confusion in the house had
reached her ears, and she had been told what had happened without
sufficient caution being exercised in preparing her to hear it. In her
weak, nervous state, the shock of the intelligence had quite prostrated
her. She had fallen into a swoon, and had been brought back to her
senses with the greatest difficulty. As to giving me or anybody else
directions what to do under the embarrassing circumstances which had
now occurred, she was totally incapable of the effort.

I waited till the middle of the day, in the hope that she might get
strong enough to give her orders; but no message came from her. At last
I resolved to send and ask her what she thought it best to do. Josephine
was the proper person to go on this errand; but when I asked for
Josephine, she was nowhere to be found. The housemaid, who had searched
for her ineffectually, brought word that her bonnet and shawl were
not hanging in their usual places. The parlor-maid, who had been in
attendance in my mistress's room, came down while we were all aghast at
this new disappearance. She could only tell us that Josephine had begged
her to do lady's-maid's duty that morning, as she was not well. Not
well! And the first result of her illness appeared to be that she had
left the house!

I cautioned the servants on no account to mention this circumstance
to my mistress, and then went upstairs myself to knock at her door. My
object was to ask if I might count on her approval if I wrote in
her name to the lawyer in London, and if I afterward went and gave
information of what had occurred to the nearest justice of the peace. I
might have sent to make this inquiry through one of the female servants;
but by this time, though not naturally suspicious, I had got to distrust
everybody in the house, whether they deserved it or not.

So I asked the question myself, standing outside the door. My mistress
thanked me in a faint voice, and begged me to do what I had proposed
immediately.

I went into my own bedroom and wrote to the lawyer, merely telling him
that Mr. James Smith had appeared unexpectedly at the Hall, and
that events had occurred in consequence which required his immediate
presence. I made the letter up like a parcel, and sent the coachman with
it to catch the mail on its way through to London.

The next thing was to go to the justice of the peace. The nearest lived
about five miles off, and was well acquainted with my mistress. He was
an old bachelor, and he kept house with his brother, who was a widower.
The two were much respected and beloved in the county, being kind,
unaffected gentlemen, who did a great deal of good among the poor. The
justice was Mr. Robert Nicholson, and his brother, the widower, was Mr.
Philip.

I had got my hat on, and was asking the groom which horse I had better
take, when an open carriage drove up to the house. It contained Mr.
Philip Nicholson and two persons in plain clothes, not exactly servants
and not exactly gentlemen, as far as I could judge. Mr. Philip looked
at me, when I touched my hat to him, in a very grave, downcast way, and
asked for my mistress. I told him she was ill in bed. He shook his head
at hearing that, and said he wished to speak to me in private. I showed
him into the library. One of the men in plain clothes followed us, and
sat in the hall. The other waited with the carriage.

"I was just going out, sir," I said, as I set a chair for him, "to speak
to Mr. Robert Nicholson about a very extraordinary circumstance--"

"I know what you refer to," said Mr. Philip, cutting me short rather
abruptly; "and I must beg, for reasons which will presently appear, that
you will make no statement of any sort to me until you have first heard
what I have to say. I am here on a very serious and a very shocking
errand, which deeply concerns your mistress and you."

His face suggested something worse than his words expressed. My heart
began to beat fast, and I felt that I was turning pale.

"Your master, Mr. James Smith," he went on, "came here unexpectedly
yesterday evening, and slept in this house last night. Before he retired
to rest he and your mistress had high words together, which ended, I am
sorry to hear, in a threat of a serious nature addressed by Mrs. James
Smith to her husband. They slept in separate rooms. This morning you
went into your master's room and saw no sign of him there. You only
found his nightgown on the bed, spotted with blood."

"Yes, sir," I said, in as steady a voice as I could command. "Quite
true."

"I am not examining you," said Mr. Philip. "I am only making a certain
statement, the truth of which you can admit or deny before my brother."

"Before your brother, sir!" I repeated. "Am I suspected of anything
wrong?"

"There is a suspicion that Mr. James Smith has been murdered," was the
answer I received to that question.

My flesh began to creep all over from head to foot.

"I am shocked--I am horrified to say," Mr. Philip went on, "that the
suspicion affects your mistress in the first place, and you in the
second."

I shall not attempt to describe what I felt when he said that. No words
of mine, no words of anybody's, could give an idea of it. What other men
would have done in my situation I don't know. I stood before Mr. Philip,
staring straight at him, without speaking, without moving, almost
without breathing. If he or any other man had struck me at that moment,
I do not believe I should have felt the blow.

"Both my brother and myself," said Mr. Philip, "have such unfeigned
respect for your mistress, such sympathy for her under these frightful
circumstances, and such an implicit belief in her capability of proving
her innocence, that we are desirous of sparing her in this dreadful
emergency as much as possible. For those reasons, I have undertaken to
come here with the persons appointed to execute my brother's warrant--"

"Warrant, sir!" I said, getting command of my voice as he pronounced
that word--"a warrant against my mistress!"

"Against her and against you," said Mr. Philip. "The suspicious
circumstances have been sworn to by a competent witness, who has
declared on oath that your mistress is guilty, and that you are an
accomplice."

"What witness, sir?"

"Your mistress's quadroon maid, who came to my brother this morning, and
who has made her deposition in due form."

"And who is as false as hell," I cried out passionately, "in every word
she says against my mistress and against me."

"I hope--no, I will go further, and say I believe she is false,"
said Mr. Philip. "But her perjury must be proved, and the necessary
examination must take place. My carriage is going back to my brother's,
and you will go in it, in charge of one of my men, who has the warrant
to take you in custody. I shall remain here with the man who is waiting
in the hall; and before any steps are taken to execute the other
warrant, I shall send for the doctor to ascertain when your mistress can
be removed."

"Oh, my poor mistress!" I said, "this will be the death of her, sir."

"I will take care that the shock shall strike her as tenderly as
possible," said Mr. Philip. "I am here for that express purpose. She
has my deepest sympathy and respect, and shall have every help and
alleviation that I can afford her."

The hearing him say that, and the seeing how sincerely he meant what he
said, was the first gleam of comfort in the dreadful affliction that had
befallen us. I felt this; I felt a burning anger against the wretch who
had done her best to ruin my mistress's fair name and mine, but in every
other respect I was like a man who had been stunned, and whose faculties
had not perfectly recovered from the shock. Mr. Philip was obliged to
remind me that time was of importance, and that I had better give myself
up immediately, on the merciful terms which his kindness offered to me.
I acknowledged that, and wished him good morning. But a mist seemed to
come over my eyes as I turned round to go away--a mist that prevented me
from finding my way to the door. Mr. Philip opened it for me, and said a
friendly word or two which I could hardly hear. The man waiting outside
took me to his companion in the carriage at the door, and I was driven
away, a prisoner for the first time in my life.

On our way to the justice's, what little thinking faculty I had left
in me was all occupied in the attempt to trace a motive for the
inconceivable treachery and falsehood of which Josephine had been
guilty.

Her words, her looks, and her manner, on that unfortunate day when my
mistress so far forget herself as to strike, her, came back dimly to my
memory, and led to the inference that part of the motive, at least, of
which I was in search, might be referred to what had happened on that
occasion. But was this the only reason for her devilish vengeance
against my mistress? And, even if it were so, what fancied injuries had
I done her? Why should I be included in the false accusation? In the
dazed state of my faculties at that time, I was quite incapable of
seeking the answer to these questions. My mind was clouded all over, and
I gave up the attempt to clear it in despair.

I was brought before Mr. Robert Nicholson that day, and the fiend of a
quadroon was examined in my presence. The first sight of her face, with
its wicked self-possession, with its smooth leering triumph, so sickened
me that I turned my head away and never looked at her a second time
throughout the proceedings. The answers she gave amounted to a mere
repetition of the deposition to which she had already sworn. I listened
to her with the most breathless attention, and was thunderstruck at the
inconceivable artfulness with which she had mixed up truth and falsehood
in her charge against my mistress and me.

This was, in substance, what she now stated in my presence:

After describing the manner of Mr. James Smith's arrival at the Hall,
the witness, Josephine Durand, confessed that she had been led to listen
at the music-room door by hearing angry voices inside, and she then
described, truly enough, the latter part of the altercation between
husband and wife. Fearing, after this, that something serious might
happen, she had kept watch in her room, which was on the same floor as
her mistress's. She had heard her mistress's door open softly between
one and two in the morning--had followed her mistress, who carried a
small lamp, along the passage and down the stairs into the hall--had
hidden herself in the porter's chair--had seen her mistress take a
dagger in a green sheath from a collection of Eastern curiosities kept
in the hall--had followed her again, and seen her softly enter the Red
Room--had heard the heavy breathing of Mr. James Smith, which gave token
that he was asleep--had slipped into an empty room, next door to the Red
Roam, and had waited there about a quarter of an hour, when her mistress
came out again with the dagger in her hand--had followed her mistress
again into the hall, where she had put the dagger back into its
place--had seen her mistress turn into a side passage that led to my
room--had heard her knock at my door, and heard me answer and open
it--had hidden again in the porter's chair--had, after a while, seen
me and my mistress pass together into the passage that led to the Red
Room--had watched us both into the Red Room--and had then, through fear
of being discovered and murdered herself, if she risked detection any
longer, stolen back to her own room for the rest of the night.

After deposing on oath to the truth of these atrocious falsehoods, and
declaring, in conclusion, that Mr. James Smith had been murdered by
my mistress, and that I was an accomplice, the quadroon had further
asserted, in order to show a motive for the crime, that Mr. Meeke was my
mistress's lover; that he had been forbidden the house by her husband,
and that he was found in the house, and alone with her, on the evening
of Mr. James Smith's return. Here again there were some grains of truth
cunningly mixed up with a revolting lie, and they had their effect in
giving to the falsehood a look of probability.

I was cautioned in the usual manner and asked if I had anything to say.

I replied that I was innocent, but that I would wait for legal
assistance before I defended myself. The justice remanded me and the
examination was over. Three days later my unhappy mistress was subjected
to the same trial. I was not allowed to communicate with her. All I
knew was that the lawyer had arrived from London to help her. Toward the
evening he was admitted to see me. He shook his head sorrowfully when I
asked after my mistress.

"I am afraid," he said, "that she has sunk under the horror of the
situation in which that vile woman has placed her. Weakened by her
previous agitation, she seems to have given way under this last shock,
tenderly and carefully as Mr. Philip Nicholson broke the bad news
to her. All her feelings appeared to be strangely blunted at the
examination to-day. She answered the questions put to her quite
correctly, but at the same time quite mechanically, with no change
in her complexion, or in her tone of voice, or in her manner, from
beginning to end. It is a sad thing, William, when women cannot get
their natural vent of weeping, and your mistress has not shed a tear
since she left Darrock Hall."

"But surely, sir," I said, "if my examination has not proved Josephine's
perjury, my mistress's examination must have exposed it?"

"Nothing will expose it," answered the lawyer, "but producing Mr. James
Smith, or, at least, legally proving that he is alive. Morally speaking,
I have no doubt that the justice before whom you have been examined is
as firmly convinced as we can be that the quadroon has perjured herself.
Morally speaking, he believes that those threats which your mistress
unfortunately used referred (as she said they did to-day) to her
intention of leaving the Hall early in the morning, with you for her
attendant, and coming to me, if she had been well enough to travel, to
seek effectual legal protection from her husband for the future. Mr.
Nicholson believes that; and I, who know more of the circumstances than
he does, believe also that Mr. James Smith stole away from Darrock Hall
in the night under fear of being indicted for bigamy. But if I can't
find him--if I can't prove him to be alive--if I can't account for those
spots of blood on the night-gown, the accidental circumstances of the
case remain unexplained--your mistress's rash language, the bad terms
on which she has lived with her husband, and her unlucky disregard of
appearances in keeping up her intercourse with Mr. Meeke, all tell dead
against us--and the justice has no alternative, in a legal point of
view, but to remand you both, as he has now done, for the production of
further evidence."

"But how, then, in Heaven's name, is our innocence to be proved, sir?" I
asked.

"In the first place," said the lawyer, "by finding Mr. James Smith;
and, in the second place, by persuading him, when he is found, to come
forward and declare himself."

"Do you really believe, sir," said I, "that he would hesitate to do
that, when he knows the horrible charge to which his disappearance has
exposed his wife? He is a heartless villain, I know; but surely--"

"I don't suppose," said the lawyer, cutting me short, "that he is quite
scoundrel enough to decline coming forward, supposing he ran no risk by
doing so. But remember that he has placed himself in a position to be
tried for bigamy, and that he believes your mistress will put the law in
force against him."

I had forgotten that circumstance. My heart sank within me when it was
recalled to my memory, and I could say nothing more.

"It is a very serious thing," the lawyer went on--"it is a downright
offense against the law of the land to make any private offer of a
compromise to this man. Knowing what we know, our duty as good citizens
is to give such information as may bring him to trial. I tell you
plainly that, if I did not stand toward your mistress in the position
of a relation as well as a legal adviser, I should think twice about
running the risk--the very serious risk--on which I am now about to
venture for her sake. As it is, I have taken the right measures to
assure Mr. James Smith that he will not be treated according to his
deserts. When he knows what the circumstances are, he will trust
us--supposing always that we can find him. The search about this
neighborhood has been quite useless. I have sent private instructions
by to-day's post to Mr. Dark in London, and with them a carefully-worded
form of advertisement for the public newspapers. You may rest assured
that every human means of tracing him will be tried forthwith. In the
meantime, I have an important question to put to you about Josephine.
She may know more than we think she does; she may have surprised the
secret of the second marriage, and may be keeping it in reserve to use
against us. If this should turn out to be the case, I shall want
some other chance against her besides the chance of indicting her for
perjury. As to her motive now for making this horrible accusation, what
can you tell me about that, William?"

"Her motive against me, sir?"

"No, no, not against you. I can see plainly enough that she accuses you
because it is necessary to do so to add to the probability of her story,
which, of course, assumes that you helped your mistress to dispose of
the dead body. You are coolly sacrificed to some devilish vengeance
against her mistress. Let us get at that first. Has there ever been
a quarrel between them?"

I told him of the quarrel, and of how Josephine had looked and talked
when she showed me her cheek.

"Yes," he said, "that is a strong motive for revenge with a naturally
pitiless, vindictive woman. But is that all? Had your mistress any hold
over her? Is there any self-interest mixed up along with this motive of
vengeance? Think a little, William. Has anything ever happened in
the house to compromise this woman, or to make her fancy herself
compromised?"

The remembrance of my mistress's lost trinkets and handkerchiefs, which
later and greater troubles had put out of my mind, flashed back into my
memory while he spoke. I told him immediately of the alarm in the house
when the loss was discovered.

"Did your mistress suspect Josephine and question her?" he asked,
eagerly.

"No, sir," I replied. "Before she could say a word, Josephine impudently
asked who she suspected, and boldly offered her own boxes to be
searched."

The lawyer's face turned red as scarlet. He jumped out of his chair, and
hit me such a smack on the shoulder that I thought he had gone mad.

"By Jupiter!" he cried out, "we have got the whip-hand of that she-devil
at last."

I looked at him in astonishment.

"Why, man alive," he said, "don't you see how it is? Josephine's the
thief! I am as sure of it as that you and I are talking together. This
vile accusation against your mistress answers another purpose besides
the vindictive one--it is the very best screen that the wretch could
possibly set up to hide herself from detection. It has stopped your
mistress and you from moving in the matter; it exhibits her in the false
character of an honest witness against a couple of criminals; it gives
her time to dispose of the goods, or to hide them, or to do anything she
likes with them. Stop! let me be quite sure that I know what the
lost things are. A pair of bracelets, three rings, and a lot of lace
pocket-handkerchiefs--is that what you said?"

"Yes, sir."

"Your mistress will describe them particularly, and I will take the
right steps the first thing to-morrow morning. Good-evening, William,
and keep up your spirits. It shan't be my fault if you don't soon see
the quadroon in the right place for her--at the prisoner's bar."

With that farewell he went out.

The days passed, and I did not see him again until the period of my
remand had expired. On this occasion, when I once more appeared before
the justice, my mistress appeared with me. The first sight of her
absolutely startled me, she was so sadly altered. Her face looked so
pinched and thin that it was like the face of an old woman. The dull,
vacant resignation of her expression was something shocking to see. It
changed a little when her eyes first turned heavily toward me, and she
whispered, with a faint smile, "I am sorry for you, William--I am very,
very sorry for you." But as soon as she had said those words the blank
look returned, and she sat with her head drooping forward, quiet, and
inattentive, and hopeless--so changed a being that her oldest friends
would hardly have known her.

Our examination was a mere formality. There was no additional evidence
either for or against us, and we were remanded again for another week.

I asked the lawyer, privately, if any chance had offered itself of
tracing Mr. James Smith. He looked mysterious, and only said in answer,
"Hope for the best." I inquired next if any progress had been made
toward fixing the guilt of the robbery on Josephine.

"I never boast," he replied. "But, cunning as she is, I should not be
surprised if Mr. Dark and I, together, turned out to be more than a
match for her."

Mr. Dark! There was something in the mere mention of his name that gave
me confidence in the future. If I could only have got my poor mistress's
sad, dazed face out of my mind, I should not have had much depression of
spirits to complain of during the interval of time that elapsed between
the second examination and the third.



CHAPTER VI.

ON the third appearance of my mistress and myself before the justice,
I noticed some faces in the room which I had not seen there before.
Greatly to my astonishment--for the previous examinations had been
conducted as privately as possible--I remarked the presence of two of
the servants from the Hall, and of three or four of the tenants on the
Darrock estate, who lived nearest to the house. They all sat together on
one side of the justice-room. Opposite to them and close at the side of
a door, stood my old acquaintance, Mr. Dark, with his big snuff-box, his
jolly face, and his winking eye. He nodded to me, when I looked at him,
as jauntily as if we were meeting at a party of pleasure. The quadroon
woman, who had been summoned to the examination, had a chair placed
opposite to the witness-box, and in a line with the seat occupied by my
poor mistress, whose looks, as I was grieved to see, were not altered
for the better. The lawyer from London was with her, and I stood behind
her chair.

We were all quietly disposed in the room in this way, when the justice,
Mr. Robert Nicholson, came in with his brother. It might have been only
fancy, but I thought I could see in both their faces that something
remarkable had happened since we had met at the last examination.

The deposition of Josephine Durand was read over by the clerk, and she
was asked if she had anything to add to it. She replied in the negative.
The justice then appealed to my mistress's relation, the lawyer, to
know if he could produce any evidence relating to the charge against his
clients.

"I have evidence," answered the lawyer, getting briskly on his legs,
"which I believe, sir, will justify me in asking for their discharge."

"Where are your witnesses?" inquired the justice, looking hard at
Josephine while he spoke.

"One of them is in waiting, your worship," said Mr. Dark, opening the
door near which he was standing.

He went out of the room, remained away about a minute, and returned with
his witness at his heels.

My heart gave a bound as if it would jump out of my body. There, with
his long hair cut short, and his bushy whiskers shaved off--there, in
his own proper person, safe and sound as ever, was Mr. James Smith!

The quadroon's iron nature resisted the shock of his unexpected presence
on the scene with a steadiness that was nothing short of marvelous. Her
thin lips closed together convulsively, and there was a slight movement
in the muscles of her throat. But not a word, not a sign betrayed her.
Even the yellow tinge of her complexion remained unchanged.

"It is not necessary, sir, that I should waste time and words in
referring to the wicked and preposterous charge against my clients,"
said the lawyer, addressing Mr. Robert Nicholson. "The one sufficient
justification for discharging them immediately is before you at this
moment in the person of that gentleman. There, sir, stands the murdered
Mr. James Smith, of Darrock Hall, alive and well, to answer for
himself."

"That is not the man!" cried Josephine, her shrill voice just as high,
clear, and steady as ever, "I denounce that man as an impostor. Of my
own knowledge, I deny that he is Mr. James Smith."

"No doubt you do," said the lawyer; "but we will prove his identity for
all that."

The first witness called was Mr. Philip Nicholson. He could swear that
he had seen Mr. James Smith, and spoken to him at least a dozen times.
The person now before him was Mr. James Smith, altered as to personal
appearance by having his hair cut short and his whiskers shaved off, but
still unmistakably the man he assumed to be.

"Conspiracy!" interrupted the prisoner, hissing the word out viciously
between her teeth.

"If you are not silent," said Mr. Robert Nicholson, "you will be removed
from the room. It will sooner meet the ends of justice," he went
on, addressing the lawyer, "if you prove the question of identity by
witnesses who have been in habits of daily communication with Mr. James
Smith."

Upon this, one of the servants from the Hall was placed in the box.

The alteration in his master's appearance evidently puzzled the man.
Besides the perplexing change already adverted to, there was also a
change in Mr. James Smith's expression and manner. Rascal as he was, I
must do him the justice to say that he looked startled and ashamed when
he first caught sight of his unfortunate wife. The servant, who was used
to be eyed tyrannically by him, and ordered about roughly, seeing him
now for the first time abashed and silent, stammered and hesitated on
being asked to swear to his identity.

"I can hardly say for certain, sir," said the man, addressing the
justice in a bewildered manner. "He is like my master, and yet he isn't.
If he wore whiskers and had his hair long, and if he was, saving your
presence, sir, a little more rough and ready in his way, I could swear
to him anywhere with a safe conscience."

Fortunately for us, at this moment Mr. James Smith's feeling of
uneasiness at the situation in which he was placed changed to a feeling
of irritation at being coolly surveyed and then stupidly doubted in the
matter of his identity by one of his own servants.

"Can't you say in plain words, you idiot, whether you know me or whether
you don't?" he called out, angrily.

"That's his voice!" cried the servant, starting in the box. "Whiskers or
no whiskers, that's him!"

"If there's any difficulty, your worship, about the gentleman's hair,"
said Mr. Dark, coming forward with a grin, "here's a small parcel which,
I may make so bold as to say, will remove it." Saying that, he opened
the parcel, took some locks of hair out of it, and held them up close to
Mr. James Smith's head. "A pretty good match, your worship," continued
Mr. Dark. "I have no doubt the gentleman's head feels cooler now it's
off. We can't put the whiskers on, I'm afraid, but they match the hair;
and they are in the paper (if one may say such a thing of whiskers) to
speak for themselves."

"Lies! lies! lies!" screamed Josephine, losing her wicked self-control
at this stage of the proceedings.

The justice made a sign to two of the constables present as she burst
out with those exclamations, and the men removed her to an adjoining
room.

The second servant from the Hall was then put in the box, and was
followed by one of the tenants. After what they had heard and seen,
neither of these men had any hesitation in swearing positively to their
master's identity.

"It is quite unnecessary," said the justice, as soon as the box was
empty again, "to examine any more witnesses as to the question of
identity. All the legal formalities are accomplished, and the charge
against the prisoners falls to the ground. I have great pleasure in
ordering the immediate discharge of both the accused persons, and
in declaring from this place that they leave the court without the
slightest stain on their characters."

He bowed low to my mistress as he said that, paused a moment, and then
looked inquiringly at Mr. James Smith.

"I have hitherto abstained from making any remark unconnected with the
immediate matter in hand," he went on. "But, now that my duty is done,
I cannot leave this chair without expressing my strong sense of
disapprobation of the conduct of Mr. James Smith--conduct which,
whatever may be the motives that occasioned it, has given a false color
of probability to a most horrible charge against a lady of unspotted
reputation, and against a person in a lower rank of life whose good
character ought not to have been imperiled even for a moment. Mr. Smith
may or may not choose to explain his mysterious disappearance from
Darrock Hall, and the equally unaccountable change which he has chosen
to make in his personal appearance. There is no legal charge against
him; but, speaking morally, I should be unworthy of the place I hold if
I hesitated to declare my present conviction that his conduct has been
deceitful, inconsiderate, and unfeeling in the highest degree."

To this sharp reprimand Mr. James Smith (evidently tutored beforehand as
to what he was to say) replied that, in attending before the justice, he
wished to perform a plain duty and to keep himself strictly within the
letter of the law. He apprehended that the only legal obligation laid
on him was to attend in that court to declare himself, and to enable
competent witnesses to prove his identity. This duty accomplished, he
had merely to add that he preferred submitting to a reprimand from the
bench to entering into explanations which would involve the disclosure
of domestic circumstances of a very unhappy nature. After that brief
reply he had nothing further to say, and he would respectfully request
the justice's permission to withdraw.

The permission was accorded. As he crossed the room he stopped near his
wife, and said, confusedly, in a very low tone:

"I have done you many injuries, but I never intended this. I am sorry
for it. Have you anything to say to me before I go?"

My mistress shuddered and hid her face. He waited a moment, and, finding
that she did not answer him, bowed his head politely and went out. I did
not know it then, but I had seen him for the last time.

After he had gone, the lawyer, addressing Mr. Robert Nicholson, said
that he had an application to make in reference to the woman Josephine
Durand.

At the mention of that name my mistress hurriedly whispered a few words
into her relation's ear. He looked toward Mr. Philip Nicholson, who
immediately advanced, offered his arm to my mistress, and led her out.
I was about to follow, when Mr. Dark stopped me, and begged that I
would wait a few minutes longer, in order to give myself the pleasure of
seeing "the end of the case."

In the meantime, the justice had pronounced the necessary order to have
the quadroon brought back. She came in, as bold and confident as ever.
Mr. Robert Nicholson looked away from her in disgust and said to the
lawyer:

"Your application is to have her committed for perjury, of course?"

"For perjury?" said Josephine, with her wicked smile. "Very good. I
shall explain some little matters that I have not explained before. You
think I am quite at your mercy now? Bah! I shall make myself a thorn in
your sides yet."

"She has got scent of the second marriage," whispered Mr. Dark to me.

There could be no doubt of it. She had evidently been listening at the
door on the night when my master came back longer than I had supposed.
She must have heard those words about "the new wife"--she might even
have seen the effect of them on Mr. James Smith.

"We do not at present propose to charge Josephine Durand with perjury,"
said the lawyer, "but with another offense, for which it is important to
try her immediately, in order to effect the restoration of property that
has been stolen. I charge her with stealing from her mistress, while
in her service at Darrock Hall, a pair of bracelets, three rings, and a
dozen and a half of lace pocket-handkerchiefs. The articles in question
were taken this morning from between the mattresses of her bed; and a
letter was found in the same place which clearly proves that she had
represented the property as belonging to herself, and that she had tried
to dispose of it to a purchaser in London." While he was speaking, Mr.
Dark produced the jewelry, the handkerchiefs and the letter, and laid
them before the justice.

Even Josephine's extraordinary powers of self-control now gave way at
last. At the first words of the unexpected charge against her she struck
her hands together violently, gnashed her sharp white teeth, and burst
out with a torrent of fierce-sounding words in some foreign language,
the meaning of which I did not understand then and cannot explain now.

"I think that's checkmate for marmzelle," whispered Mr. Dark, with his
invariable wink. "Suppose you go back to the Hall, now, William, and
draw a jug of that very remarkable old ale of yours? I'll be after you
in five minutes, as soon as the charge is made out."

I could hardly realize it when I found myself walking back to Darrock a
free man again.

In a quarter of an hour's time Mr. Dark joined me, and drank to my
health, happiness and prosperity in three separate tumblers. After
performing this ceremony, he wagged his head and chuckled with an
appearance of such excessive enjoyment that I could not avoid remarking
on his high spirits.

"It's the case, William--it's the beautiful neatness of the case that
quite intoxicates me. Oh, Lord, what a happiness it is to be concerned
in such a job as this!" cries Mr. Dark, slapping his stumpy hands on his
fat knees in a sort of ecstasy.

I had a very different opinion of the case for my own part, but I did
not venture on expressing it. I was too anxious to know how Mr. James
Smith had been discovered and produced at the examination to enter
into any arguments. Mr. Dark guessed what was passing in my mind, and,
telling me to sit down and make myself comfortable, volunteered of his
own accord to inform me of all that I wanted to know.

"When I got my instructions and my statement of particulars," he began,
"I was not at all surprised to hear that Mr. James Smith had come back.
(I prophesied that, if you remember, William, the last time we met?)
But I was a good deal astonished, nevertheless, at the turn things
had taken, and I can't say I felt very hopeful about finding our man.
However, I followed my master's directions, and put the advertisement
in the papers. It addressed Mr. James Smith by name, but it was very
carefully worded as to what was wanted of him. Two days after it
appeared, a letter came to our office in a woman's handwriting. It was
my business to open the letters, and I opened that. The writer was short
and mysterious. She requested that somebody would call from our office
at a certain address, between the hours of two and four that afternoon,
in reference to the advertisement which we had inserted in the
newspapers. Of course, I was the somebody who went. I kept myself from
building up hopes by the way, knowing what a lot of Mr. James Smiths
there were in London. On getting to the house, I was shown into the
drawing-room, and there, dressed in a wrapper and lying on a sofa, was
an uncommonly pretty woman, who looked as if she was just recovering
from an illness. She had a newspaper by her side, and came to the point
at once: 'My husband's name is James Smith,' she says, 'and I have my
reasons for wanting to know if he is the person you are in search of.'
I described our man as Mr. James Smith, of Darrock Hall, Cumberland. 'I
know no such person,' says she--"

"What! was it not the second wife, after all?" I broke out.

"Wait a bit," says Mr. Dark. "I mentioned the name of the yacht next,
and she started up on the sofa as if she had been shot. 'I think you
were married in Scotland, ma'am,' says I. She turns as pale as ashes,
and drops back on the sofa, and says, faintly: 'It is my husband. Oh,
sir, what has happened? What do you want with him? Is he in debt?' I
took a minute to think, and then made up my mind to tell her everything,
feeling that she would keep her husband (as she called him) out of the
way if I frightened her by any mysteries. A nice job I had, William,
as you may suppose, when she knew about the bigamy business. What
with screaming, fainting, crying, and blowing me up (as if _I_ was to
blame!), she kept me by that sofa of hers the best part of an hour--kept
me there, in short, till Mr. James Smith himself came back. I leave you
to judge if that mended matters. He found me mopping the poor woman's
temples with scent and water; and he would have pitched me out of the
window, as sure as I sit here, if I had not met him and staggered him at
once with the charge of murder against his wife. That stopped him when
he was in full cry, I can promise you. 'Go and wait in the next room,'
says he, 'and I'll come in and speak to you directly.'"

"And did you go?" I asked.

"Of course I did," said Mr. Dark. "I knew he couldn't get out by the
drawing-room windows, and I knew I could watch the door; so away I went,
leaving him alone with the lady, who didn't spare him by any manner of
means, as I could easily hear in the next room. However, all rows in
this world come to an end sooner or later, and a man with any brains in
his head may do what he pleases with a woman who is fond of him. Before
long I heard her crying and kissing him. 'I can't go home,' she says,
after this. 'You have behaved like a villain and a monster to me--but
oh, Jemmy, I can't give you up to anybody! Don't go back to your wife!
Oh, don't, don't go back to your wife!' 'No fear of that,' says he. 'My
wife wouldn't have me if I did go back to her.' After that I heard the
door open, and went out to meet him on the landing. He began swearing
the moment he saw me, as if that was any good. 'Business first, if
you please, sir,' says I, 'and any pleasure you like, in the way of
swearing, afterward.' With that beginning, I mentioned our terms to him,
and asked the pleasure of his company to Cumberland in return, he was
uncommonly suspicious at first, but I promised to draw out a legal
document (mere waste paper, of no earthly use except to pacify him),
engaging to hold him harmless throughout the proceedings; and what
with that, and telling him of the frightful danger his wife was in, I
managed, at last, to carry my point."

"But did the second wife make no objection to his going away with you?"
I inquired.

"Not she," said Mr. Dark. "I stated the case to her just as it stood,
and soon satisfied her that there was no danger of Mr. James Smith's
first wife laying any claim to him. After hearing that, she joined me
in persuading him to do his duty, and said she pitied your mistress from
the bottom of her heart. With her influence to back me, I had no great
fear of our man changing his mind. I had the door watched that night,
however, so as to make quite sure of him. The next morning he was ready
to time when I called, and a quarter of an hour after that we were off
together for the north road. We made the journey with post-horses, being
afraid of chance passengers, you know, in public conveyances. On the way
down, Mr. James Smith and I got on as comfortably together as if we had
been a pair of old friends. I told the story of our tracing him to the
north of Scotland, and he gave me the particulars, in return, of his
bolting from Darrock Hall. They are rather amusing, William; would you
like to hear them?"

I told Mr. Dark that he had anticipated the very question I was about to
ask him.

"Well," he said, "this is how it was: To begin at the beginning, our man
really took Mrs. Smith, Number Two, to the Mediterranean, as we heard.
He sailed up the Spanish coast, and, after short trips ashore, stopped
at a seaside place in France called Cannes. There he saw a house and
grounds to be sold which took his fancy as a nice retired place to keep
Number Two in. Nothing particular was wanted but the money to buy it;
and, not having the little amount in his own possession, Mr. James Smith
makes a virtue of necessity, and goes back overland to his wife with
private designs on her purse-strings. Number Two, who objects to be left
behind, goes with him as far as London. There he trumps up the first
story that comes into his head about rents in the country, and a house
in Lincolnshire that is too damp for her to trust herself in; and so,
leaving her for a few days in London, starts boldly for Darrock Hall.
His notion was to wheedle your mistress out of the money by good
behavior; but it seems he started badly by quarreling with her about a
fiddle-playing parson--"

"Yes, yes, I know all about that part of the story," I broke in, seeing
by Mr. Dark's manner that he was likely to speak both ignorantly and
impertinently of my mistress's unlucky friend ship for Mr. Meeke. "Go
on to the time when I left my master alone in the Red Room, and tell me
what he did between midnight and nine the next morning."

"Did?" said Mr. Dark. "Why, he went to bed with the unpleasant
conviction on his mind that your mistress had found him out, and with no
comfort to speak of except what he could get out of the brandy bottle.
He couldn't sleep; and the more he tossed and tumbled, the more certain
he felt that his wife intended to have him tried for bigamy. At last,
toward the gray of the morning, he could stand it no longer, and he made
up his mind to give the law the slip while he had the chance. As soon as
he was dressed, it struck him that there might be a reward offered
for catching him, and he determined to make that slight change in his
personal appearance which puzzled the witnesses so much before the
magistrate to-day. So he opens his dressing-case and crops his hair in
no time, and takes off his whiskers next. The fire was out, and he had
to shave in cold water. What with that, and what with the flurry of his
mind, naturally enough he cut himself--"

"And dried the blood with his nightgown?" says I.

"With his nightgown," repeated Mr. Dark. "It was the first thing that
lay handy, and he snatched it up. Wait a bit, though; the cream of the
thing is to come. When he had done being his own barber, he couldn't for
the life of him hit on a way of getting rid of the loose hair. The fire
was out, and he had no matches; so he couldn't burn it. As for throwing
it away, he didn't dare do that in the house or about the house, for
fear of its being found, and betraying what he had done. So he wraps it
all up in paper, crams it into his pocket to be disposed of when he is
at a safe distance from the Hall, takes his bag, gets out at the window,
shuts it softly after him, and makes for the road as fast as his long
legs will carry him. There he walks on till a coach overtakes him, and
so travels back to London to find himself in a fresh scrape as soon as
he gets there. An interesting situation, William, and hard traveling
from one end of France to the other, had not agreed together in the case
of Number Two. Mr. James Smith found her in bed, with doctor's orders
that she was not to be moved. There was nothing for it after that but
to lie by in London till the lady got better. Luckily for us, she didn't
hurry herself; so that, after all, your mistress has to thank the very
woman who supplanted her for clearing her character by helping us to
find Mr. James Smith."

"And, pray, how did you come by that loose hair of his which you showed
before the justice to-day?" I asked.

"Thank Number Two again," says Mr. Dark. "I was put up to asking after
it by what she told me. While we were talking about the advertisement, I
made so bold as to inquire what first set her thinking that her husband
and the Mr. James Smith whom we wanted might be one and the same man.
'Nothing,' says she, 'but seeing him come home with his hair cut short
and his whiskers shaved off, and finding that he could not give me any
good reason for disfiguring himself in that way. I had my suspicions
that something was wrong, and the sight of your advertisement
strengthened them directly.' The hearing her say that suggested to
my mind that there might be a difficulty in identifying him after the
change in his looks, and I asked him what he had done with the loose
hair before we left London. It was found in the pocket of his traveling
coat just as he had huddled it up there on leaving the Hall, worry,
and fright, and vexation, having caused him to forget all about it. Of
course I took charge of the parcel, and you know what good it did as
well as I do. So to speak, William, it just completed this beautifully
neat case. Looking at the matter in a professional point of view, I
don't hesitate to say that we have managed our business with Mr. James
Smith to perfection. We have produced him at the right time, and we are
going to get rid of him at the right time. By to-night he will be on
his way to foreign parts with Number Two, and he won't show his nose in
England again if he lives to the age of Methuselah."

It was a relief to hear that and it was almost as great a comfort to
find, from what Mr. Dark said next, that my mistress need fear nothing
that Josephine could do for the future.

The charge of theft, on which she was about to be tried, did not afford
the shadow of an excuse in law any more than in logic for alluding to
the crime which her master had committed. If she meant to talk about it
she might do so in her place of transportation, but she would not have
the slightest chance of being listened to previously in a court of law.

"In short," said Mr. Dark, rising to take his leave, "as I have told you
already, William, it's checkmate for marmzelle. She didn't manage the
business of the robbery half as sharply as I should have expected. She
certainly began well enough by staying modestly at a lodging in the
village to give her attendance at the examinations, as it might be
required; nothing could look more innocent and respectable so far; but
her hiding the property between the mattresses of her bed--the very
first place that any experienced man would think of looking in--was such
an amazingly stupid thing to do, that I really can't account for it,
unless her mind had more weighing on it than it was able to bear, which,
considering the heavy stakes she played for, is likely enough. Anyhow,
her hands are tied now, and her tongue too, for the matter of that. Give
my respects to your mistress, and tell her that her runaway husband and
her lying maid will never either of them harm her again as long as they
live. She has nothing to do now but to pluck up her spirits and live
happy. Here's long life to her and to you, William, in the last glass of
ale; and here's the same toast to myself in the bottom of the jug."

With those words Mr. Dark pocketed his large snuff-box, gave a last wink
with his bright eye, and walked rapidly away, whistling, to catch the
London coach. From that time to this he and I have never met again.

A few last words relating to my mistress and to the other persons
chiefly concerned in this narrative will conclude all that it is now
necessary for me to say.

For some months the relatives and friends, and I myself, felt sad
misgivings on my poor mistress's account. We doubted if it was possible,
with such a quick, sensitive nature as hers, that she could support the
shock which had been inflicted on her. But our powers of endurance are,
as I have learned to believe, more often equal to the burdens laid upon
us than we are apt to imagine. I have seen many surprising recoveries
from illness after all hope had been lost, and I have lived to see my
mistress recover from the grief and terror which we once thought would
prove fatal to her. It was long before she began to hold up her head
again; but care and kindness, and time and change wrought their effect
on her at last. She is not now, and never will be again, the woman she
was once; her manner is altered, and she looks older by many a year than
she really is. But her health causes us no anxiety now; her spirits are
calm and equal, and I have good hope that many quiet years of service in
her house are left for me still. I myself have married during the long
interval of time which I am now passing over in a few words. This change
in my life is, perhaps, not worth mentioning, but I am reminded of my
two little children when I speak of my mistress in her present position.
I really think they make the great happiness, and interest, and
amusement of her life, and prevent her from feeling lonely and dried
up at heart. It is a pleasant reflection to me to remember this, and
perhaps it may be the same to you, for which reason only I speak of it.

As for the other persons connected with the troubles at Darrock Hall,
I may mention the vile woman Josephine first, so as to have the sooner
done with her. Mr. Dark's guess, when he tried to account for her want
of cunning in hiding the stolen property, by saying that her mind might
have had more weighing on it than she was able to bear, turned out to be
nothing less than the plain and awful truth. After she had been
found guilty of the robbery, and had been condemned to seven years'
transportation, a worse sentence fell upon her from a higher tribunal
than any in this world. While she was still in the county jail, previous
to her removal, her mind gave way, the madness breaking out in an
attempt to set fire to the prison. Her case was pronounced to be
hopeless from the first. The lawful asylum received her, and the lawful
asylum will keep her to the end of her days.

Mr. James Smith, who, in my humble opinion, deserved hanging by law, or
drowning by accident at least, lived quietly abroad with his Scotch
wife (or no wife) for two years, and then died in the most quiet
and customary manner, in his bed, after a short illness. His end was
described to me as a "highly edifying one." But as he was also reported
to have sent his forgiveness to his wife--which was as much as to say
that _he_ was the injured person of the two--I take leave to consider
that he was the same impudent vagabond in his last moments that he
had been all his life. His Scotch widow has married again, and is now
settled in London. I hope her husband is all her own property this time.

Mr. Meeke must not be forgotten, although he has dropped out of the
latter part of my story because he had nothing to do with the serious
events which followed Josephine's perjury. In the confusion and
wretchedness of that time, he was treated with very little ceremony, and
was quite passed over when we left the neighborhood. After pining and
fretting some time, as we afterward heard, in his lonely parsonage,
he resigned his living at the first chance he got, and took a sort of
under-chaplain's place in an English chapel abroad. He writes to my
mistress once or twice a year to ask after her health and well-being,
and she writes back to him. That is all the communication they are ever
likely to have with each other. The music they once played together will
never sound again. Its last notes have long since faded away and the
last words of this story, trembling on the lips of the teller, may now
fade with them.


THE NINTH DAY.

A LITTLE change in the weather. The rain still continues, but the wind
is not quite so high. Have I any reason to believe, because it is calmer
on land, that it is also calmer at sea? Perhaps not. But my mind is
scarcely so uneasy to-day, nevertheless.

I had looked over the newspaper with the usual result, and had laid it
down with the customary sense of disappointment, when Jessie handed me a
letter which she had received that morning. It was written by her aunt,
and it upbraided her in the highly exaggerated terms which ladies love
to employ, where any tender interests of their own are concerned, for
her long silence and her long absence from home. Home! I thought of my
poor boy and of the one hope on which all his happiness rested, and I
felt jealous of the word when I saw it used persuasively in a letter to
our guest. What right had any one to mention "home" to her until George
had spoken first?

"I must answer it by return of post," said Jessie, with a tone of sorrow
in her voice for which my heart warmed to her. "You have been very kind
to me; you have taken more pains to interest and amuse me than I am
worth. I can laugh about most things, but I can't laugh about going
away. I am honestly and sincerely too grateful for that."

She paused, came round to where I was sitting, perched herself on the
end of the table, and, resting her hands on my shoulders, added gently:

"It must be the day after to-morrow, must it not?"

I could not trust myself to answer. If I had spoken, I should have
betrayed George's secret in spite of myself.

"To-morrow is the tenth day," she went on, softly. "It looks so selfish
and so ungrateful to go the moment I have heard the last of the stories,
that I am quite distressed at being obliged to enter on the subject at
all. And yet, what choice is left me? what can I do when my aunt writes
to me in that way?"

She took up the letter again, and looked at it so ruefully that I drew
her head a little nearer to me, and gratefully kissed the smooth white
forehead.

"If your aunt is only half as anxious to see you again, my love, as I
am to see my son, I must forgive her for taking you away from us." The
words came from me without premeditation. It was not calculation this
time, but sheer instinct that impelled me to test her in this way, once
more, by a direct reference to George. She was so close to me that I
felt her breath quiver on my cheek. Her eyes had been fixed on my face a
moment before, but they now wandered away from it constrainedly. One of
her hands trembled a little on my shoulder, and she took it off.

"Thank you for trying to make our parting easier to me," she said,
quickly, and in a lower tone than she had spoken in yet. I made no
answer, but still looked her anxiously in the face. For a few seconds
her nimble delicate fingers nervously folded and refolded the letter
from her aunt, then she abruptly changed her position.

"The sooner I write, the sooner it will be over," she said, and
hurriedly turned away to the paper-case on the side-table.

How was the change in her manner to be rightly interpreted? Was she hurt
by what I had said, or was she secretly so much affected by it, in the
impressionable state of her mind at that moment, as to be incapable of
exerting a young girl's customary self-control? Her looks, actions, and
language might bear either interpretation. One striking omission had
marked her conduct when I had referred to George's return. She had not
inquired when I expected him back. Was this indifference? Surely not.
Surely indifference would have led her to ask the conventionally civil
question which ninety-nine persons out of a hundred would have addressed
to me as a matter of course. Was she, on her side, afraid to trust
herself to speak of George at a time when an unusual tenderness was
aroused in her by the near prospect of saying farewell? It might
be--it might not be--it might be. My feeble reason took the side of my
inclination; and, after vibrating between Yes and No, I stopped where I
had begun--at Yes.

She finished the letter in a few minutes, and dropped it into the
post-bag the moment it was done.

"Not a word more," she said, returning to me with a sigh of relief--"not
a word about my aunt or my going away till the time comes. We have two
more days; let us make the most of them."

Two more days! Eight-and-forty hours still to pass; sixty minutes in
each of those hours; and every minute long enough to bring with it
an event fatal to George's future! The bare thought kept my mind in a
fever. For the remainder of the day I was as desultory and as restless
as our Queen of Hearts herself. Owen affectionately did his best to
quiet me, but in vain. Even Morgan, who whiled away the time by smoking
incessantly, was struck by the wretched spectacle of nervous anxiety
that I presented to him, and pitied me openly for being unable to
compose myself with a pipe. Wearily and uselessly the hours wore on till
the sun set. The clouds in the western heaven wore wild and tortured
shapes when I looked out at them; and, as the gathering darkness fell on
us, the fatal fearful wind rose once more.

When we assembled at eight, the drawing of the lots had no longer any
interest or suspense, so far as I was concerned. I had read my last
story, and it now only remained for chance to decide the question of
precedency between Owen and Morgan. Of the two numbers left in the bowl,
the one drawn was Nine. This made it Morgan's turn to read, and left it
appropriately to Owen, as our eldest brother, to close the proceedings
on the next night.

Morgan looked round the table when he had spread out his manuscript, and
seemed half inclined to open fire, as usual, with a little preliminary
sarcasm; but his eyes met mine; he saw the anxiety I was suffering; and
his natural kindness, perversely as he might strive to hide it, got the
better of him. He looked down on his paper; growled out briefly, "No
need for a preface; my little bit of writing explains itself; let's go
on and have done with it," and so began to read without another word
from himself or from any of us.




BROTHER MORGAN'S STORY of FAUNTLEROY.



CHAPTER I.


IT was certainly a dull little dinner-party. Of the four guests, two of
us were men between fifty and sixty, and two of us were youths between
eighteen and twenty, and we had no subjects in common. We were all
intimate with our host, but were only slightly acquainted with each
other. Perhaps we should have got on better if there had been some
ladies among us; but the master of the house was a bachelor, and, except
the parlor-maids who assisted in waiting on us at dinner, no daughter of
Eve was present to brighten the dreary scene.

We tried all sorts of subjects, but they dropped one after the other.
The elder gentlemen seemed to be afraid of committing themselves by
talking too freely within hearing of us juniors, and we, on our
side, restrained our youthful flow of spirits and youthful freedom of
conversation out of deference to our host, who seemed once or twice
to be feeling a little nervous about the continued propriety of our
behavior in the presence of his respectable guests. To make matters
worse, we had dined at a sensible hour. When the bottles made their
first round at dessert, the clock on the mantel-piece only struck eight.
I counted the strokes, and felt certain, from the expression of his
face, that the other junior guest, who sat on one side of me at the
round table, was counting them also. When we came to the final eight, we
exchanged looks of despair. "Two hours more of this! What on earth is
to become of us?" In the language of the eyes, that was exactly what we
said to each other.

The wine was excellent, and I think we all came separately and secretly
to the same conclusion--that our chance of getting through the evening
was intimately connected with our resolution in getting through the
bottles.

As a matter of course, we talked wine. No company of Englishmen can
assemble together for an evening without doing that. Every man in this
country who is rich enough to pay income-tax has at one time or other
in his life effected a very remarkable transaction in wine. Sometimes he
has made such a bargain as he never expects to make again. Sometimes
he is the only man in England, not a peer of the realm, who has got a
single drop of a certain famous vintage which has perished from the face
of the earth. Sometimes he has purchased, with a friend, a few last left
dozens from the cellar of a deceased potentate, at a price so exorbitant
that he can only wag his head and decline mentioning it; and, if you
ask his friend, that friend will wag his head, and decline mentioning it
also. Sometimes he has been at an out-of-the-way country inn; has found
the sherry not drinkable; has asked if there is no other wine in the
house; has been informed that there is some "sourish foreign stuff
that nobody ever drinks"; has called for a bottle of it; has found it
Burgundy, such as all France cannot now produce, has cunningly kept his
own counsel with the widowed landlady, and has bought the whole stock
for "an old song." Sometimes he knows the proprietor of a famous tavern
in London, and he recommends his one or two particular friends, the
next time they are passing that way, to go in and dine, and give his
compliments to the landlord, and ask for a bottle of the brown sherry,
with the light blue--as distinguished from the dark blue--seal.
Thousands of people dine there every year, and think they have got the
famous sherry when they get the dark blue seal; but the real wine, the
famous wine, is the light blue seal, and nobody in England knows it but
the landlord and his friends. In all these wine-conversations, whatever
variety there may be in the various experiences related, one of
two great first principles is invariably assumed by each speaker in
succession. Either he knows more about it than any one else, or he
has got better wine of his own even than the excellent wine he is now
drinking. Men can get together sometimes without talking of women,
without talking of horses, without talking of politics, but they cannot
assemble to eat a meal together without talking of wine, and they cannot
talk of wine without assuming to each one of themselves an absolute
infallibility in connection with that single subject which they would
shrink from asserting in relation to any other topic under the sun.

How long the inevitable wine-talk lasted on the particular social
occasion of which I am now writing is more than I can undertake to say.
I had heard so many other conversations of the same sort at so many
other tables that my attention wandered away wearily, and I began to
forget all about the dull little dinner-party and the badly-assorted
company of guests of whom I formed one. How long I remained in this not
over-courteous condition of mental oblivion is more than I can tell;
but when my attention was recalled, in due course of time, to the little
world around me, I found that the good wine had begun to do its good
office.

The stream of talk on either side of the host's chair was now beginning
to flow cheerfully and continuously; the wine-conversation had worn
itself out; and one of the elder guests--Mr. Wendell--was occupied in
telling the other guest--Mr. Trowbridge--of a small fraud which had
lately been committed on him by a clerk in his employment. The first
part of the story I missed altogether. The last part, which alone caught
my attention, followed the career of the clerk to the dock of the Old
Bailey.

"So, as I was telling you," continued Mr. Wendell, "I made up my mind to
prosecute, and I did prosecute. Thoughtless people blamed me for sending
the young man to prison, and said I might just as well have forgiven
him, seeing that the trifling sum of money I had lost by his breach of
trust was barely as much as ten pounds. Of course, personally speaking,
I would much rather not have gone into court; but I considered that my
duty to society in general, and to my brother merchants in particular,
absolutely compelled me to prosecute for the sake of example. I acted
on that principle, and I don't regret that I did so. The circumstances
under which the man robbed me were particularly disgraceful. He was a
hardened reprobate, sir, if ever there was one yet; and I believe, in my
conscience, that he wanted nothing but the opportunity to be as great a
villain as Fauntleroy himself."

At the moment when Mr. Wendell personified his idea of consummate
villainy by quoting the example of Fauntleroy, I saw the other
middle-aged gentleman--Mr. Trowbridge--color up on a sudden, and begin
to fidget in his chair.

"The next time you want to produce an instance of a villain, sir," said
Mr. Trowbridge, "I wish you could contrive to quote some other example
than Fauntleroy."

Mr. Wendell naturally enough looked excessively astonished when he heard
these words, which were very firmly and, at the same time, very politely
addressed to him.

"May I inquire why you object to my example?" he asked.

"I object to it, sir," said Mr. Trowbridge, "because it makes me very
uncomfortable to hear Fauntleroy called a villain."

"Good heavens above!" exclaimed Mr. Wendell, utterly bewildered.
"Uncomfortable!--you, a mercantile man like myself--you, whose character
stands so high everywhere--you uncomfortable when you hear a man who was
hanged for forgery called a villain! In the name of wonder, why?"

"Because," answered Mr. Trowbridge, with perfect composure, "Fauntleroy
was a friend of mine."

"Excuse me, my dear sir," retorted Mr. Wendell, in as polished a tone of
sarcasm as he could command; "but of all the friends whom you have made
in the course of your useful and honorable career, I should have thought
the friend you have just mentioned would have been the very last to whom
you were likely to refer in respectable society, at least by name."

"Fauntleroy committed an unpardonable crime, and died a disgraceful
death," said Mr. Trowbridge. "But, for all that, Fauntleroy was a friend
of mine, and in that character I shall always acknowledge him boldly to
my dying day. I have a tenderness for his memory, though he violated a
sacred trust, and died for it on the gallows. Don't look shocked, Mr.
Wendell. I will tell you, and our other friends here, if they will
let me, why I feel that tenderness, which looks so strange and so
discreditable in your eyes. It is rather a curious anecdote, sir, and
has an interest, I think, for all observers of human nature quite apart
from its connection with the unhappy man of whom we have been talking.
You young gentlemen," continued Mr. Trowbridge, addressing himself to us
juniors, "have heard of Fauntleroy, though he sinned and suffered, and
shocked all England long before your time?"

We answered that we had certainly heard of him as one of the famous
criminals of his day. We knew that he had been a partner in a great
London banking-house; that he had not led a very virtuous life; that he
had possessed himself, by forgery, of trust-moneys which he was doubly
bound to respect; and that he had been hanged for his offense, in the
year eighteen hundred and twenty-four, when the gallows was still set up
for other crimes than murder, and when Jack Ketch was in fashion as one
of the hard-working reformers of the age.

"Very good," said Mr. Trowbridge. "You both of you know quite enough
of Fauntleroy to be interested in what I am going to tell you. When the
bottles have been round the table, I will start with my story."

The bottles went round--claret for the degenerate youngsters; port
for the sterling, steady-headed, middle-aged gentlemen. Mr. Trowbridge
sipped his wine--meditated a little--sipped again--and started with the
promised anecdote in these terms:



CHAPTER II.

WHAT I am going to tell you, gentlemen, happened when I was a very young
man, and when I was just setting up in business on my own account.

My father had been well acquainted for many years with Mr. Fauntleroy,
of the famous London banking firm of Marsh, Stracey, Fauntleroy &
Graham. Thinking it might be of some future service to me to make
my position known to a great man in the commercial world, my father
mentioned to his highly-respected friend that I was about to start in
business for myself in a very small way, and with very little money. Mr.
Fauntleroy received the intimation with a kind appearance of interest,
and said that he would have his eye on me. I expected from this that he
would wait to see if I could keep on my legs at starting, and that, if
he found I succeeded pretty well, he would then help me forward if it
lay in his power. As events turned out, he proved to be a far better
friend than that, and he soon showed me that I had very much underrated
the hearty and generous interest which he had felt in my welfare from
the first.

While I was still fighting with the difficulties of setting up my
office, and recommending myself to my connection, and so forth, I got
a message from Mr. Fauntleroy telling me to call on him, at the
banking-house, the first time I was passing that way. As you may easily
imagine, I contrived to be passing that way on a particularly early
occasion, and, on presenting myself at the bank, I was shown at once
into Mr. Fauntleroy's private room.

He was as pleasant a man to speak to as ever I met with--bright, and
gay, and companionable in his manner--with a sort of easy, hearty,
jovial bluntness about him that attracted everybody. The clerks all
liked him--and that is something to say of a partner in a banking-house,
I can tell you!

"Well, young Trowbridge," says he, giving his papers on the table a
brisk push away from him, "so you are going to set up in business for
yourself, are you? I have a great regard for your father, and a great
wish to see you succeed. Have you started yet? No? Just on the point of
beginning, eh? Very good. You will have your difficulties, my friend,
and I mean to smooth one of them away for you at the outset. A word of
advice for your private ear--Bank with us."

"You are very kind, sir," I answered, "and I should ask nothing better
than to profit by your suggestion, if I could. But my expenses are heavy
at starting, and when they are all paid I am afraid I shall have very
little left to put by for the first year. I doubt if I shall be able to
muster much more than three hundred pounds of surplus cash in the world
after paying what I must pay before I set up my office, and I should be
ashamed to trouble your house, sir, to open an account for such a trifle
as that."

"Stuff and nonsense!" says Mr. Fauntleroy. "Are _you_ a banker? What
business have you to offer an opinion on the matter? Do as I tell
you--leave it to me--bank with us--and draw for what you like. Stop! I
haven't done yet. When you open the account, speak to the head cashier.
Perhaps you may find he has got something to tell you. There! there! go
away--don't interrupt me--good-by--God bless you!"

That was his way--ah! poor fellow, that was his way.

I went to the head cashier the next morning when I opened my little
modicum of an account. He had received orders to pay my drafts without
reference to my balance. My checks, when I had overdrawn, were to
be privately shown to Mr. Fauntleroy. Do many young men who start in
business find their prosperous superiors ready to help them in that way?

Well, I got on--got on very fairly and steadily, being careful not to
venture out of my depth, and not to forget that small beginnings
may lead in time to great ends. A prospect of one of those great
ends--great, I mean, to such a small trader as I was at that
period--showed itself to me when I had been some little time in
business. In plain terms, I had a chance of joining in a first-rate
transaction, which would give me profit, and position, and everything
I wanted, provided I could qualify myself for engaging in it by getting
good security beforehand for a very large amount.

In this emergency, I thought of my kind friend, Mr. Fauntleroy, and went
to the bank, and saw him once more in his private room.

There he was at the same table, with the same heaps of papers about him,
and the same hearty, easy way of speaking his mind to you at once, in
the fewest possible words. I explained the business I came upon with
some little hesitation and nervousness, for I was afraid he might think
I was taking an unfair advantage of his former kindness to me. When I
had done, he just nodded his head, snatched up a blank sheet of paper,
scribbled a few lines on it in his rapid way, handed the writing to me,
and pushed me out of the room by the two shoulders before I could say
a single word. I looked at the paper in the outer office. It was my
security from the great banking-house for the whole amount, and for
more, if more was wanted.

I could not express my gratitude then, and I don't know that I can
describe it now. I can only say that it has outlived the crime, the
disgrace, and the awful death on the scaffold. I am grieved to speak
of that death at all; but I have no other alternative. The course of
my story must now lead me straight on to the later time, and to the
terrible discovery which exposed my benefactor and my friend to all
England as the forger Fauntleroy.

I must ask you to suppose a lapse of some time after the occurrence of
the events that I have just been relating. During this interval, thanks
to the kind assistance I had received at the outset, my position as a
man of business had greatly improved. Imagine me now, if you please, on
the high road to prosperity, with good large offices and a respectable
staff of clerks, and picture me to yourselves sitting alone in my
private room between four and five o'clock on a certain Saturday
afternoon.

All my letters had been written, all the people who had appointments
with me had been received. I was looking carelessly over the newspaper,
and thinking about going home, when one of my clerks came in, and said
that a stranger wished to see me immediately on very important business.

"Did he mention his name?" I inquired.

"No, sir."

"Did you not ask him for it?"

"Yes, sir. And he said you would be none the wiser if he told me what it
was."

"Does he look like a begging-letter writer?"

"He looks a little shabby, sir, but he doesn't talk at all like a
begging-letter writer. He spoke sharp and decided, sir, and said it
was in your interests that he came, and that you would deeply regret it
afterward if you refused to see him."

"He said that, did he? Show him in at once, then."

He was shown in immediately: a middling-sized man, with a sharp,
unwholesome-looking face, and with a flippant, reckless manner, dressed
in a style of shabby smartness, eying me with a bold look, and not so
overburdened with politeness as to trouble himself about taking off his
hat when he came in. I had never seen him before in my life, and I could
not form the slightest conjecture from his appearance to guide me toward
guessing his position in the world. He was not a gentleman, evidently;
but as to fixing his whereabouts in the infinite downward gradations
of vagabond existence in London, that was a mystery which I was totally
incompetent to solve.

"Is your name Trowbridge?" he began.

"Yes," I answered, dryly enough.

"Do you bank with Marsh, Stracey, Fauntleroy & Graham?"

"Why do you ask?"

"Answer my question, and you will know."

"Very well, I _do_ bank with Marsh, Stracey, Fauntleroy & Graham--and
what then?"

"Draw out every farthing of balance you have got before the bank closes
at five to-day."

I stared at him in speechless amazement. The words, for an instant,
absolutely petrified me.

"Stare as much as you like," he proceeded, coolly, "I mean what I say.
Look at your clock there. In twenty minutes it will strike five, and the
bank will be shut. Draw out every farthing, I tell you again, and look
sharp about it."

"Draw out my money!" I exclaimed, partially recovering myself. "Are you
in your right senses? Do you know that the firm I bank with represents
one of the first houses in the world? What do you mean--you, who are
a total stranger to me--by taking this extraordinary interest in my
affairs? If you want me to act on your advice, why don't you explain
yourself?"

"I have explained myself. Act on my advice or not, just as you like. It
doesn't matter to me. I have done what I promised, and there's an end of
it."

He turned to the door. The minute-hand of the clock was getting on from
the twenty minutes to the quarter.

"Done what you promised?" I repeated, getting up to stop him.

"Yes," he said, with his hand on the lock. "I have given my message.
Whatever happens, remember that. Good-afternoon."

He was gone before I could speak again.

I tried to call after him, but my speech suddenly failed me. It was very
foolish, it was very unaccountable, but there was something in the man's
last words which had more than half frightened me.

I looked at the clock. The minute-hand was on the quarter.

My office was just far enough from the bank to make it necessary for
me to decide on the instant. If I had had time to think, I am perfectly
certain that I should not have profited by the extraordinary warning
that had just been addressed to me. The suspicious appearance and
manners of the stranger; the outrageous improbability of the inference
against the credit of the bank toward which his words pointed; the
chance that some underhand attempt was being made, by some enemy of
mine, to frighten me into embroiling myself with one of my best friends,
through showing an ignorant distrust of the firm with which he was
associated as partner--all these considerations would unquestionably
have occurred to me if I could have found time for reflection; and, as
a necessary consequence, not one farthing of my balance would have been
taken from the keeping of the bank on that memorable day.

As it was, I had just time enough to act, and not a spare moment for
thinking. Some heavy payments made at the beginning of the week had so
far decreased my balance that the sum to my credit in the banking-book
barely reached fifteen hundred pounds. I snatched up my check-book,
wrote a draft for the whole amount, and ordered one of my clerks to
run to the bank and get it cashed before the doors closed. What impulse
urged me on, except the blind impulse of hurry and bewilderment, I can't
say. I acted mechanically, under the influence of the vague inexplicable
fear which the man's extraordinary parting words had aroused in me,
without stopping to analyze my own sensations--almost without knowing
what I was about. In three minutes from the time when the stranger had
closed my door the clerk had started for the bank, and I was alone again
in my room, with my hands as cold as ice and my head all in a whirl.

I did not recover my control over myself until the clerk came back with
the notes in his hand. He had just got to the bank in the nick of time.
As the cash for my draft was handed to him over the counter, the clock
struck five, and he heard the order given to close the doors.

When I had counted the bank-notes and had locked them up in the safe,
my better sense seemed to come back to me on a sudden. Never have I
reproached myself before or since as I reproached myself at that moment.
What sort of return had I made for Mr. Fauntleroy's fatherly kindness
to me? I had insulted him by the meanest, the grossest distrust of the
honor and the credit of his house, and that on the word of an
absolute stranger, of a vagabond, if ever there was one yet. It was
madness--downright madness in any man to have acted as I had done. I
could not account for my own inconceivably thoughtless proceeding. I
could hardly believe in it myself. I opened the safe and looked at the
bank-notes again. I locked it once more, and flung the key down on
the table in a fury of vexation against myself. There the money was,
upbraiding me with my own inconceivable folly, telling me in the
plainest terms that I had risked depriving myself of my best and kindest
friend henceforth and forever.

It was necessary to do something at once toward making all the atonement
that lay in my power. I felt that, as soon as I began to cool down a
little. There was but one plain, straight-forward way left now out of
the scrape in which I had been mad enough to involve myself. I took my
hat, and, without stopping an instant to hesitate, hurried off to the
bank to make a clean breast of it to Mr. Fauntleroy.

When I knocked at the private door and asked for him, I was told that
he had not been at the bank for the last two days. One of the other
partners was there, however, and was working at that moment in his own
room.

I sent in my name at once, and asked to see him. He and I were little
better than strangers to each other, and the interview was likely to be,
on that account, unspeakably embarrassing and humiliating on my side.
Still, I could not go home. I could not endure the inaction of the next
day, the Sunday, without having done my best on the spot to repair the
error into which my own folly had led me. Uncomfortable as I felt at
the prospect of the approaching interview, I should have been far more
uneasy in my mind if the partner had declined to see me.

To my relief, the bank porter returned with a message requesting me to
walk in.

What particular form my explanations and apologies took when I tried to
offer them is more than I can tell now. I was so confused and distressed
that I hardly knew what I was talking about at the time. The one
circumstance which I remember clearly is that I was ashamed to refer to
my interview with the strange man, and that I tried to account for my
sudden withdrawal of my balance by referring it to some inexplicable
panic, caused by mischievous reports which I was unable to trace to
their source, and which, for anything I knew to the contrary, might,
after all, have been only started in jest. Greatly to my surprise, the
partner did not seem to notice the lamentable lameness of my excuses,
and did not additionally confuse me by asking any questions. A weary,
absent look, which I had observed on his face when I came in, remained
on it while I was speaking. It seemed to be an effort to him even to
keep up the appearance of listening to me; and when, at last, I fairly
broke down in the middle of a sentence, and gave up the hope of getting
any further, all the answer he gave me was comprised in these few civil
commonplace words:

"Never mind, Mr. Trowbridge; pray don't think of apologizing. We are all
liable to make mistakes. Say nothing more about it, and bring the money
back on Monday if you still honor us with your confidence."

He looked down at his papers as if he was anxious to be alone again,
and I had no alternative, of course, but to take my leave immediately.
I went home, feeling a little easier in my mind now that I had paved the
way for making the best practical atonement in my power by bringing my
balance back the first thing on Monday morning. Still, I passed a weary
day on Sunday, reflecting, sadly enough, that I had not yet made my
peace with Mr. Fauntleroy. My anxiety to set myself right with my
generous friend was so intense that I risked intruding myself on his
privacy by calling at his town residence on the Sunday. He was not
there, and his servant could tell me nothing of his whereabouts. There
was no help for it now but to wait till his weekday duties brought him
back to the bank.

I went to business on Monday morning half an hour earlier than usual, so
great was my impatience to restore the amount of that unlucky draft to
my account as soon as possible after the bank opened.

On entering my office, I stopped with a startled feeling just inside the
door. Something serious had happened. The clerks, instead of being at
their desks as usual, were all huddled together in a group, talking to
each other with blank faces. When they saw me, they fell back behind my
managing man, who stepped forward with a circular in his hand.

"Have you heard the news, sir?" he said.

"No. What is it?"

He handed me the circular. My heart gave one violent throb the instant
I looked at it. I felt myself turn pale; I felt my knees trembling under
me.

Marsh, Stracey, Fauntleroy & Graham had stopped payment.

"The circular has not been issued more than half an hour," continued
my managing clerk. "I have just come from the bank, sir. The doors are
shut; there is no doubt about it. Marsh & Company have stopped this
morning."

I hardly heard him; I hardly knew who was talking to me. My strange
visitor of the Saturday had taken instant possession of all my thoughts,
and his words of warning seemed to be sounding once more in my ears.
This man had known the true condition of the bank when not another
soul outside the doors was aware of it! The last draft paid across the
counter of that ruined house, when the doors closed on Saturday, was
the draft that I had so bitterly reproached myself for drawing; the one
balance saved from the wreck was my balance. Where had the stranger got
the information that had saved me? and why had he brought it to my ears?

I was still groping, like a man in the dark, for an answer to those two
questions--I was still bewildered by the unfathomable mystery of doubt
into which they had plunged me--when the discovery of the stopping of
the bank was followed almost immediately by a second shock, far more
dreadful, far heavier to bear, so far as I was concerned, than the
first.

While I and my clerks were still discussing the failure of the firm,
two mercantile men, who were friends of mine, ran into the office, and
overwhelmed us with the news that one of the partners had been arrested
for forgery. Never shall I forget the terrible Monday morning when those
tidings reached me, and when I knew that the partner was Mr. Fauntleroy.

I was true to him--I can honestly say I was true to my belief in my
generous friend--when that fearful news reached me. My fellow-merchants
had got all the particulars of the arrest. They told me that two of Mr.
Fauntleroy's fellow-trustees had come up to London to make arrangements
about selling out some stock. On inquiring for Mr. Fauntleroy at the
banking-house, they had been informed that he was not there; and,
after leaving a message for him, they had gone into the City to make
an appointment with their stockbroker for a future day, when their
fellow-trustee might be able to attend. The stock-broker volunteered to
make certain business inquiries on the spot, with a view to saving as
much time as possible, and left them at his office to await his return.
He came back, looking very much amazed, with the information that the
stock had been sold out down to the last five hundred pounds. The affair
was instantly investigated; the document authorizing the selling out
was produced; and the two trustees saw on it, side by side with Mr.
Fauntleroy's signature, the forged signatures of their own names. This
happened on the Friday, and the trustees, without losing a moment, sent
the officers of justice in pursuit of Mr. Fauntleroy. He was arrested,
brought up before the magistrate, and remanded on the Saturday. On
the Monday I heard from my friends the particulars which I have just
narrated.

But the events of that one morning were not destined to end even yet. I
had discovered the failure of the bank and the arrest of Mr. Fauntleroy.
I was next to be enlightened, in the strangest and the saddest manner,
on the difficult question of his innocence or his guilt.

Before my friends had left my office--before I had exhausted the
arguments which my gratitude rather than my reason suggested to me in
favor of the unhappy prisoner--a note, marked immediate, was placed in
my hands, which silenced me the instant I looked at it. It was written
from the prison by Mr. Fauntleroy, and it contained two lines only,
entreating me to apply for the necessary order, and to go and see him
immediately.

I shall not attempt to describe the flutter of expectation, the strange
mixture of dread and hope that agitated me when I recognized his
handwriting, and discovered what it was that he desired me to do. I
obtained the order and went to the prison. The authorities, knowing the
dreadful situation in which he stood, were afraid of his attempting to
destroy himself, and had set two men to watch him. One came out as they
opened his cell door. The other, who was bound not to leave him, very
delicately and considerately affected to be looking out of window the
moment I was shown in.

He was sitting on the side of his bed, with his head drooping and his
hands hanging listlessly over his knees when I first caught sight of
him. At the sound of my approach he started to his feet, and, without
speaking a word, flung both his arms round my neck.

My heart swelled up.

"Tell me it's not true, sir! For God's sake, tell me it's not true!" was
all I could say to him.

He never answered--oh me! he never answered, and he turned away his
face.

There was one dreadful moment of silence. He still held his arms round
my neck, and on a sudden he put his lips close to my ear.

"Did you get your money out?" he whispered. "Were you in time on
Saturday afternoon?"

I broke free from him in the astonishment of hearing those words.

"What!" I cried out loud, forgetting the third person at the window.
"That man who brought the message--"

"Hush!" he said, putting his hand on my lips. "There was no better man
to be found, after the officers had taken me--I know no more about
him than you do--I paid him well as a chance messenger, and risked his
cheating me of his errand."

"_You_ sent him, then!"

"I sent him."

My story is over, gentlemen. There is no need for me to tell you that
Mr. Fauntleroy was found guilty, and that he died by the hangman's hand.
It was in my power to soothe his last moments in this world by taking on
myself the arrangement of some of his private affairs, which, while they
remained unsettled, weighed heavily on his mind. They had no connection
with the crimes he had committed, so I could do him the last little
service he was ever to accept at my hands with a clear conscience.

I say nothing in defense of his character--nothing in palliation of the
offense for which he suffered. But I cannot forget that in the time of
his most fearful extremity, when the strong arm of the law had already
seized him, he thought of the young man whose humble fortunes he had
helped to build; whose heartfelt gratitude he had fairly won; whose
simple faith he was resolved never to betray. I leave it to greater
intellects than mine to reconcile the anomaly of his reckless falsehood
toward others and his steadfast truth toward me. It is as certain as
that we sit here that one of Fauntleroy's last efforts in this world was
the effort he made to preserve me from being a loser by the trust that I
had placed in him. There is the secret of my strange tenderness for the
memory of a felon; that is why the word villain does somehow still grate
on my heart when I hear it associated with the name--the disgraced
name, I grant you--of the forger Fauntleroy. Pass the bottles, young
gentlemen, and pardon a man of the old school for having so long
interrupted your conversation with a story of the old time.


THE TENTH DAY.


THE storm has burst on us in its full fury. Last night the stout old
tower rocked on its foundations.

I hardly ventured to hope that the messenger who brings us our letters
from the village--the postman, as we call him--would make his appearance
this morning; but he came bravely through rain, hail and wind. The old
pony which he usually rides had refused to face the storm, and, sooner
than disappoint us, our faithful postman had boldly started for The Glen
Tower on foot. All his early life had been passed on board ship, and,
at sixty years of age, he had battled his way that morning through the
storm on shore as steadily and as resolutely as ever he had battled it
in his youth through the storm at sea.

I opened the post-bag eagerly. There were two letters for Jessie from
young lady friends; a letter for Owen from a charitable society; a
letter to me upon business; and--on this last day, of all others--no
newspaper!

I sent directly to the kitchen (where the drenched and weary postman was
receiving the hospitable attentions of the servants) to make inquiries.
The disheartening answer returned was that the newspaper could not have
arrived as usual by the morning's post, or it must have been put into
the bag along with the letters. No such accident as this had occurred,
except on one former occasion, since the beginning of the year. And
now, on the very day when I might have looked confidently for news of
George's ship, when the state of the weather made the finding of that
news of the last importance to my peace of mind, the paper, by some
inconceivable fatality, had failed to reach me! If there had been the
slightest chance of borrowing a copy in the village, I should have
gone there myself through the tempest to get it. If there had been the
faintest possibility of communicating, in that frightful weather, with
the distant county town, I should have sent there or gone there myself.
I even went the length of speaking to the groom, an old servant whom
I knew I could trust. The man stared at me in astonishment, and then
pointed through the window to the blinding hail and the writhing trees.

"No horse that ever was foaled, sir," he said, "would face _that_ for
long. It's almost a miracle that the postman got here alive. He says
himself that he dursn't go back again. I'll try it, sir, if you order
me; but if an accident happens, please to remember, whatever becomes of
_me,_ that I warned you beforehand."

It was only too plain that the servant was right, and I dismissed him.
What I suffered from that one accident of the missing newspaper I am
ashamed to tell. No educated man can conceive how little his acquired
mental advantages will avail him against his natural human inheritance
of superstition, under certain circumstances of fear and suspense, until
he has passed the ordeal in his own proper person. We most of us soon
arrive at a knowledge of the extent of our strength, but we may pass a
lifetime and be still ignorant of the extent of our weakness.

Up to this time I had preserved self-control enough to hide the real
state of my feelings from our guest; but the arrival of the tenth day,
and the unexpected trial it had brought with it, found me at the end of
my resources. Jessie's acute observation soon showed her that something
had gone wrong, and she questioned me on the subject directly. My mind
was in such a state of confusion that no excuse occurred to me. I left
her precipitately, and entreated Owen and Morgan to keep her in their
company, and out of mine, for the rest of the day. My strength to
preserve my son's secret had failed me, and my only chance of resisting
the betrayal of it lay in the childish resource of keeping out of
the way. I shut myself into my room till I could bear it no longer. I
watched my opportunity, and paid stolen visits over and over again to
the barometer in the hall. I mounted to Morgan's rooms at the top of the
tower, and looked out hopelessly through rain-mist and scud for signs
of a carriage on the flooded valley-road below us. I stole down again to
the servants' hall, and questioned the old postman (half-tipsy by this
time with restorative mulled ale) about his past experience of storms
at sea; drew him into telling long, rambling, wearisome stories,
not one-tenth part of which I heard; and left him with my nervous
irritability increased tenfold by his useless attempts to interest and
inform me. Hour by hour, all through that miserable day, I opened doors
and windows to feel for myself the capricious changes of the storm from
worse to better, and from better to worse again. Now I sent once more
for the groom, when it looked lighter; and now I followed him hurriedly
to the stables, to countermand my own rash orders. My thoughts seemed
to drive over my mind as the rain drove over the earth; the confusion
within me was the image in little of the mightier turmoil that raged
outside.

Before we assembled at the dinner-table, Owen whispered to me that he
had made my excuses to our guest, and that I need dread nothing more
than a few friendly inquiries about my health when I saw her again. The
meal was dispatched hastily and quietly. Toward dusk the storm began to
lessen, and for a moment the idea of sending to the town occurred to me
once more. But, now that the obstacle of weather had been removed, the
obstacle of darkness was set up in its place. I felt this; I felt that a
few more hours would decide the doubt about George, so far as this last
day was concerned, and I determined to wait a little longer, having
already waited so long. My resolution was the more speedily taken in
this matter, as I had now made up my mind, in sheer despair, to tell
my son's secret to Jessie if he failed to return before she left us.
My reason warned me that I should put myself and my guest in a false
position by taking this step, but something stronger than my reason
forbade me to let her go back to the gay world and its temptations
without first speaking to her of George in the lamentable event of
George not being present to speak for himself.

We were a sad and silent little company when the clock struck eight that
night, and when we met for the last time to hear the last story.
The shadow of the approaching farewell--itself the shade of the long
farewell--rested heavily on our guest's spirits. The gay dresses which
she had hitherto put on to honor our little ceremony were all packed
up, and the plain gown she wore kept the journey of the morrow cruelly
before her eyes and ours. A quiet melancholy shed its tenderness over
her bright young face as she drew the last number, for form's sake,
out of the bowl, and handed it to Owen with a faint smile. Even our
positions at the table were altered now. Under the pretense that the
light hurt my eyes, I moved back into a dim corner, to keep my anxious
face out of view. Morgan, looking at me hard, and muttering under his
breath, "Thank Heaven, I never married!" stole his chair by degrees,
with rough, silent kindness, nearer and nearer to mine. Jessie, after a
moment's hesitation, vacated her place next, and, saying that she wanted
to sit close to one of us on the farewell night, took a chair at Owen's
side. Sad! sad! we had instinctively broken up already, so far as our
places at the table were concerned, before the reading of the last story
had so much as begun.

It was a relief when Owen' s quiet voice stole over the weary silence,
and pleaded for our attention to the occupation of the night.

"Number Six," he said, "is the number that chance has left to remain
till the last. The manuscript to which it refers is not, as you may see,
in my handwriting. It consists entirely of passages from the Diary of a
poor hard-working girl--passages which tell an artless story of love
and friendship in humble life. When that story has come to an end, I may
inform you how I became possessed of it. If I did so now, I should only
forestall one important part of the interest of the narrative. I have
made no attempt to find a striking title for it. It is called, simply
and plainly, after the name of the writer of the Diary--the Story of
Anne Rodway."

In the short pause that Owen made before he began to read, I listened
anxiously for the sound of a traveler's approach outside. At short
intervals, all through the story, I listened and listened again. Still,
nothing caught my ear but the trickle of the rain and the rush of the
sweeping wind through the valley, sinking gradually lower and lower as
the night advanced.




BROTHER OWEN'S STORY of ANNE RODWAY.

[TAKEN FROM HER DIARY.]


...MARCH 3d, 1840. A long letter today from Robert, which surprised
and vexed me so that I have been sadly behindhand with my work ever
since. He writes in worse spirits than last time, and absolutely
declares that he is poorer even than when he went to America, and that
he has made up his mind to come home to London.

How happy I should be at this news, if he only returned to me a
prosperous man! As it is, though I love him dearly, I cannot look
forward to the meeting him again, disappointed and broken down, and
poorer than ever, without a feeling almost of dread for both of us. I
was twenty-six last birthday and he was thirty-three, and there seems
less chance now than ever of our being married. It is all I can do to
keep myself by my needle; and his prospects, since he failed in the
small stationery business three years ago, are worse, if possible, than
mine.

Not that I mind so much for myself; women, in all ways of life, and
especially in my dressmaking way, learn, I think, to be more patient
than men. What I dread is Robert's despondency, and the hard struggle
he will have in this cruel city to get his bread, let alone making
money enough to marry me. So little as poor people want to set up in
housekeeping and be happy together, it seems hard that they can't get it
when they are honest and hearty, and willing to work. The clergyman said
in his sermon last Sunday evening that all things were ordered for the
best, and we are all put into the stations in life that are properest
for us. I suppose he was right, being a very clever gentleman who fills
the church to crowding; but I think I should have understood him better
if I had not been very hungry at the time, in consequence of my own
station in life being nothing but plain needlewoman.


March 4th. Mary Mallinson came down to my room to take a cup of tea with
me. I read her bits of Robert's letter, to show her that, if she has her
troubles, I have mine too; but I could not succeed in cheering her.
She says she is born to misfortune, and that, as long back as she can
remember, she has never had the least morsel of luck to be thankful for.
I told her to go and look in my glass, and to say if she had nothing
to be thankful for then; for Mary is a very pretty girl, and would look
still prettier if she could be more cheerful and dress neater. However,
my compliment did no good. She rattled her spoon impatiently in her
tea-cup, and said, "If I was only as good a hand at needle-work as you
are, Anne, I would change faces with the ugliest girl in London." "Not
you!" says I, laughing. She looked at me for a moment, and shook her
head, and was out of the room before I could get up and stop her. She
always runs off in that way when she is going to cry, having a kind of
pride about letting other people see her in tears.


March 5th. A fright about Mary. I had not seen her all day, as she does
not work at the same place where I do; and in the evening she never came
down to have tea with me, or sent me word to go to her; so, just before
I went to bed, I ran upstairs to say good-night.

She did not answer when I knocked; and when I stepped softly in the room
I saw her in bed, asleep, with her work not half done, lying about the
room in the untidiest way. There was nothing remarkable in that, and I
was just going away on tiptoe, when a tiny bottle and wine-glass on the
chair by her bedside caught my eye. I thought she was ill and had been
taking physic, and looked at the bottle. It was marked in large letters,
"Laudanum--Poison."

My heart gave a jump as if it was going to fly out of me. I laid hold of
her with both hands, and shook her with all my might. She was sleeping
heavily, and woke slowly, as it seemed to me--but still she did wake.
I tried to pull her out of bed, having heard that people ought to
be always walked up and down when they have taken laudanum but she
resisted, and pushed me away violently.

"Anne!" says she, in a fright. "For gracious sake, what's come to you!
Are you out of your senses?"

"Oh, Mary! Mary!" says I, holding up the bottle before her, "if I hadn't
come in when I did--" And I laid hold of her to shake her again.

She looked puzzled at me for a moment--then smiled (the first time I had
seen her do so for many a long day)--then put her arms round my neck.

"Don't be frightened about me, Anne," she says; "I am not worth it, and
there is no need."

"No need!" says I, out of breath--"no need, when the bottle has got
Poison marked on it!"

"Poison, dear, if you take it all," says Mary, looking at me very
tenderly, "and a night's rest if you only take a little."

I watched her for a moment, doubtful whether I ought to believe what she
said or to alarm the house. But there was no sleepiness now in her eyes,
and nothing drowsy in her voice; and she sat up in bed quite easily,
without anything to support her.

"You have given me a dreadful fright, Mary," says I, sitting down by
her in the chair, and beginning by this time to feel rather faint after
being startled so.

She jumped out of bed to get me a drop of water, and kissed me, and said
how sorry she was, and how undeserving of so much interest being taken
in her. At the same time, she tried to possess herself of the laudanum
bottle which I still kept cuddled up tight in my own hands.

"No," says I. "You have got into a low-spirited, despairing way. I won't
trust you with it."

"I am afraid I can't do without it," says Mary, in her usual quiet,
hopeless voice. "What with work that I can't get through as I ought, and
troubles that I can't help thinking of, sleep won't come to me unless I
take a few drops out of that bottle. Don't keep it away from me, Anne;
it's the only thing in the world that makes me forget myself."

"Forget yourself!" says I. "You have no right to talk in that way, at
your age. There's something horrible in the notion of a girl of eighteen
sleeping with a bottle of laudanum by her bedside every night. We all of
us have our troubles. Haven't I got mine?"

"You can do twice the work I can, twice as well as me," says Mary. "You
are never scolded and rated at for awkwardness with your needle, and I
always am. You can pay for your room every week, and I am three weeks in
debt for mine."

"A little more practice," says I, "and a little more courage, and you
will soon do better. You have got all your life before you--"

"I wish I was at the end of it," says she, breaking in. "I am alone in
the world, and my life's no good to me."

"You ought to be ashamed of yourself for saying so," says I. "Haven't
you got me for a friend? Didn't I take a fancy to you when first you
left your step-mother and came to lodge in this house? And haven't I
been sisters with you ever since? Suppose you are alone in the world, am
I much better off? I'm an orphan like you. I've almost as many things
in pawn as you; and, if your pockets are empty, mine have only got
ninepence in them, to last me for all the rest of the week."

"Your father and mother were honest people," says Mary, obstinately. "My
mother ran away from home, and died in a hospital. My father was always
drunk, and always beating me. My step-mother is as good as dead, for all
she cares about me. My only brother is thousands of miles away in foreign
parts, and never writes to me, and never helps me with a farthing.
My sweetheart--"

She stopped, and the red flew into her face. I knew, if she went on that
way, she would only get to the saddest part of her sad story, and give
both herself and me unnecessary pain.

"_My_ sweetheart is too poor to marry me, Mary," I said, "so I'm not
so much to be envied even there. But let's give over disputing which is
worst off. Lie down in bed, and let me tuck you up. I'll put a stitch or
two into that work of yours while you go to sleep."

Instead of doing what I told her, she burst out crying (being very like
a child in some of her ways), and hugged me so tight round the neck that
she quite hurt me. I let her go on till she had worn herself out,
and was obliged to lie down. Even then, her last few words before she
dropped off to sleep were such as I was half sorry, half frightened to
hear.

"I won't plague you long, Anne," she said. "I haven't courage to go
out of the world as you seem to fear I shall; but I began my life
wretchedly, and wretchedly I am sentenced to end it."

It was of no use lecturing her again, for she closed her eyes.

I tucked her up as neatly as I could, and put her petticoat over her,
for the bedclothes were scanty, and her hands felt cold. She looked so
pretty and delicate as she fell asleep that it quite made my heart ache
to see her, after such talk as we had held together. I just waited long
enough to be quite sure that she was in the land of dreams, then emptied
the horrible laudanum bottle into the grate, took up her half-done work,
and, going out softly, left her for that night.


March 6th. Sent off a long letter to Robert, begging and entreating
him not to be so down-hearted, and not to leave America without
making another effort. I told him I could bear any trial except the
wretchedness of seeing him come back a helpless, broken-down man, trying
uselessly to begin life again when too old for a change.

It was not till after I had posted my own letter, and read over part of
Robert's again, that the suspicion suddenly floated across me, for the
first time, that he might have sailed for England immediately after
writing to me. There were expressions in the letter which seemed to
indicate that he had some such headlong project in his mind. And
yet, surely, if it were so, I ought to have noticed them at the first
reading. I can only hope I am wrong in my present interpretation of much
of what he has written to me--hope it earnestly for both our sakes.

This has been a doleful day for me. I have been uneasy about Robert and
uneasy about Mary. My mind is haunted by those last words of hers: "I
began my life wretchedly, and wretchedly I am sentenced to end it." Her
usual melancholy way of talking never produced the same impression on
me that I feel now. Perhaps the discovery of the laudanum-bottle is the
cause of this. I would give many a hard day's work to know what to do
for Mary's good. My heart warmed to her when we first met in the
same lodging-house two years ago, and, although I am not one of the
over-affectionate sort myself, I feel as if I could go to the world's
end to serve that girl. Yet, strange to say, if I was asked why I was so
fond of her, I don't think I should know how to answer the question.


March 7th. I am almost ashamed to write it down, even in this journal,
which no eyes but mine ever look on; yet I must honestly confess to
myself that here I am, at nearly one in the morning, sitting up in a
state of serious uneasiness because Mary has not yet come home.

I walked with her this morning to the place where she works, and tried
to lead her into talking of the relations she has got who are still
alive. My motive in doing this was to see if she dropped anything in
the course of conversation which might suggest a way of helping
her interests with those who are bound to give her all reasonable
assistance. But the little I could get her to say to me led to nothing.
Instead of answering my questions about her step-mother and her brother,
she persisted at first, in the strangest way, in talking of her father,
who was dead and gone, and of one Noah Truscott, who had been the worst
of all the bad friends he had, and had taught him to drink and game.
When I did get her to speak of her brother, she only knew that he had
gone out to a place called Assam, where they grew tea. How he was doing,
or whether he was there still, she did not seem to know, never having
heard a word from him for years and years past.

As for her step-mother, Mary not unnaturally flew into a passion the
moment I spoke of her. She keeps an eating-house at Hammersmith, and
could have given Mary good employment in it; but she seems always to
have hated her, and to have made her life so wretched with abuse and ill
usage that she had no refuge left but to go away from home, and do her
best to make a living for herself. Her husband (Mary's father) appears
to have behaved badly to her, and, after his death, she took the wicked
course of revenging herself on her step-daughter. I felt, after this,
that it was impossible Mary could go back, and that it was the hard
necessity of her position, as it is of mine, that she should struggle
on to make a decent livelihood without assistance from any of her
relations. I confessed as much as this to her; but I added that I would
try to get her employment with the persons for whom I work, who pay
higher wages, and show a little more indulgence to those under them than
the people to whom she is now obliged to look for support.

I spoke much more confidently than I felt about being able to do this,
and left her, as I thought, in better spirits than usual. She promised
to be back to-night to tea at nine o'clock, and now it is nearly one in
the morning, and she is not home yet. If it was any other girl I should
not feel uneasy, for I should make up my mind that there was extra work
to be done in a hurry, and that they were keeping her late, and I should
go to bed. But Mary is so unfortunate in everything that happens to her,
and her own melancholy talk about herself keeps hanging on my mind so,
that I have fears on her account which would not distress me about any
one else. It seems inexcusably silly to think such a thing, much more
to write it down; but I have a kind of nervous dread upon me that some
accident--

What does that loud knocking at the street door mean? And those voices
and heavy footsteps outside? Some lodger who has lost his key, I
suppose. And yet, my heart--What a coward I have become all of a sudden!

More knocking and louder voices. I must run to the door and see what it
is. Oh, Mary! Mary! I hope I am not going to have another fright about
you, but I feel sadly like it.


March 8th.

March 9th.

March 10th.

March 11th. Oh me! all the troubles I have ever had in my life are as
nothing to the trouble I am in now. For three days I have not been able
to write a single line in this journal, which I have kept so regularly
ever since I was a girl. For three days I have not once thought of
Robert--I, who am always thinking of him at other times.

My poor, dear, unhappy Mary! the worst I feared for you on that night
when I sat up alone was far below the dreadful calamity that has really
happened. How can I write about it, with my eyes full of tears and my
hand all of a tremble? I don't even know why I am sitting down at my
desk now, unless it is habit that keeps me to my old every-day task,
in spite of all the grief and fear which seem to unfit me entirely for
performing it.

The people of the house were asleep and lazy on that dreadful night,
and I was the first to open the door. Never, never could I describe in
writing, or even say in plain talk, though it is so much easier, what I
felt when I saw two policemen come in, carrying between them what seemed
to me to be a dead girl, and that girl Mary! I caught hold of her, and
gave a scream that must have alarmed the whole house; for frightened
people came crowding downstairs in their night-dresses. There was a
dreadful confusion and noise of loud talking, but I heard nothing
and saw nothing till I had got her into my room and laid on my bed. I
stooped down, frantic-like, to kiss her, and saw an awful mark of a blow
on the left temple, and felt, at the same time, a feeble flutter of her
breath on my cheek. The discovery that she was not dead seemed to give
me back my senses again. I told one of the policemen where the nearest
doctor was to be found, and sat down by the bedside while he was gone,
and bathed her poor head with cold water. She never opened her eyes, or
moved, or spoke; but she breathed, and that was enough for me, because
it was enough for life.

The policeman left in the room was a big, thick-voiced, pompous man,
with a horrible unfeeling pleasure in hearing himself talk before an
assembly of frightened, silent people. He told us how he had found her,
as if he had been telling a story in a tap-room, and began with saying:
"I don't think the young woman was drunk."

Drunk! My Mary, who might have been a born lady for all the spirits she
ever touched--drunk! I could have struck the man for uttering the word,
with her lying--poor suffering angel--so white, and still, and helpless
before him. As it was, I gave him a look, but he was too stupid to
understand it, and went droning on, saying the same thing over and over
again in the same words. And yet the story of how they found her was,
like all the sad stories I have ever heard told in real life, so very,
very short. They had just seen her lying along on the curbstone a few
streets off, and had taken her to the station-house. There she had been
searched, and one of my cards, that I gave to ladies who promise me
employment, had been found in her pocket, and so they had brought her
to our house. This was all the man really had to tell. There was nobody
near her when she was found, and no evidence to show how the blow on her
temple had been inflicted.

What a time it was before the doctor came, and how dreadful to hear him
say, after he had looked at her, that he was afraid all the medical men
in the world could be of no use here! He could not get her to swallow
anything; and the more he tried to bring her back to her senses the
less chance there seemed of his succeeding. He examined the blow on her
temple, and said he thought she must have fallen down in a fit of some
sort, and struck her head against the pavement, and so have given her
brain what he was afraid was a fatal shake. I asked what was to be done
if she showed any return to sense in the night. He said: "Send for me
directly"; and stopped for a little while afterward stroking her head
gently with his hand, and whispering to himself: "Poor girl, so young
and so pretty!" I had felt, some minutes before, as if I could have
struck the policeman, and I felt now as if I could have thrown my arms
round the doctor's neck and kissed him. I did put out my hand when he
took up his hat, and he shook it in the friendliest way. "Don't hope, my
dear," he said, and went out.

The rest of the lodgers followed him, all silent and shocked, except
the inhuman wretch who owns the house and lives in idleness on the high
rents he wrings from poor people like us.

"She's three weeks in my debt," says he, with a frown and an oath.
"Where the devil is my money to come from now?" Brute! brute!

I had a long cry alone with her that seemed to ease my heart a little.
She was not the least changed for the better when I had wiped away the
tears and could see her clearly again. I took up her right hand,
which lay nearest to me. It was tight clinched. I tried to unclasp the
fingers, and succeeded after a little time. Something dark fell out of
the palm of her hand as I straightened it.

I picked the thing up, and smoothed it out, and saw that it was an end
of a man's cravat.

A very old, rotten, dingy strip of black silk, with thin lilac lines,
all blurred and deadened with dirt, running across and across the stuff
in a sort of trellis-work pattern. The small end of the cravat was
hemmed in the usual way, but the other end was all jagged, as if the
morsel then in my hands had been torn off violently from the rest of
the stuff. A chill ran all over me as I looked at it; for that poor,
stained, crumpled end of a cravat seemed to be saying to me, as though
it had been in plain words: "If she dies, she has come to her death by
foul means, and I am the witness of it."

I had been frightened enough before, lest she should die suddenly and
quietly without my knowing it, while we were alone together; but I got
into a perfect agony now, for fear this last worst affliction should
take me by surprise. I don't suppose five minutes passed all that woful
night through without my getting up and putting my cheek close to her
mouth, to feel if the faint breaths still fluttered out of it. They came
and went just the same as at first, though the fright I was in often
made me fancy they were stilled forever.

Just as the church clocks were striking four I was startled by seeing
the room door open. It was only Dusty Sal (as they call her in the
house), the maid-of-all-work. She was wrapped up in the blanket off her
bed; her hair was all tumbled over her face, and her eyes were heavy
with sleep as she came up to the bedside where I was sitting.

"I've two hours good before I begin to work," says she, in her hoarse,
drowsy voice, "and I've come to sit up and take my turn at watching her.
You lay down and get some sleep on the rug. Here's my blanket for you. I
don't mind the cold--it will keep me awake."

"You are very kind--very, very kind and thoughtful, Sally," says I, "but
I am too wretched in my mind to want sleep, or rest, or to do anything
but wait where I am, and try and hope for the best."

"Then I'll wait, too," says Sally. "I must do something; if there's
nothing to do but waiting, I'll wait."

And she sat down opposite me at the foot of the bed, and drew the
blanket close round her with a shiver.

"After working so hard as you do, I'm sure you must want all the little
rest you can get," says I.

"Excepting only you," says Sally, putting her heavy arm very clumsily,
but very gently at the same time, round Mary's feet, and looking hard at
the pale, still face on the pillow. "Excepting you, she's the only soul
in this house as never swore at me, or give me a hard word that I can
remember. When you made puddings on Sundays, and give her half, she
always give me a bit. The rest of 'em calls me Dusty Sal. Excepting
only you, again, she always called me Sally, as if she knowed me in a
friendly way. I ain't no good here, but I ain't no harm, neither; and I
shall take my turn at the sitting up--that's what I shall do!"

She nestled her head down close at Mary's feet as she spoke those words,
and said no more. I once or twice thought she had fallen asleep, but
whenever I looked at her her heavy eyes were always wide open. She never
changed her position an inch till the church clocks struck six; then she
gave one little squeeze to Mary's feet with her arm, and shuffled out of
the room without a word. A minute or two after, I heard her down below,
lighting the kitchen fire just as usual.

A little later the doctor stepped over before his breakfast-time to see
if there had been any change in the night. He only shook his head when
he looked at her as if there was no hope. Having nobody else to consult
that I could put trust in, I showed him the end of the cravat, and told
him of the dreadful suspicion that had arisen in my mind when I found it
in her hand.

"You must keep it carefully, and produce it at the inquest," he said.
"I don't know, though, that it is likely to lead to anything. The bit
of stuff may have been lying on the pavement near her, and her hand
may have unconsciously clutched it when she fell. Was she subject to
fainting-fits?"

"Not more so, sir, than other young girls who are hard-worked and
anxious, and weakly from poor living," I answered.

"I can't say that she may not have got that blow from a fall," the
doctor went on, locking at her temple again. "I can't say that it
presents any positive appearance of having been inflicted by another
person. It will be important, however, to ascertain what state of
health she was in last night. Have you any idea where she was yesterday
evening?"

I told him where she was employed at work, and said I imagined she must
have been kept there later than usual.

"I shall pass the place this morning" said the doctor, "in going
my rounds among my patients, and I'll just step in and make some
inquiries."

I thanked him, and we parted. Just as he was closing the door he looked
in again.

"Was she your sister?" he asked.

"No, sir, only my dear friend."

He said nothing more, but I heard him sigh as he shut the door softly.
Perhaps he once had a sister of his own, and lost her? Perhaps she was
like Mary in the face?

The doctor was hours gone away. I began to feel unspeakably forlorn and
helpless, so much so as even to wish selfishly that Robert might really
have sailed from America, and might get to London in time to assist and
console me.

No living creature came into the room but Sally. The first time she
brought me some tea; the second and third times she only looked in to
see if there was any change, and glanced her eye toward the bed. I had
never known her so silent before; it seemed almost as if this dreadful
accident had struck her dumb. I ought to have spoken to her, perhaps,
but there was something in her face that daunted me; and, besides, the
fever of anxiety I was in began to dry up my lips, as if they would
never be able to shape any words again. I was still tormented by that
frightful apprehension of the past night, that she would die without my
knowing it--die without saying one word to clear up the awful mystery
of this blow, and set the suspicions at rest forever which I still felt
whenever my eyes fell on the end of the old cravat.

At last the doctor came back.

"I think you may safely clear your mind of any doubts to which that
bit of stuff may have given rise," he said. "She was, as you supposed,
detained late by her employers, and she fainted in the work-room. They
most unwisely and unkindly let her go home alone, without giving her
any stimulant, as soon as she came to her senses again. Nothing is more
probable, under these circumstances, than that she should faint a second
time on her way here. A fall on the pavement, without any friendly arm
to break it, might have produced even a worse injury than the injury
we see. I believe that the only ill usage to which the poor girl was
exposed was the neglect she met with in the work-room."

"You speak very reasonably, I own, sir," said I, not yet quite
convinced. "Still, perhaps she may--"

"My poor girl, I told you not to hope," said the doctor, interrupting
me. He went to Mary, and lifted up her eyelids, and looked at her eyes
while he spoke; then added, "If you still doubt how she came by that
blow, do not encourage the idea that any words of hers will ever
enlighten you. She will never speak again."

"Not dead! Oh, sir, don't say she's dead!"

"She is dead to pain and sorrow--dead to speech and recognition. There
is more animation in the life of the feeblest insect that flies than
in the life that is left in her. When you look at her now, try to think
that she is in heaven. That is the best comfort I can give you, after
telling the hard truth."

I did not believe him. I could not believe him. So long as she breathed
at all, so long I was resolved to hope. Soon after the doctor was gone,
Sally came in again, and found me listening (if I may call it so) at
Mary's lips. She went to where my little hand-glass hangs against the
wall, took it down, and gave it to me.

"See if the breath marks it," she said.

Yes; her breath did mark it, but very faintly. Sally cleaned the
glass with her apron, and gave it back to me. As she did so, she half
stretched out her hand to Mary's face, but drew it in again suddenly, as
if she was afraid of soiling Mary's delicate skin with her hard, horny
fingers. Going out, she stopped at the foot of the bed, and scraped away
a little patch of mud that was on one of Mary's shoes.

"I always used to clean 'em for her," said Sally, "to save her hands
from getting blacked. May I take 'em off now, and clean 'em again?"

I nodded my head, for my heart was too heavy to speak. Sally took the
shoes off with a slow, awkward tenderness, and went out.

An hour or more must have passed, when, putting the glass over her lips
again, I saw no mark on it. I held it closer and closer. I dulled it
accidentally with my own breath, and cleaned it. I held it over her
again. Oh, Mary, Mary, the doctor was right! I ought to have only
thought of you in heaven!

Dead, without a word, without a sign--without even a look to tell the
true story of the blow that killed her! I could not call to anybody, I
could not cry, I could not so much as put the glass down and give her
a kiss for the last time. I don't know how long I had sat there with
my eyes burning, and my hands deadly cold, when Sally came in with the
shoes cleaned, and carried carefully in her apron for fear of a soil
touching them. At the sight of that--

I can write no more. My tears drop so fast on the paper that I can see
nothing.


March 12th. She died on the afternoon of the eighth. On the morning of
the ninth, I wrote, as in duty bound, to her stepmother at Hammersmith.
There was no answer. I wrote again; my letter was returned to me this
morning unopened. For all that woman cares, Mary might be buried with
a pauper's funeral; but this shall never be, if I pawn everything about
me, down to the very gown that is on my back. The bare thought of Mary
being buried by the workhouse gave me the spirit to dry my eyes, and go
to the undertaker's, and tell him how I was placed. I said if he would
get me an estimate of all that would have to be paid, from first
to last, for the cheapest decent funeral that could be had, I would
undertake to raise the money. He gave me the estimate, written in this
way, like a common bill:

    A walking funeral complete............Pounds 1 13 8
    Vestry.......................................0  4 4
    Rector.......................................0  4 4
    Clerk........................................0  1 0
    Sexton.......................................0  1 0
    Beadle.......................................0  1 0
    Bell.........................................0  1 0
    Six feet of ground...........................0  2 0

     ------    Total                      Pounds 2  8 4

If I had the heart to give any thought to it, I should be inclined to
wish that the Church could afford to do without so many small charges
for burying poor people, to whose friends even shillings are of
consequence. But it is useless to complain; the money must be raised
at once. The charitable doctor--a poor man himself, or he would not
be living in our neighborhood--has subscribed ten shillings toward the
expenses; and the coroner, when the inquest was over, added five more.
Perhaps others may assist me. If not, I have fortunately clothes and
furniture of my own to pawn. And I must set about parting with them
without delay, for the funeral is to be to-morrow, the thirteenth.

The funeral--Mary's funeral! It is well that the straits and
difficulties I am in keep my mind on the stretch. If I had leisure to
grieve, where should I find the courage to face to-morrow?

Thank God they did not want me at the inquest. The verdict given, with
the doctor, the policeman, and two persons from the place where she
worked, for witnesses, was Accidental Death. The end of the cravat was
produced, and the coroner said that it was certainly enough to suggest
suspicion; but the jury, in the absence of any positive evidence, held
to the doctor's notion that she had fainted and fallen down, and so got
the blow on her temple. They reproved the people where Mary worked
for letting her go home alone, without so much as a drop of brandy to
support her, after she had fallen into a swoon from exhaustion before
their eyes. The coroner added, on his own account, that he thought the
reproof was thoroughly deserved. After that, the cravat-end was given
back to me by my own desire, the police saying that they could make no
investigations with such a slight clew to guide them. They may think so,
and the coroner, and doctor, and jury may think so; but, in spite of all
that has passed, I am now more firmly persuaded than ever that there
is some dreadful mystery in connection with that blow on my poor lost
Mary's temple which has yet to be revealed, and which may come to be
discovered through this very fragment of a cravat that I found in her
hand. I cannot give any good reason for why I think so, but I know
that if I had been one of the jury at the inquest, nothing should have
induced me to consent to such a verdict as Accidental Death.

After I had pawned my things, and had begged a small advance of wages
at the place where I work to make up what was still wanting to pay
for Mary's funeral, I thought I might have had a little quiet time to
prepare myself as I best could for to-morrow. But this was not to be.
When I got home the landlord met me in the passage. He was in liquor,
and more brutal and pitiless in his way of looking and speaking than
ever I saw him before.

"So you're going to be fool enough to pay for her funeral, are you?"
were his first words to me.

I was too weary and heart-sick to answer; I only tried to get by him to
my own door.

"If you can pay for burying her," he went on, putting himself in front
of me, "you can pay her lawful debts. She owes me three weeks' rent.
Suppose you raise the money for that next, and hand it over to me? I'm
not joking, I can promise you. I mean to have my rent; and, if somebody
don't pay it, I'll have her body seized and sent to the workhouse!"

Between terror and disgust, I thought I should have dropped to the floor
at his feet. But I determined not to let him see how he had horrified
me, if I could possibly control myself. So I mustered resolution enough
to answer that I did not believe the law gave him any such wicked power
over the dead.

"I'll teach you what the law is!" he broke in; "you'll raise money to
bury her like a born lady, when she's died in my debt, will you? And you
think I'll let my rights be trampled upon like that, do you? See if I
do! I'll give you till to-night to think about it. If I don't have the
three weeks she owes before to-morrow, dead or alive, she shall go to
the workhouse!"

This time I managed to push by him, and get to my own room, and lock
the door in his face. As soon as I was alone I fell into a breathless,
suffocating fit of crying that seemed to be shaking me to pieces. But
there was no good and no help in tears; I did my best to calm myself
after a little while, and tried to think who I should run to for help
and protection.

The doctor was the first friend I thought of; but I knew he was always
out seeing his patients of an afternoon. The beadle was the next person
who came into my head. He had the look of being a very dignified,
unapproachable kind of man when he came about the inquest; but he talked
to me a little then, and said I was a good girl, and seemed, I really
thought, to pity me. So to him I determined to apply in my great danger
and distress.

Most fortunately, I found him at home. When I told him of the landlord's
infamous threats, and of the misery I was suffering in consequence of
them, he rose up with a stamp of his foot, and sent for his gold-laced
cocked hat that he wears on Sundays, and his long cane with the ivory
top to it.

"I'll give it to him," said the beadle. "Come along with me, my dear.
I think I told you you were a good girl at the inquest--if I didn't, I
tell you so now. I'll give it to him! Come along with me."

And he went out, striding on with his cocked hat and his great cane, and
I followed him.

"Landlord!" he cries, the moment he gets into the passage, with a thump
of his cane on the floor, "landlord!" with a look all round him as if he
was King of England calling to a beast, "come out!"

The moment the landlord came out and saw who it was, his eye fixed on
the cocked hat, and he turned as pale as ashes.

"How dare you frighten this poor girl?" says the beadle. "How dare you
bully her at this sorrowful time with threatening to do what you know
you can't do? How dare you be a cowardly, bullying, braggadocio of an
unmanly landlord? Don't talk to me: I won't hear you. I'll pull you up,
sir. If you say another word to the young woman, I'll pull you up before
the authorities of this metropolitan parish. I've had my eye on you, and
the authorities have had their eye on you, and the rector has had his
eye on you. We don't like the look of your small shop round the corner;
we don't like the look of some of the customers who deal at it; we don't
like disorderly characters; and we don't by any manner of means like
you. Go away. Leave the young woman alone. Hold your tongue, or I'll
pull you up. If he says another word, or interferes with you again,
my dear, come and tell me; and, as sure as he's a bullying, unmanly,
braggadocio of a landlord, I'll pull him up."

With those words the beadle gave a loud cough to clear his throat, and
another thump of his cane on the floor, and so went striding out again
before I could open my lips to thank him. The landlord slunk back into
his room without a word. I was left alone and unmolested at last,
to strengthen myself for the hard trial of my poor love's funeral
to-morrow.


March 13th. It is all over. A week ago her head rested on my bosom.
It is laid in the churchyard now; the fresh earth lies heavy over her
grave. I and my dearest friend, the sister of my love, are parted in
this world forever.

I followed her funeral alone through the cruel, hustling streets. Sally,
I thought, might have offered to go with me, but she never so much as
came into my room. I did not like to think badly of her for this, and I
am glad I restrained myself; for, when we got into the churchyard, among
the two or three people who were standing by the open grave I saw Sally,
in her ragged gray shawl and her patched black bonnet. She did not seem
to notice me till the last words of the service had been read and the
clergyman had gone away; then she came up and spoke to me.

"I couldn't follow along with you," she said, looking at her ragged
shawl, "for I haven't a decent suit of clothes to walk in. I wish I
could get vent in crying for her like you, but I can't; all the crying's
been drudged and starved out of me long ago. Don't you think about
lighting your fire when you get home. I'll do that, and get you a drop
of tea to comfort you."

She seemed on the point of saying a kind word or two more, when, seeing
the beadle coming toward me, she drew back, as if she was afraid of him,
and left the churchyard.

"Here's my subscription toward the funeral," said the beadle, giving me
back his shilling fee. "Don't say anything about it, for it mightn't
be approved of in a business point of view, if it came to some people's
ears. Has the landlord said anything more to you? no, I thought not.
He's too polite a man to give me the trouble of pulling him up. Don't
stop crying here, my dear. Take the advice of a man familiar with
funerals, and go home."

I tried to take his advice, but it seemed like deserting Mary to go away
when all the rest forsook her.

I waited about till the earth was thrown in and the man had left the
place, then I returned to the grave. Oh, how bare and cruel it was,
without so much as a bit of green turf to soften it! Oh, how much harder
it seemed to live than to die, when I stood alone looking at the heavy
piled-up lumps of clay, and thinking of what was hidden beneath them!

I was driven home by my own despairing thoughts. The sight of Sally
lighting the fire in my room eased my heart a little. When she was gone,
I took up Robert's letter again to keep my mind employed on the only
subject in the world that has any interest for it now.

This fresh reading increased the doubts I had already felt relative
to his having remained in America after writing to me. My grief and
forlornness have made a strange alteration in my former feelings about
his coming back. I seem to have lost all my prudence and self-denial,
and to care so little about his poverty, and so much about himself, that
the prospect of his return is really the only comforting thought I have
now to support me. I know this is weak in me, and that his coming back
can lead to no good result for either of us; but he is the only living
being left me to love; and--I can't explain it--but I want to put my
arms round his neck and tell him about Mary.


March 14th. I locked up the end of the cravat in my writing-desk. No
change in the dreadful suspicions that the bare sight of it rouses in
me. I tremble if I so much as touch it.


March 15th, 16th, 17th. Work, work, work. If I don't knock up, I shall
be able to pay back the advance in another week; and then, with a little
more pinching in my daily expenses, I may succeed in saving a shilling
or two to get some turf to put over Mary's grave, and perhaps even a few
flowers besides to grow round it.


March 18th. Thinking of Robert all day long. Does this mean that he is
really coming back? If it does, reckoning the distance he is at from New
York, and the time ships take to get to England, I might see him by the
end of April or the beginning of May.


March 19th. I don't remember my mind running once on the end of the
cravat yesterday, and I am certain I never looked at it; yet I had the
strangest dream concerning it at night. I thought it was lengthened
into a long clew, like the silken thread that led to Rosamond's Bower.
I thought I took hold of it, and followed it a little way, and then got
frightened and tried to go back, but found that I was obliged, in spite
of myself, to go on. It led me through a place like the Valley of the
Shadow of Death, in an old print I remember in my mother's copy of
the Pilgrim's Progress. I seemed to be months and months following it
without any respite, till at last it brought me, on a sudden, face to
face with an angel whose eyes were like Mary's. He said to me, "Go on,
still; the truth is at the end, waiting for you to find it." I burst out
crying, for the angel had Mary's voice as well as Mary's eyes, and woke
with my heart throbbing and my cheeks all wet. What is the meaning of
this? Is it always superstitious, I wonder, to believe that dreams may
come true?

* * * * * * *

April 30th. I have found it! God knows to what results it may lead; but
it is as certain as that I am sitting here before my journal that I
have found the cravat from which the end in Mary's hand was torn. I
discovered it last night; but the flutter I was in, and the nervousness
and uncertainty I felt, prevented me from noting down this most
extraordinary and unexpected event at the time when it happened. Let me
try if I can preserve the memory of it in writing now.

I was going home rather late from where I work, when I suddenly
remembered that I had forgotten to buy myself any candles the evening
before, and that I should be left in the dark if I did not manage to
rectify this mistake in some way. The shop close to me, at which I
usually deal, would be shut up, I knew, before I could get to it; so I
determined to go into the first place I passed where candles were sold.
This turned out to be a small shop with two counters, which did business
on one side in the general grocery way, and on the other in the rag and
bottle and old iron line.

There were several customers on the grocery side when I went in, so I
waited on the empty rag side till I could be served. Glancing about me
here at the worthless-looking things by which I was surrounded, my eye
was caught by a bundle of rags lying on the counter, as if they had just
been brought in and left there. From mere idle curiosity, I looked close
at the rags, and saw among them something like an old cravat. I took it
up directly and held it under a gaslight. The pattern was blurred lilac
lines running across and across the dingy black ground in a trellis-work
form. I looked at the ends: one of them was torn off.

How I managed to hide the breathless surprise into which this discovery
threw me I cannot say, but I certainly contrived to steady my voice
somehow, and to ask for my candles calmly when the man and woman serving
in the shop, having disposed of their other customers, inquired of me
what I wanted.

As the man took down the candles, my brain was all in a whirl with
trying to think how I could get possession of the old cravat without
exciting any suspicion. Chance, and a little quickness on my part in
taking advantage of it, put the object within my reach in a moment. The
man, having counted out the candles, asked the woman for some paper to
wrap them in. She produced a piece much too small and flimsy for the
purpose, and declared, when he called for something better, that the
day's supply of stout paper was all exhausted. He flew into a rage
with her for managing so badly. Just as they were beginning to quarrel
violently, I stepped back to the rag-counter, took the old cravat
carelessly out of the bundle, and said, in as light a tone as I could
possibly assume:

"Come, come, don't let my candles be the cause of hard words between
you. Tie this ragged old thing round them with a bit of string, and I
shall carry them home quite comfortably."

The man seemed disposed to insist on the stout paper being produced; but
the woman, as if she was glad of an opportunity of spiting him, snatched
the candles away, and tied them up in a moment in the torn old cravat. I
was afraid he would have struck her before my face, he seemed in such a
fury; but, fortunately, another customer came in, and obliged him to put
his hands to peaceable and proper use.

"Quite a bundle of all-sorts on the opposite counter there," I said to
the woman, as I paid her for the candles.

"Yes, and all hoarded up for sale by a poor creature with a lazy brute
of a husband, who lets his wife do all the work while he spends all
the money," answered the woman, with a malicious look at the man by her
side.

"He can't surely have much money to spend, if his wife has no better
work to do than picking up rags," said I.

"It isn't her fault if she hasn't got no better," says the woman, rather
angrily. "She's ready to turn her hand to anything. Charing, washing,
laying-out, keeping empty houses--nothing comes amiss to her. She's my
half-sister, and I think I ought to know."

"Did you say she went out charing?" I asked, making believe as if I knew
of somebody who might employ her.

"Yes, of course I did," answered the woman; "and if you can put a job
into her hands, you'll be doing a good turn to a poor hard-working
creature as wants it. She lives down the Mews here to the right--name of
Horlick, and as honest a woman as ever stood in shoe-leather. Now, then,
ma'am, what for you?"

Another customer came in just then, and occupied her attention. I left
the shop, passed the turning that led down to the Mews, looked up at
the name of the street, so as to know how to find it again, and then ran
home as fast as I could. Perhaps it was the remembrance of my strange
dream striking me on a sudden, or perhaps it was the shock of the
discovery I had just made, but I began to feel frightened without
knowing why, and anxious to be under shelter in my own room.

If Robert should come back! Oh, what a relief and help it would be now
if Robert should come back!


May 1st. On getting indoors last night, the first thing I did, after
striking a light, was to take the ragged cravat off the candles, and
smooth it out on the table. I then took the end that had been in poor
Mary's hand out of my writing-desk, and smoothed that out too. It
matched the torn side of the cravat exactly. I put them together, and
satisfied myself that there was not a doubt of it.

Not once did I close my eyes that night. A kind of fever got possession
of me--a vehement yearning to go on from this first discovery and
find out more, no matter what the risk might be. The cravat now really
became, to my mind, the clew that I thought I saw in my dream--the clew
that I was resolved to follow. I determined to go to Mrs. Horlick this
evening on my return from work.

I found the Mews easily. A crook-backed dwarf of a man was lounging
at the corner of it smoking his pipe. Not liking his looks, I did not
inquire of him where Mrs. Horlick lived, but went down the Mews till I
met with a woman, and asked her. She directed me to the right number.
I knocked at the door, and Mrs. Horlick herself--a lean, ill-tempered,
miserable-looking woman--answered it. I told her at once that I had come
to ask what her terms were for charing. She stared at me for a moment,
then answered my question civilly enough.

"You look surprised at a stranger like me finding you out," I said.
"I first came to hear of you last night, from a relation of yours, in
rather an odd way."

And I told her all that had happened in the chandler's shop, bringing in
the bundle of rags, and the circumstance of my carrying home the candles
in the old torn cravat, as often as possible.

"It's the first time I've heard of anything belonging to him turning out
any use," said Mrs. Horlick, bitterly.

"What! the spoiled old neck-handkerchief belonged to your husband, did
it?" said I, at a venture.

"Yes; I pitched his rotten rag of a neck-'andkercher into the bundle
along with the rest, and I wish I could have pitched him in after it,"
said Mrs. Horlick. "I'd sell him cheap at any ragshop. There he stands,
smoking his pipe at the end of the Mews, out of work for weeks past, the
idlest humpbacked pig in all London!"

She pointed to the man whom I had passed on entering the Mews. My cheeks
began to burn and my knees to tremble, for I knew that in tracing the
cravat to its owner I was advancing a step toward a fresh discovery. I
wished Mrs. Horlick good evening, and said I would write and mention the
day on which I wanted her.

What I had just been told put a thought into my mind that I was afraid
to follow out. I have heard people talk of being light-headed, and I
felt as I have heard them say they felt when I retraced my steps up the
Mews. My head got giddy, and my eyes seemed able to see nothing but the
figure of the little crook-backed man, still smoking his pipe in his
former place. I could see nothing but that; I could think of nothing but
the mark of the blow on my poor lost Mary's temple. I know that I must
have been light-headed, for as I came close to the crook-backed man I
stopped without meaning it. The minute before, there had been no idea
in me of speaking to him. I did not know how to speak, or in what way it
would be safest to begin; and yet, the moment I came face to face with
him, something out of myself seemed to stop me, and to make me speak
without considering beforehand, without thinking of consequences,
without knowing, I may almost say, what words I was uttering till the
instant when they rose to my lips.

"When your old neck-tie was torn, did you know that one end of it went
to the rag-shop, and the other fell into my hands?"

I said these bold words to him suddenly, and, as it seemed, without my
own will taking any part in them.

He started, stared, changed color. He was too much amazed by my sudden
speaking to find an answer for me. When he did open his lips, it was to
say rather to himself than me:

"You're not the girl."

"No," I said, with a strange choking at my heart, "I'm her friend."

By this time he had recovered his surprise, and he seemed to be aware
that he had let out more than he ought.

"You may be anybody's friend you like," he said, brutally, "so long as
you don't come jabbering nonsense here. I don't know you, and I don't
understand your jokes."

He turned quickly away from me when he had said the last words. He had
never once looked fairly at me since I first spoke to him.

Was it his hand that had struck the blow? I had only sixpence in my
pocket, but I took it out and followed him. If it had been a five-pound
note I should have done the same in the state I was in then.

"Would a pot of beer help you to understand me?" I said, and offered him
the sixpence.

"A pot ain't no great things," he answered, taking the sixpence
doubtfully.

"It may lead to something better," I said. His eyes began to twinkle,
and he came close to me. Oh, how my legs trembled--how my head swam!

"This is all in a friendly way, is it?" he asked, in a whisper.

I nodded my head. At that moment I could not have spoken for worlds.

"Friendly, of course," he went on to himself, "or there would have been
a policeman in it. She told you, I suppose, that I wasn't the man?"

I nodded my head again. It was all I could do to keep myself standing
upright.

"I suppose it's a case of threatening to have him up, and make him
settle it quietly for a pound or two? How much for me if you lay hold of
him?"

"Half."

I began to be afraid that he would suspect something if I was still
silent. The wretch's eyes twinkled again and he came yet closer.

"I drove him to the Red Lion, corner of Dodd Street and Rudgely Street.
The house was shut up, but he was let in at the jug and bottle door,
like a man who was known to the landlord. That's as much as I can tell
you, and I'm certain I'm right. He was the last fare I took up at night.
The next morning master gave me the sack--said I cribbed his corn and
his fares. I wish I had."

I gathered from this that the crook-backed man had been a cab-driver.

"Why don't you speak?" he asked, suspiciously. "Has she been telling you
a pack of lies about me? What did she say when she came home?"

"What ought she to have said?"

"She ought to have said my fare was drunk, and she came in the way as
he was going to get into the cab. That's what she ought to have said to
begin with."

"But after?"

"Well, after, my fare, by way of larking with her, puts out his leg for
to trip her up, and she stumbles and catches at me for to save herself,
and tears off one of the limp ends of my rotten old tie. 'What do you
mean by that, you brute?' says she, turning round as soon as she was
steady on her legs, to my fare. Says my fare to her: 'I means to teach
you to keep a civil tongue in your head.' And he ups with his fist,
and--what's come to you, now? What are you looking at me like that for?
How do you think a man of my size was to take her part against a man big
enough to have eaten me up? Look as much as you like, in my place you
would have done what I done--drew off when he shook his fist at you,
and swore he'd be the death of you if you didn't start your horse in no
time."

I saw he was working himself up into a rage; but I could not, if my life
had depended on it, have stood near him or looked at him any longer.
I just managed to stammer out that I had been walking a long way, and
that, not being used to much exercise, I felt faint and giddy with
fatigue. He only changed from angry to sulky when I made that excuse. I
got a little further away from him, and then added that if he would be
at the Mews entrance the next evening I should have something more to
say and something more to give him. He grumbled a few suspicious words
in answer about doubting whether he should trust me to come back.
Fortunately, at that moment, a policeman passed on the opposite side of
the way. He slunk down the Mews immediately, and I was free to make my
escape.

How I got home I can't say, except that I think I ran the greater part
of the way. Sally opened the door, and asked if anything was the matter
the moment she saw my face. I answered: "Nothing--nothing." She stopped
me as I was going into my room, and said:

"Smooth your hair a bit, and put your collar straight. There's a
gentleman in there waiting for you."

My heart gave one great bound: I knew who it was in an instant, and
rushed into the room like a mad woman.

"Oh, Robert, Robert!"

All my heart went out to him in those two little words.

"Good God, Anne, has anything happened? Are you ill?"

"Mary! my poor, lost, murdered, dear, dear Mary!"

That was all I could say before I fell on his breast.


May 2d. Misfortunes and disappointments have saddened him a little, but
toward me he is unaltered. He is as good, as kind, as gently and truly
affectionate as ever. I believe no other man in the world could have
listened to the story of Mary's death with such tenderness and pity as
he. Instead of cutting me short anywhere, he drew me on to tell more
than I had intended; and his first generous words when I had done were
to assure me that he would see himself to the grass being laid and the
flowers planted on Mary's grave. I could almost have gone on my knees
and worshiped him when he made me that promise.

Surely this best, and kindest, and noblest of men cannot always be
unfortunate! My cheeks burn when I think that he has come back with only
a few pounds in his pocket, after all his hard and honest struggles to
do well in America. They must be bad people there when such a man as
Robert cannot get on among them. He now talks calmly and resignedly of
trying for any one of the lowest employments by which a man can earn his
bread honestly in this great city--he who knows French, who can write
so beautifully! Oh, if the people who have places to give away only
knew Robert as well as I do, what a salary he would have, what a post he
would be chosen to occupy!

I am writing these lines alone while he has gone to the Mews to treat
with the dastardly, heartless wretch with whom I spoke yesterday.

Robert says the creature--I won't call him a man--must be humored and
kept deceived about poor Mary's end, in order that we may discover and
bring to justice the monster whose drunken blow was the death of her. I
shall know no ease of mind till her murderer is secured, and till I am
certain that he will be made to suffer for his crimes. I wanted to go
with Robert to the Mews, but he said it was best that he should carry
out the rest of the investigation alone, for my strength and resolution
had been too hardly taxed already. He said more words in praise of
me for what I have been able to do up to this time, which I am almost
ashamed to write down with my own pen. Besides, there is no need;
praise from his lips is one of the things that I can trust my memory to
preserve to the latest day of my life.


May 3d. Robert was very long last night before he came back to tell me
what he had done. He easily recognized the hunchback at the corner of
the Mews by my description of him; but he found it a hard matter, even
with the help of money, to overcome the cowardly wretch's distrust of
him as a stranger and a man. However, when this had been accomplished,
the main difficulty was conquered. The hunchback, excited by the promise
of more money, went at once to the Red Lion to inquire about the person
whom he had driven there in his cab. Robert followed him, and waited at
the corner of the street. The tidings brought by the cabman were of
the most unexpected kind. The murderer--I can write of him by no other
name--had fallen ill on the very night when he was driven to the Red
Lion, had taken to his bed there and then, and was still confined to
it at that very moment. His disease was of a kind that is brought on by
excessive drinking, and that affects the mind as well as the body. The
people at the public house call it the Horrors.

Hearing these things, Robert determined to see if he could not find out
something more for himself by going and inquiring at the public house,
in the character of one of the friends of the sick man in bed upstairs.
He made two important discoveries. First, he found out the name and
address of the doctor in attendance. Secondly, he entrapped the barman
into mentioning the murderous wretch by his name. This last discovery
adds an unspeakably fearful interest to the dreadful misfortune
of Mary's death. Noah Truscott, as she told me herself in the last
conversation I ever had with her, was the name of the man whose drunken
example ruined her father, and Noah Truscott is also the name of the
man whose drunken fury killed her. There is something that makes one
shudder, something supernatural in this awful fact. Robert agrees with
me that the hand of Providence must have guided my steps to that shop
from which all the discoveries since made took their rise. He says he
believes we are the instruments of effecting a righteous retribution;
and, if he spends his last farthing, he will have the investigation
brought to its full end in a court of justice.


May 4th. Robert went to-day to consult a lawyer whom he knew in former
times. The lawyer was much interested, though not so seriously impressed
as he ought to have been by the story of Mary's death and of the events
that have followed it. He gave Robert a confidential letter to take to
the doctor in attendance on the double-dyed villain at the Red Lion.
Robert left the letter, and called again and saw the doctor, who said
his patient was getting better, and would most likely be up again in ten
days or a fortnight. This statement Robert communicated to the lawyer,
and the lawyer has undertaken to have the public house properly watched,
and the hunchback (who is the most important witness) sharply looked
after for the next fortnight, or longer if necessary. Here, then, the
progress of this dreadful business stops for a while.


May 5th. Robert has got a little temporary employment in copying for his
friend the lawyer. I am working harder than ever at my needle, to make
up for the time that has been lost lately.


May 6th. To-day was Sunday, and Robert proposed that we should go and
look at Mary's grave. He, who forgets nothing where a kindness is to be
done, has found time to perform the promise he made to me on the night
when we first met. The grave is already, by his orders, covered with
turf, and planted round with shrubs. Some flowers, and a low headstone,
are to be added, to make the place look worthier of my poor lost darling
who is beneath it. Oh, I hope I shall live long after I am married to
Robert! I want so much time to show him all my gratitude!


May 20th. A hard trial to my courage to-day. I have given evidence at
the police-office, and have seen the monster who murdered her.

I could only look at him once. I could just see that he was a giant in
size, and that he kept his dull, lowering, bestial face turned toward
the witness-box, and his bloodshot, vacant eyes staring on me. For
an instant I tried to confront that look; for an instant I kept my
attention fixed on him--on his blotched face--on the short, grizzled
hair above it--on his knotty, murderous right hand, hanging loose over
the bar in front of him, like the paw of a wild beast over the edge of
its den. Then the horror of him--the double horror of confronting
him, in the first place, and afterward of seeing that he was an old
man--overcame me, and I turned away, faint, sick, and shuddering.
I never faced him again; and, at the end of my evidence, Robert
considerately took me out.

When we met once more at the end of the examination, Robert told me that
the prisoner never spoke and never changed his position. He was either
fortified by the cruel composure of a savage, or his faculties had not
yet thoroughly recovered from the disease that had so lately shaken
them. The magistrate seemed to doubt if he was in his right mind; but
the evidence of the medical man relieved this uncertainty, and the
prisoner was committed for trial on a charge of manslaughter.

Why not on a charge of murder? Robert explained the law to me when I
asked that question. I accepted the explanation, but it did not satisfy
me. Mary Mallinson was killed by a blow from the hand of Noah Truscott.
That is murder in the sight of God. Why not murder in the sight of the
law also?

* * * * *

June 18th. To-morrow is the day appointed for the trial at the Old
Bailey.

Before sunset this evening I went to look at Mary's grave. The turf has
grown so green since I saw it last, and the flowers are springing up
so prettily. A bird was perched dressing his feathers on the low white
headstone that bears the inscription of her name and age. I did not
go near enough to disturb the little creature. He looked innocent and
pretty on the grave, as Mary herself was in her lifetime. When he flew
away I went and sat for a little by the headstone, and read the mournful
lines on it. Oh, my love! my love! what harm or wrong had you ever
done in this world, that you should die at eighteen by a blow from a
drunkard's hand?


June 19th. The trial. My experience of what happened at it is limited,
like my experience of the examination at the police-office, to the time
occupied in giving my own evidence. They made me say much more than I
said before the magistrate. Between examination and cross-examination,
I had to go into almost all the particulars about poor Mary and her
funeral that I have written i n this journal; the jury listening to
every word I spoke with the most anxious attention. At the end, the
judge said a few words to me approving of my conduct, and then there
was a clapping of hands among the people in court. I was so agitated and
excited that I trembled all over when they let me go out into the air
again.

I looked at the prisoner both when I entered the witness-box and when
I left it. The lowering brutality of his face was unchanged, but his
faculties seemed to be more alive and observant than they were at the
police-office. A frightful blue change passed over his face, and he drew
his breath so heavily that the gasps were distinctly audible while I
mentioned Mary by name and described the mark or the blow on her temple.
When they asked me if I knew anything of the prisoner, and I answered
that I only knew what Mary herself had told me about his having been
her father's ruin, he gave a kind of groan, and struck both his hands
heavily on the dock. And when I passed beneath him on my way out of
court, he leaned over suddenly, whether to speak to me or to strike me
I can't say, for he was immediately made to stand upright again by the
turnkeys on either side of him. While the evidence proceeded (as Robert
described it to me), the signs that he was suffering under superstitious
terror became more and more apparent; until, at last, just as the lawyer
appointed to defend him was rising to speak, he suddenly cried out, in
a voice that startled every one, up to the very judge on the bench:
"Stop!"

There was a pause, and all eyes looked at him. The perspiration was
pouring over his face like water, and he made strange, uncouth signs
with his hands to the judge opposite. "Stop all this!" he cried again;
"I've been the ruin of the father and the death of the child. Hang me
before I do more harm! Hang me, for God's sake, out of the way!" As soon
as the shock produced by this extraordinary interruption had subsided,
he was removed, and there followed a long discussion about whether he
was of sound mind or not. The matter was left to the jury to decide
by their verdict. They found him guilty of the charge of manslaughter,
without the excuse of insanity. He was brought up again, and condemned
to transportation for life. All he did, on hearing the dreadful
sentence, was to reiterate his desperate words: "Hang me before I do
more harm! Hang me, for God's sake, out of the way!"


June 20th. I made yesterday's entry in sadness of heart, and I have not
been better in my spirits to-day. It is something to have brought the
murderer to the punishment that he deserves. But the knowledge that this
most righteous act of retribution is accomplished brings no consolation
with it. The law does indeed punish Noah Truscott for his crime, but
can it raise up Mary Mallinson from her last resting-place in the
churchyard?

While writing of the law, I ought to record that the heartless wretch
who allowed Mary to be struck down in his presence without making an
attempt to defend her is not likely to escape with perfect impunity.
The policeman who looked after him to insure his attendance at the trial
discovered that he had committed past offenses, for which the law can
make him answer. A summons was executed upon him, and he was taken
before the magistrate the moment he left the court after giving his
evidence.


I had just written these few lines, and was closing my journal, when
there came a knock at the door. I answered it, thinking that Robert had
called on his way home to say good-night, and found myself face to face
with a strange gentleman, who immediately asked for Anne Rodway. On
hearing that I was the person inquired for, he requested five minutes'
conversation with me. I showed him into the little empty room at the
back of the house, and waited, rather surprised and fluttered, to hear
what he had to say.

He was a dark man, with a serious manner, and a short, stern way of
speaking. I was certain that he was a stranger, and yet there seemed
something in his face not unfamiliar to me. He began by taking a
newspaper from his pocket, and asking me if I was the person who
had given evidence at the trial of Noah Truscott on a charge of
manslaughter. I answered immediately that I was.

"I have been for nearly two years in London seeking Mary Mallinson, and
always seeking her in vain," he said. "The first and only news I have
had of her I found in the newspaper report of the trial yesterday."

He still spoke calmly, but there was something in the look of his eyes
which showed me that he was suffering in spirit. A sudden nervousness
overcame me, and I was obliged to sit down.

"You knew Mary Mallinson, sir?" I asked, as quietly as I could.

"I am her brother."

I clasped my hands and hid my face in despair. Oh, the bitterness of
heart with which I heard him say those simple words!

"You were very kind to her," said the calm, tearless man. "In her name
and for her sake, I thank you."

"Oh, sir," I said, "why did you never write to her when you were in
foreign parts?"

"I wrote often," he answered; "but each of my letters contained a
remittance of money. Did Mary tell you she had a stepmother? If she did,
you may guess why none of my letters were allowed to reach her. I now
know that this woman robbed my sister. Has she lied in telling me that
she was never informed of Mary's place of abode?"

I remembered that Mary had never communicated with her stepmother after
the separation, and could therefore assure him that the woman had spoken
the truth.

He paused for a moment after that, and sighed. Then he took out a
pocket-book, and said:

"I have already arranged for the payment of any legal expenses that may
have been incurred by the trial, but I have still to reimburse you for
the funeral charges which you so generously defrayed. Excuse my speaking
bluntly on this subject; I am accustomed to look on all matters where
money is concerned purely as matters of business."

I saw that he was taking several bank-notes out of the pocket-book, and
stopped him.

"I will gratefully receive back the little money I actually paid, sir,
because I am not well off, and it would be an ungracious act of pride in
me to refuse it from you," I said; "but I see you handling bank-notes,
any one of which is far beyond the amount you have to repay me. Pray put
them back, sir. What I did for your poor lost sister I did from my love
and fondness for her. You have thanked me for that, and your thanks are
all I can receive."

He had hitherto concealed his feelings, but I saw them now begin to get
the better of him. His eyes softened, and he took my hand and squeezed
it hard.

"I beg your pardon," he said; "I beg your pardon, with all my heart."

There was silence between us, for I was crying, and I believe, at heart,
he was crying too. At last he dropped my hand, and seemed to change
back, by an effort, to his former calmness.

"Is there no one belonging to you to whom I can be of service?" he
asked. "I see among the witnesses on the trial the name of a young
man who appears to have assisted you in the inquiries which led to the
prisoner's conviction. Is he a relation?"

"No, sir--at least, not now--but I hope--"

"What?"

"I hope that he may, one day, be the nearest and dearest relation to me
that a woman can have." I said those words boldly, because I was afraid
of his otherwise taking some wrong view of the connection between Robert
and me

"One day?" he repeated. "One day may be a long time hence."

"We are neither of us well off, sir," I said. "One day means the day
when we are a little richer than we are now."

"Is the young man educated? Can he produce testimonials to his
character? Oblige me by writing his name and address down on the back of
that card."

When I had obeyed, in a handwriting which I am afraid did me no credit,
he took out another card and gave it to me.

"I shall leave England to-morrow," he said. "There is nothing now to
keep me in my own country. If you are ever in any difficulty or distress
(which I pray God you may never be), apply to my London agent, whose
address you have there."

He stopped, and looked at me attentively, then took my hand again.

"Where is she buried?" he said, suddenly, in a quick whisper, turning
his head away.

I told him, and added that we had made the grave as beautiful as we
could with grass and flowers. I saw his lips whiten and tremble.

"God bless and reward you!" he said, and drew me toward him quickly and
kissed my forehead. I was quite overcome, and sank down and hid my face
on the table. When I looked up again he was gone.

* * * * * * *

June 25th, 1841. I write these lines on my wedding morning, when little
more than a year has passed since Robert returned to England.

His salary was increased yesterday to one hundred and fifty pounds a
year. If I only knew where Mr. Mallinson was, I would write and tell
him of our present happiness. But for the situation which his kindness
procured for Robert, we might still have been waiting vainly for the day
that has now come.

I am to work at home for the future, and Sally is to help us in our new
abode. If Mary could have lived to see this day! I am not ungrateful for
my blessings; but oh, how I miss that sweet face on this morning of all
others!

I got up to-day early enough to go alone to the grave, and to gather the
nosegay that now lies before me from the flowers that grow round it. I
shall put it in my bosom when Robert comes to fetch me to the church.
Mary would have been my bridesmaid if she had lived; and I can't forget
Mary, even on my wedding-day....


THE NIGHT.


THE last words of the last story fell low and trembling from Owen's
lips. He waited for a moment while Jessie dried the tears which Anne
Rodway's simple diary had drawn from her warm young heart, then closed
the manuscript, and taking her hand patted it in his gentle, fatherly
way.

"You will be glad to hear, my love," he said, "that I can speak from
personal experience of Anne Rodway's happiness. She came to live in my
parish soon after the trial at which she appeared as chief witness,
and I was the clergyman who married her. Months before that I knew her
story, and had read those portions of her diary which you have just
heard. When I made her my little present on her wedding day, and when
she gratefully entreated me to tell her what she could do for me in
return, I asked for a copy of her diary to keep among the papers that
I treasured most. 'The reading of it now and then,' I said, 'will
encourage that faith in the brighter and better part of human nature
which I hope, by God's help, to preserve pure to my dying day.' In that
way I became possessed of the manuscript: it was Anne's husband who made
the copy for me. You have noticed a few withered leaves scattered here
and there between the pages. They were put there, years since, by the
bride's own hand: they are all that now remain of the flowers that Anne
Rodway gathered on her marriage morning from Mary Mallinson's grave."

Jessie tried to answer, but the words failed on her lips. Between the
effect of the story, and the anticipation of the parting now so near at
hand, the good, impulsive, affectionate creature was fairly overcome.
She laid her head on Owen's shoulder, and kept tight hold of his hand,
and let her heart speak simply for itself, without attempting to help it
by a single word.

The silence that followed was broken harshly by the tower clock. The
heavy hammer slowly rang out ten strokes through the gloomy night-time
and the dying storm.

I waited till the last humming echo of the clock fainted into dead
stillness. I listened once more attentively, and again listened in vain.
Then I rose, and proposed to my brothers that we should leave our guest
to compose herself for the night.

When Owen and Morgan were ready to quit the room, I took her by the
hand, and drew her a little aside.

"You leave us early, my dear," I said; "but, before you go to-morrow
morning--"

I stopped to listen for the last time, before the words were spoken
which committed me to the desperate experiment of pleading George's
cause in defiance of his own request. Nothing caught my ear but the
sweep of the weary weakened wind and the melancholy surging of the
shaken trees.

"But, before you go to-morrow morning," I resumed, "I want to speak to
you in private. We shall breakfast at eight o'clock. Is it asking
too much to beg you to come and see me alone in my study at half past
seven?"

Just as her lips opened to answer me I saw a change pass over her
face. I had kept her hand in mine while I was speaking, and I must have
pressed it unconsciously so hard as almost to hurt her. She may even
have uttered a few words of remonstrance; but they never reached me: my
whole hearing sense was seized, absorbed, petrified. At the very instant
when I had ceased speaking, I, and I alone, heard a faint sound--a sound
that was new to me--fly past the Glen Tower on the wings of the wind.

"Open the window, for God's sake!" I cried.

My hand mechanically held hers tighter and tighter. She struggled to
free it, looking hard at me with pale cheeks and frightened eyes. Owen
hastened up and released her, and put his arms round me.

"Griffith, Griffith!" he whispered, "control yourself, for George's
sake."

Morgan hurried to the window and threw it wide open.

The wind and rain rushed in fiercely. Welcome, welcome wind! They all
heard it now. "Oh, Father in heaven, so merciful to fathers on earth--my
son, my son!"

It came in, louder and louder with every gust of wind--the joyous, rapid
gathering roll of wheels. My eyes fastened on her as if they could see
to her heart, while she stood there with her sweet face turned on me all
pale and startled. I tried to speak to her; I tried to break away from
Owen's arms, to throw my own arms round her, to keep her on my bosom,
till _he_ came to take her from me. But all my strength had gone in the
long waiting and the long suspense. My head sank on Owen's breast--but
I still heard the wheels. Morgan loosened my cravat, and sprinkled water
over my face--I still heard the wheels. The poor terrified girl ran into
her room, and came back with her smelling-salts--I heard the carriage
stop at the house. The room whirled round and round with me; but I heard
the eager hurry of footsteps in the hall, and the opening of the door.
In another moment my son's voice rose clear and cheerful from below,
greeting the old servants who loved him. The dear, familiar tones just
poured into my ear, and then, the moment they filled it, hushed me
suddenly to rest.

When I came to myself again my eyes opened upon George. I was lying
on the sofa, still in the same room; the lights we had read by in the
evening were burning on the table; my son was kneeling at my pillow, and
we two were alone.


THE MORNING.

THE wind is fainter, but there is still no calm. The rain is ceasing,
but there is still no sunshine. The view from my window shows me the
mist heavy on the earth, and a dim gray veil drawn darkly over the sky.
Less than twelve hours since, such a prospect would have saddened me for
the day. I look out at it this morning, through the bright medium of
my own happiness, and not the shadow of a shade falls across the steady
inner sunshine that is poring over my heart.

The pen lingers fondly in my hand, and yet it is little, very little,
that I have left to say. The Purple Volume lies open by my side, with
the stories ranged together in it in the order in which they were read.
My son has learned to prize them already as the faithful friends who
served him at his utmost need. I have only to wind off the little thread
of narrative on which they are all strung together before the volume is
closed and our anxious literary experiment fairly ended.


My son and I had a quiet hour together on that happy night before we
retired to rest. The little love-plot invented in George's interests now
required one last stroke of diplomacy to complete it before we all threw
off our masks and assumed our true characters for the future. When my
son and I parted for the night, we had planned the necessary stratagem
for taking our lovely guest by surprise as soon as she was out of her
bed in the morning.

Shortly after seven o'clock I sent a message to Jessie by her maid,
informing her that a good night's rest had done wonders for me, and that
I expected to see her in my study at half past seven, as we had arranged
the evening before. As soon as her answer, promising to be punctual to
the appointment, had reached me, I took George into my study--left him
in my place to plead his own cause--and stole away, five minutes before
the half hour, to join my brothers in the breakfast-room.

Although the sense of my own happiness disposed me to take the brightest
view of my son's chances, I must nevertheless acknowledge that some
nervous anxieties still fluttered about my heart while the slow minutes
of suspense were counting themselves out in the breakfast-room. I had as
little attention to spare for Owen's quiet prognostications of success
as for Morgan's pitiless sarcasms on love, courtship, and matrimony. A
quarter of an hour elapsed--then twenty minutes. The hand moved on, and
the clock pointed to five minutes to eight, before I heard the study
door open, and before the sound of rapidly-advancing footsteps warned me
that George was coming into the room.

His beaming face told the good news before a word could be spoken on
either side. The excess of his happiness literally and truly deprived
him of speech. He stood eagerly looking at us all three, with
outstretched hands and glistening eyes.

"Have I folded up my surplice forever," asked Owen, "or am I to wear it
once again, George, in your service?"

"Answer this question first," interposed Morgan, with a look of grim
anxiety. "Have you actually taken your young woman off my hands, or have
you not?"

No direct answer followed either question. George's feelings had been
too deeply stirred to allow him to return jest for jest at a moment's
notice.

"Oh, father, how can I thank you!" he said. "And you! and you!" he
added, looking at Owen and Morgan gratefully.

"You must thank Chance as well as thank us," I replied, speaking as
lightly as my heart would let me, to encourage him. "The advantage of
numbers in our little love-plot was all on our side. Remember, George,
we were three to one."

While I was speaking the breakfast-room door opened noiselessly, and
showed us Jessie standing on the threshold, uncertain whether to join
us or to run back to her own room. Her bright complexion heightened to
a deep glow; the tears just rising in her eyes, and not yet falling from
them; her delicate lips trembling a little, as if they were still shyly
conscious of other lips that had pressed them but a few minutes since;
her attitude irresolutely graceful; her hair just disturbed enough
over her forehead and her cheeks to add to the charm of them--she stood
before us, the loveliest living picture of youth, and tenderness,
and virgin love that eyes ever looked on. George and I both advanced
together to meet her at the door. But the good, grateful girl had
heard from my son the true story of all that I had done, and hoped, and
suffered for the last ten days, and showed charmingly how she felt it by
turning at once to _me_.

"May I stop at the Glen Tower a little longer?" she asked, simply.

"If you think you can get through your evenings, my love," I answered.
"'But surely you forget that the Purple Volume is closed, and that the
stories have all come to an end?"

She clasped her arms round my neck, and laid her cheek fondly against
mine.

"How you must have suffered yesterday!" she whispered, softly.

"And how happy I am to-day!"

The tears gathered in her eyes and dropped over her cheeks as she raised
her head to look at me affectionately when I said those words. I gently
unclasped her arms and led her to George.

"So you really did love him, then, after all," I whispered, "though you
were too sly to let me discover it?"

A smile broke out among the tears as her eyes wandered away from mine
and stole a look at my son. The clock struck the hour, and the servant
came in with breakfast. A little domestic interruption of this kind
was all that was wanted to put us at our ease. We drew round the table
cheerfully, and set the Queen of Hearts at the head of it, in the
character of mistress of the house already.

========================================
