========================================

THE ROSE AND THE RING


by William Makepeace Thackeray





PRELUDE

It happened that the undersigned spent the last Christmas season in a
foreign city where there were many English children.

In that city, if you wanted to give a child's party, you could not even
get a magic-lantern or buy Twelfth-Night characters--those funny painted
pictures of the King, the Queen, the Lover, the Lady, the Dandy, the
Captain, and so on--with which our young ones are wont to recreate
themselves at this festive time.

My friend Miss Bunch, who was governess of a large family that lived in
the Piano Nobile of the house inhabited by myself and my young charges
(it was the Palazzo Poniatowski at Rome, and Messrs. Spillmann, two
of the best pastrycooks in Christendom, have their shop on the ground
floor): Miss Bunch, I say, begged me to draw a set of Twelfth-Night
characters for the amusement of our young people.

She is a lady of great fancy and droll imagination, and having looked
at the characters, she and I composed a history about them, which
was recited to the little folks at night, and served as our FIRESIDE
PANTOMIME.

Our juvenile audience was amused by the adventures of Giglio and Bulbo,
Rosalba and Angelica. I am bound to say the fate of the Hall Porter
created a considerable sensation; and the wrath of Countess Gruffanuff
was received with extreme pleasure.

If these children are pleased, thought I, why should not others be
amused also? In a few days Dr. Birch's young friends will be expected
to reassemble at Rodwell Regis, where they will learn everything that
is useful, and under the eyes of careful ushers continue the business of
their little lives.

But, in the meanwhile, and for a brief holiday, let us laugh and be as
pleasant as we can. And you elder folk--a little joking, and dancing,
and fooling will do even you no harm. The author wishes you a merry
Christmas, and welcomes you to the Fireside Pantomime.

W. M. THACKERAY. December 1854.




CONTENTS

I. SHOWS HOW THE ROYAL FAMILY SATE DOWN TO BREAKFAST

II. HOW KING VALOROSO GOT THE CROWN, AND PRINCE GIGLIO WENT WITHOUT

III. TELLS WHO THE FAIRY BLACKSTICK WAS, AND WHO WERE EVER SO MANY GRAND
PERSONAGES BESIDES

IV. HOW BLACKSTICK WAS NOT ASKED TO THE PRINCESS ANGELICA'S CHRISTENING

V. HOW PRINCESS ANGELICA TOOK A LITTLE MAID

VI. HOW PRINCE GIGLIO BEHAVED HIMSELF

VII. HOW GIGLIO AND ANGELICA HAD A QUARREL

VIII. HOW GRUFFANUFF PICKED THE FAIRY RING UP, AND PRINCE BULBO CAME TO
COURT

IX. HOW BETSINDA GOT THE WARMING-PAN

X. HOW KING VALOROSO WAS IN A DREADFUL PASSION

XI. WHAT GRUFFANUFF DID TO GIGLIO AND BETSINDA

XII. HOW BETSINDA FLED, AND WHAT BECAME OF HER

XIII. HOW QUEEN ROSALBA CAME TO THE CASTLE OF THE BOLD COUNT HOGGINARMO

XIV. WHAT BECAME OF GIGLIO

XV. WE RETURN TO ROSALBA

XVI. HOW HEDZOFF RODE BACK AGAIN TO KING GIGLIO

XVII. HOW A TREMENDOUS BATTLE TOOK PLACE, AND WHO WON IT

XVIII. HOW THEY ALL JOURNEYED BACK TO THE CAPITAL

XIX. AND NOW WE COME TO THE LAST SCENE IN THE PANTOMIME




THE ROSE AND THE RING




I. SHOWS HOW THE ROYAL FAMILY SATE DOWN TO BREAKFAST

This is Valoroso XXIV., King of Paflagonia, seated with his Queen and
only child at their royal breakfast-table, and receiving the letter
which announces to His Majesty a proposed visit from Prince Bulbo, heir
of Padella, reigning King of Crim Tartary. Remark the delight upon the
monarch's royal features. He is so absorbed in the perusal of the King
of Crim Tartary's letter, that he allows his eggs to get cold, and
leaves his august muffins untasted.

'What! that wicked, brave, delightful Prince Bulbo!' cries Princess
Angelica; 'so handsome, so accomplished, so witty--the conqueror of
Rimbombamento, where he slew ten thousand giants!'

'Who told you of him, my dear?' asks His Majesty.

'A little bird,' says Angelica.

'Poor Giglio!' says mamma, pouring out the tea.

'Bother Giglio!' cries Angelica, tossing up her head, which rustled with
a thousand curl-papers.

'I wish,' growls the King--'I wish Giglio was. . .'

'Was better? Yes, dear, he is better,' says the Queen. 'Angelica's
little maid, Betsinda, told me so when she came to my room this morning
with my early tea.'

'You are always drinking tea,' said the monarch, with a scowl.

'It is better than drinking port or brandy and water;' replies Her
Majesty.

'Well, well, my dear, I only said you were fond of drinking tea,' said
the King of Paflagonia, with an effort as if to command his temper.
'Angelica! I hope you have plenty of new dresses; your milliners' bills
are long enough. My dear Queen, you must see and have some parties. I
prefer dinners, but of course you will be for balls. Your everlasting
blue velvet quite tires me: and, my love, I should like you to have a
new necklace. Order one. Not more than a hundred or a hundred and fifty
thousand pounds.'

'And Giglio, dear?' says the Queen.

'GIGLIO MAY GO TO THE--'

'Oh, sir,' screams Her Majesty. 'Your own nephew! our late King's only
son.'

'Giglio may go to the tailor's, and order the bills to be sent in to
Glumboso to pay. Confound him! I mean bless his dear heart. He need want
for nothing; give him a couple of guineas for pocket-money, my dear;
and you may as well order yourself bracelets while you are about the
necklace, Mrs. V.'

Her Majesty, or MRS. V., as the monarch facetiously called her (for
even royalty will have its sport, and this august family were very
much attached), embraced her husband, and, twining her arm round her
daughter's waist, they quitted the breakfast-room in order to make all
things ready for the princely stranger.

When they were gone, the smile that had lighted up the eyes of the
HUSBAND and FATHER fled--the pride of the KING fled--the MAN was alone.
Had I the pen of a G. P. R. James, I would describe Valoroso's torments
in the choicest language; in which I would also depict his flashing
eye, his distended nostril--his dressing-gown, pocket-handkerchief, and
boots. But I need not say I have NOT the pen of that novelist; suffice
it to say, Valoroso was alone.

He rushed to the cupboard, seizing from the table one of the many
egg-cups with which his princely board was served for the matin meal,
drew out a bottle of right Nantz or Cognac, filled and emptied the cup
several times, and laid it down with a hoarse 'Ha, ha, ha! now Valoroso
is a man again!'

'But oh!' he went on (still sipping, I am sorry to say), 'ere I was a
king, I needed not this intoxicating draught; once I detested the hot
brandy wine, and quaffed no other fount but nature's rill. It dashes not
more quickly o'er the rocks than I did, as, with blunderbuss in hand,
I brushed away the early morning dew, and shot the partridge, snipe, or
antlered deer! Ah! well may England's dramatist remark, "Uneasy lies
the head that wears a crown!" Why did I steal my nephew's, my young
Giglio's--? Steal! said I? no, no, no, not steal, not steal. Let me
withdraw that odious expression. I took, and on my manly head I set, the
royal crown of Paflagonia; I took, and with my royal arm I wield, the
sceptral rod of Paflagonia; I took, and in my outstretched hand I hold,
the royal orb of Paflagonia! Could a poor boy, a snivelling, drivelling
boy--was in his nurse's arms but yesterday, and cried for sugarplums and
puled for pap--bear up the awful weight of crown, orb, sceptre? gird
on the sword my royal fathers wore, and meet in fight the tough Crimean
foe?'

And then the monarch went on to argue in his own mind (though we need
not say that blank verse is not argument) that what he had got it was
his duty to keep, and that, if at one time he had entertained ideas of a
certain restitution, which shall be nameless, the prospect by a CERTAIN
MARRIAGE of uniting two crowns and two nations which had been engaged
in bloody and expensive wars, as the Paflagonians and the Crimeans had
been, put the idea of Giglio's restoration to the throne out of the
question: nay, were his own brother, King Savio, alive, he would
certainly will the crown from his own son in order to bring about such a
desirable union.

Thus easily do we deceive ourselves! Thus do we fancy what we wish is
right! The King took courage, read the papers, finished his muffins
and eggs, and rang the bell for his Prime Minister. The Queen, after
thinking whether she should go up and see Giglio, who had been sick,
thought 'Not now. Business first; pleasure afterwards. I will go and see
dear Giglio this afternoon; and now I will drive to the jeweller's, to
look for the necklace and bracelets.' The Princess went up into her own
room, and made Betsinda, her maid, bring out all her dresses; and as for
Giglio, they forgot him as much as I forget what I had for dinner last
Tuesday twelve-month.




II. HOW KING VALOROSO GOT THE CROWN, AND PRINCE GIGLIO WENT WITHOUT

Paflagonia, ten or twenty thousand years ago, appears to have been one
of those kingdoms where the laws of succession were not settled; for
when King Savio died, leaving his brother Regent of the kingdom, and
guardian of Savio's orphan infant, this unfaithful regent took no sort
of regard of the late monarch's will; had himself proclaimed sovereign
of Paflagonia under the title of King Valoroso XXIV., had a most
splendid coronation, and ordered all the nobles of the kingdom to pay
him homage. So long as Valoroso gave them plenty of balls at Court,
plenty of money and lucrative places, the Paflagonian nobility did not
care who was king; and as for the people, in those early times, they
were equally indifferent. The Prince Giglio, by reason of his tender
age at his royal father's death, did not feel the loss of his crown and
empire. As long as he had plenty of toys and sweetmeats, a holiday
five times a week and a horse and gun to go out shooting when he grew
a little older, and, above all, the company of his darling cousin, the
King's only child, poor Giglio was perfectly contented; nor did he
envy his uncle the royal robes and sceptre, the great hot uncomfortable
throne of state, and the enormous cumbersome crown in which that monarch
appeared from morning till night. King Valoroso's portrait has been
left to us; and I think you will agree with me that he must have been
sometimes RATHER TIRED of his velvet, and his diamonds, and his ermine,
and his grandeur. I shouldn't like to sit in that stifling robe with
such a thing as that on my head.

No doubt, the Queen must have been lovely in her youth; for though
she grew rather stout in after life, yet her features, as shown in her
portrait, are certainly PLEASING. If she was fond of flattery, scandal,
cards, and fine clothes, let us deal gently with her infirmities, which,
after all, may be no greater than our own. She was kind to her nephew;
and if she had any scruples of conscience about her husband's taking the
young Prince's crown, consoled herself by thinking that the King, though
a usurper, was a most respectable man, and that at his death Prince
Giglio would be restored to his throne, and share it with his cousin,
whom he loved so fondly.

The Prime Minister was Glumboso, an old statesman, who most cheerfully
swore fidelity to King Valoroso, and in whose hands the monarch left
all the affairs of his kingdom. All Valoroso wanted was plenty of
money, plenty of hunting, plenty of flattery, and as little trouble as
possible. As long as he had his sport, this monarch cared little how
his people paid for it: he engaged in some wars, and of course
the Paflagonian newspapers announced that he had gained prodigious
victories: he had statues erected to himself in every city of the
empire; and of course his pictures placed everywhere, and in all the
print-shops: he was Valoroso the Magnanimous, Valoroso the Victorious,
Valoroso the Great, and so forth;--for even in these early times
courtiers and people knew how to flatter.

This royal pair had one only child, the Princess Angelica, who, you may
be sure, was a paragon in the courtiers' eyes, in her parents', and in
her own. It was said she had the longest hair, the largest eyes, the
slimmest waist, the smallest foot, and the most lovely complexion of
any young lady in the Paflagonian dominions. Her accomplishments were
announced to be even superior to her beauty; and governesses used to
shame their idle pupils by telling them what Princess Angelica could do.
She could play the most difficult pieces of music at sight. She could
answer any one of Mangnall's Questions. She knew every date in the
history of Paflagonia, and every other country. She knew French,
English, Italian, German, Spanish, Hebrew, Greek, Latin, Cappadocian,
Samothracian, Aegean, and Crim Tartar. In a word, she was a most
accomplished young creature; and her governess and lady-in-waiting was
the severe Countess Gruffanuff.


Would you not fancy, from this picture, that Gruffanuff must have been a
person of highest birth? She looks so haughty that I should have thought
her a princess at the very least, with a pedigree reaching as far back
as the Deluge. But this lady was no better born than many other ladies
who give themselves airs; and all sensible people laughed at her absurd
pretensions. The fact is, she had been maid-servant to the Queen when
Her Majesty was only Princess, and her husband had been head footman;
but after his death or DISAPPEARANCE, of which you shall hear presently,
this Mrs. Gruffanuff, by flattering, toadying, and wheedling her royal
mistress, became a favourite with the Queen (who was rather a weak
woman), and Her Majesty gave her a title, and made her nursery governess
to the Princess.

And now I must tell you about the Princess's learning and
accomplishments, for which she had such a wonderful character. Clever
Angelica certainly was, but as IDLE as POSSIBLE. Play at sight, indeed!
she could play one or two pieces, and pretend that she had never seen
them before; she could answer half a dozen Mangnall's Questions; but
then you must take care to ask the RIGHT ones. As for her languages,
she had masters in plenty, but I doubt whether she knew more than a few
phrases in each, for all her presence; and as for her embroidery and her
drawing, she showed beautiful specimens, it is true, but WHO DID THEM?

This obliges me to tell the truth, and to do so I must go back ever so
far, and tell you about the FAIRY BLACKSTICK.




III. TELLS WHO THE FAIRY BLACKSTICK WAS, AND WHO WERE EVER SO MANY GRAND
PERSONAGES BESIDES

Between the kingdoms of Paflagonia and Crim Tartary, there lived a
mysterious personage, who was known in those countries as the Fairy
Blackstick, from the ebony wand or crutch which she carried; on which
she rode to the moon sometimes, or upon other excursions of business or
pleasure, and with which she performed her wonders.

When she was young, and had been first taught the art of conjuring
by the necromancer, her father, she was always practicing her skill,
whizzing about from one kingdom to another upon her black stick, and
conferring her fairy favours upon this Prince or that. She had scores of
royal godchildren; turned numberless wicked people into beasts, birds,
millstones, clocks, pumps, boot jacks, umbrellas, or other absurd
shapes; and, in a word, was one of the most active and officious of the
whole College of fairies.

But after two or three thousand years of this sport, I suppose
Blackstick grew tired of it. Or perhaps she thought, 'What good am I
doing by sending this Princess to sleep for a hundred years? by fixing a
black pudding on to that booby's nose? by causing diamonds and pearls to
drop from one little girl's mouth, and vipers and toads from another's?
I begin to think I do as much harm as good by my performances. I might
as well shut my incantations up, and allow things to take their natural
course.

'There were my two young goddaughters, King Savio's wife, and Duke
Padella's wife, I gave them each a present, which was to render them
charming in the eyes of their husbands, and secure the affection of
those gentlemen as long as they lived. What good did my Rose and my Ring
do these two women? None on earth. From having all their whims indulged
by their husbands, they became capricious, lazy, ill-humoured, absurdly
vain, and leered and languished, and fancied themselves irresistibly
beautiful, when they were really quite old and hideous, the ridiculous
creatures! They used actually to patronise me when I went to pay them
a visit--ME, the Fairy Blackstick, who knows all the wisdom of the
necromancers, and could have turned them into baboons, and all their
diamonds into strings of onions, by a single wave of my rod!' So
she locked up her books in her cupboard, declined further magical
performances, and scarcely used her wand at all except as a cane to walk
about with.

So when Duke Padella's lady had a little son (the Duke was at that
time only one of the principal noblemen in Crim Tartary), Blackstick,
although invited to the christening, would not so much as attend; but
merely sent her compliments and a silver papboat for the baby, which was
really not worth a couple of guineas. About the same time the Queen
of Paflagonia presented His Majesty with a son and heir; and guns
were fired, the capital illuminated, and no end of feasts ordained to
celebrate the young Prince's birth. It was thought the fairy, who was
asked to be his godmother, would at least have presented him with an
invisible jacket, a flying horse, a Fortunatus's purse, or some other
valuable token of her favour; but instead, Blackstick went up to
the cradle of the child Giglio, when everybody was admiring him and
complimenting his royal papa and mamma, and said, 'My poor child, the
best thing I can send you is a little MISFORTUNE'; and this was all
she would utter, to the disgust of Giglio's parents, who died very soon
after, when Giglio's uncle took the throne, as we read in Chapter I.

In like manner, when CAVOLFIORE, King of Crim Tartary, had a christening
of his only child, ROSALBA, the Fairy Blackstick, who had been invited,
was not more gracious than in Prince Giglio's case. Whilst everybody was
expatiating over the beauty of the darling child, and congratulating
its parents, the Fairy Blackstick looked very sadly at the baby and its
mother, and said, 'My good woman (for the Fairy was very familiar, and
no more minded a Queen than a washerwoman)--my good woman, these people
who are following you will be the first to turn against you; and as for
this little lady, the best thing I can wish her is a LITTLE MISFORTUNE.'
So she touched Rosalba with her black wand, looked severely at the
courtiers, motioned the Queen an adieu with her hand, and sailed slowly
up into the air out of the window.

When she was gone, the Court people, who had been awed and silent in her
presence, began to speak. 'What an odious Fairy she is (they said)--a
pretty Fairy, indeed! Why, she went to the King of Paflagonia's
christening, and pretended to do all sorts of things for that family;
and what has happened--the Prince, her godson, has been turned off his
throne by his uncle. Would we allow our sweet Princess to be deprived of
her rights by any enemy? Never, never, never, never!'

And they all shouted in a chorus, 'Never, never, never, never!'

Now, I should like to know, and how did these fine courtiers show
their fidelity? One of King Cavolfiore's vassals, the Duke Padella
just mentioned, rebelled against the King, who went out to chastise
his rebellious subject. 'Any one rebel against our beloved and august
Monarch!' cried the courtiers; 'any one resist HIM? Pooh! He is
invincible, irresistible. He will bring home Padella a prisoner, and tie
him to a donkey's tail, and drive him round the town, saying, "This is
the way the Great Cavolfiore treats rebels."'

The King went forth to vanquish Padella; and the poor Queen, who was a
very timid, anxious creature, grew so frightened and ill that I am sorry
to say she died; leaving injunctions with her ladies to take care of
the dear little Rosalba.--Of course they said they would. Of course they
vowed they would die rather than any harm should happen to the Princess.
At first the Crim Tartar Court Journal stated that the King was
obtaining great victories over the audacious rebel: then it was
announced that the troops of the infamous Padella were in flight: then
it was said that the royal army would soon come up with the enemy, and
then--then the news came that King Cavolfiore was vanquished and slain
by His Majesty, King Padella the First!

At this news, half the courtiers ran off to pay their duty to the
conquering chief, and the other half ran away, laying hands on all the
best articles in the palace; and poor little Rosalba was left there
quite alone--quite alone; and she toddled from one room to another,
crying, 'Countess! Duchess!' (Only she said 'Tountess, Duttess,' not
being able to speak plain) 'bring me my mutton sop; my Royal Highness
hungy! Tountess! Duttess!' And she went from the private apartments into
the throne-room and nobody was there;--and thence into the ballroom
and nobody was there;--and thence into the pages' room and nobody was
there;--and she toddled down the great staircase into the hall and
nobody was there;--and the door was open, and she went into the court,
and into the garden, and thence into the wilderness, and thence into the
forest where the wild beasts live, and was never heard of any more!

A piece of her torn mantle and one of her shoes were found in the wood
in the mouths of two lionesses' cubs whom KING PADELLA and a royal
hunting party shot--for he was King now, and reigned over Crim Tartary.
'So the poor little Princess is done for,' said he; 'well, what's done
can't be helped. Gentlemen, let us go to luncheon!' And one of the
courtiers took up the shoe and put it in his pocket. And there was an
end of Rosalba!




IV. HOW BLACKSTICK WAS NOT ASKED TO THE PRINCESS ANGELICA'S CHRISTENING

When the Princess Angelica was born, her parents not only did not ask
the Fairy Blackstick to the christening party, but gave orders to their
porter absolutely to refuse her if she called. This porter's name
was Gruffanuff, and he had been selected for the post by their Royal
Highnesses because he was a very tall fierce man, who could say 'Not
at home' to a tradesman or an unwelcome visitor with a rudeness which
frightened most such persons away. He was the husband of that Countess
whose picture we have just seen, and as long as they were together they
quarrelled from morning till night. Now this fellow tried his rudeness
once too often, as you shall hear. For the Fairy Blackstick coming to
call upon the Prince and Princess, who were actually sitting at the open
drawing-room window, Gruffanuff not only denied them, but made the most
ODIOUS VULGAR SIGN as he was going to slam the door in the Fairy's face!
'Git away, hold Blackstick!' said he. 'I tell you, Master and Missis
ain't at home to you;' and he was, as we have said, GOING to slam the
door.

But the Fairy, with her wand, prevented the door being shut; and
Gruffanuff came out again in a fury, swearing in the most abominable
way, and asking the Fairy 'whether she thought he was a going to stay at
that there door hall day?'

'You ARE going to stay at that door all day and all night, and for many
a long year,' the Fairy said, very majestically; and Gruffanuff, coming
out of the door, straddling before it with his great calves, burst out
laughing, and cried, 'Ha, ha, ha! this is a good un! Ha--ah--what's
this? Let me down--O--o--H'm!' and then he was dumb!

For, as the Fairy waved her wand over him, he felt himself rising off
the ground, and fluttering up against the door, and then, as if a screw
ran into his stomach, he felt a dreadful pain there, and was pinned to
the door; and then his arms flew up over his head; and his legs, after
writhing about wildly, twisted under his body; and he felt cold,
cold, growing over him, as if he was turning into metal; and he said,
'O--o--H'm!' and could say no more, because he was dumb.

He WAS turned into metal! He was, from being BRAZEN, BRASS! He was
neither more nor less than a knocker! And there he was, nailed to the
door in the blazing summer day, till he burned almost red-hot; and there
he was, nailed to the door all the bitter winter nights, till his brass
nose was dropping with icicles. And the postman came and rapped at him,
and the vulgarest boy with a letter came and hit him up against the
door. And the King and Queen (Princess and Prince they were then) coming
home from a walk that evening, the King said, 'Hullo, my dear! you have
had a new knocker put on the door. Why, it's rather like our porter in
the face! What has become of that boozy vagabond?' And the house-maid
came and scrubbed his nose with sandpaper; and once, when the Princess
Angelica's little sister was born, he was tied up in an old kid glove;
and, another night, some LARKING young men tried to wrench him off, and
put him to the most excruciating agony with a turn screw. And then
the Queen had a fancy to have the colour of the door altered; and the
painters dabbed him over the mouth and eyes, and nearly choked him, as
they painted him pea-green. I warrant he had leisure to repent of having
been rude to the Fairy Blackstick!

As for his wife, she did not miss him; and as he was always guzzling
beer at the public-house, and notoriously quarrelling with his wife, and
in debt to the tradesmen, it was supposed he had run away from all these
evils, and emigrated to Australia or America. And when the Prince and
Princess chose to become King and Queen, they left their old house, and
nobody thought of the porter any more.




V. HOW PRINCESS ANGELICA TOOK A LITTLE MAID

One day, when the Princess Angelica was quite a little girl, she
was walking in the garden of the palace, with Mrs. Gruffanuff, the
governess, holding a parasol over her head, to keep her sweet complexion
from the freckles, and Angelica was carrying a bun, to feed the swans
and ducks in the royal pond.

They had not reached the duck-pond, when there came toddling up to them
such a funny little girl! She had a great quantity of hair blowing about
her chubby little cheeks, and looked as if she had not been washed or
combed for ever so long. She wore a ragged bit of a cloak, and had only
one shoe on.

'You little wretch, who let you in here?' asked Mrs. Gruffanuff.

'Div me dat bun,' said the little girl, 'me vely hungy.'

'Hungry! what is that?' asked Princess Angelica, and gave the child the
bun.

'Oh, Princess!' says Mrs. Gruffanuff, 'how good, how kind, how truly
angelical you are! See, Your Majesties,' she said to the King and Queen,
who now came up, along with their nephew, Prince Giglio, 'how kind the
Princess is! She met this little dirty wretch in the garden--I can't
tell how she came in here, or why the guards did not shoot her dead at
the gate!--and the dear darling of a Princess has given her the whole of
her bun!'

'I didn't want it,' said Angelical

'But you are a darling little angel all the same,' says the governess.

'Yes; I know I am,' said Angelical 'Dirty little girl, don't you think
I am very pretty?' Indeed, she had on the finest of little dresses and
hats; and, as her hair was carefully curled, she really looked very
well.

'Oh, pooty, pooty!' says the little girl, capering about, laughing, and
dancing, and munching her bun; and as she ate it she began to sing, 'Oh,
what fun to have a plum bun! how I wis it never was done!' At which,
and her funny accent, Angelica, Giglio, and the King and Queen began to
laugh very merrily.

'I can dance as well as sing,' says the little girl. 'I can dance, and I
can sing, and I can do all sorts of ting.' And she ran to a flower-bed,
and pulling a few polyanthuses, rhododendrons, and other flowers, made
herself a little wreath, and danced before the King and Queen so drolly
and prettily, that everybody was delighted.

'Who was your mother--who were your relations, little girl?' said the
Queen.

The little girl said, 'Little lion was my brudder; great big lioness my
mudder; neber heard of any udder.' And she capered away on her one shoe,
and everybody was exceedingly diverted.

So Angelica said to the Queen, 'Mamma, my parrot flew away yesterday out
of its cage, and I don't care any more for any of my toys; and I think
this funny little dirty child will amuse me. I will take her home, and
give her some of my old frocks.'

'Oh, the generous darling!' says Mrs. Gruffanuff.

'Which I have worn ever so many times, and am quite tired of,' Angelica
went on; 'and she shall be my little maid. Will you come home with me,
little dirty girl?'

The child clapped her hands, and said, 'Go home with you--yes! You pooty
Princess!--Have a nice dinner, and wear a new dress!'

And they all laughed again, and took home the child to the palace,
where, when she was washed and combed, and had one of the Princess's
frocks given to her, she looked as handsome as Angelica, almost. Not
that Angelica ever thought so; for this little lady never imagined
that anybody in the world could be as pretty, as good, or as clever as
herself. In order that the little girl should not become too proud and
conceited, Mrs. Gruffanuff took her old ragged mantle and one shoe, and
put them into a glass box, with a card laid upon them, upon which was
written, 'These were the old clothes in which little BETSINDA was found
when the great goodness and admirable kindness of Her Royal Highness the
Princess Angelica received this little outcast.' And the date was added,
and the box locked up.

For a while little Betsinda was a great favourite with the Princess, and
she danced, and sang, and made her little rhymes, to amuse her mistress.
But then the Princess got a monkey, and afterwards a little dog, and
afterwards a doll, and did not care for Betsinda any more, who became
very melancholy and quiet, and sang no more funny songs, because nobody
cared to hear her. And then, as she grew older, she was made a little
lady's-maid to the Princess; and though she had no wages, she worked
and mended, and put Angelica's hair in papers, and was never cross when
scolded, and was always eager to please her mistress, and was always
up early and to bed late, and at hand when wanted, and in fact became
a perfect little maid. So the two girls grew up, and, when the Princess
came out, Betsinda was never tired of waiting on her; and made her
dresses better than the best milliner, and was useful in a hundred ways.
Whilst the Princess was having her masters, Betsinda would sit and watch
them; and in this way she picked up a great deal of learn ing; for she
was always awake, though her mistress was not, and listened to the wise
professors when Angelica was yawning or thinking of the next ball. And
when the dancing-master came, Betsinda learned along with Angelica;
and when the music-master came, she watched him, and practiced the
Princess's pieces when Angelica was away at balls and parties; and when
the drawing-master came, she took note of all he said and did; and the
same with French, Italian, and all other languages--she learned them
from the teacher who came to Angelica. When the Princess was going out
of an evening she would say, 'My good Betsinda, you may as well finish
what I have begun.' 'Yes, miss,' Betsinda would say, and sit down very
cheerful, not to FINISH what Angelica began, but to DO it.

For instance, the Princess would begin a head of a warrior, let us say,
and when it was begun it was something like this--

But when it was done, the warrior was like this--

(only handsomer still if possible), and the Princess put her name to the
drawing; and the Court and King and Queen, and above all poor Giglio,
admired the picture of all things, and said, 'Was there ever a genius
like Angelica?' So, I am sorry to say, was it with the Princess's
embroidery and other accomplishments; and Angelica actually believed
that she did these things herself, and received all the flattery of
the Court as if every word of it was true. Thus she began to think that
there was no young woman in all the world equal to herself, and that no
young man was good enough for her. As for Betsinda, as she heard none of
these praises, she was not puffed up by them, and being a most grateful,
good-natured girl, she was only too anxious to do everything which might
give her mistress pleasure. Now you begin to perceive that Angelica
had faults of her own, and was by no means such a wonder of wonders as
people represented Her Royal Highness to be.




VI. HOW PRINCE GIGLIO BEHAVED HIMSELF

And now let us speak about Prince Giglio, the nephew of the reigning
monarch of Paflagonia. It has already been stated, in page seven, that
as long as he had a smart coat to wear, a good horse to ride, and money
in his pocket, or rather to take out of his pocket, for he was very
good-natured, my young Prince did not care for the loss of his crown and
sceptre, being a thoughtless youth, not much inclined to politics or any
kind of learning. So his tutor had a sinecure. Giglio would not
learn classics or mathematics, and the Lord Chancellor of Paflagonia,
SQUARETOSO, pulled a very long face because the Prince could not be got
to study the Paflagonian laws and constitution; but, on the other hand,
the King's gamekeepers and huntsmen found the Prince an apt pupil;
the dancing-master pronounced that he was a most elegant and assiduous
scholar; the First Lord of the Billiard Table gave the most flattering
reports of the Prince's skill; so did the Groom of the Tennis Court;
and as for the Captain of the Guard and Fencing Master, the VALIANT and
VETERAN Count KUTASOFF HEDZOFF, he avowed that since he ran the General
of Crim Tartary, the dreadful Grumbuskin, through the body, he never had
encountered so expert a swordsman as Prince Giglio.

I hope you do not imagine that there was any impropriety in the Prince
and Princess walking together in the palace garden, and because Giglio
kissed Angelica's hand in a polite manner. In the first place they are
cousins; next, the Queen is walking in the garden too (you cannot see
her, for she happens to be behind that tree), and Her Majesty always
wished that Angelica and Giglio should marry: so did Giglio: so did
Angelica sometimes, for she thought her cousin very handsome, brave,
and good-natured: but then you know she was so clever and knew so many
things, and poor Giglio knew nothing, and had no conversation. When they
looked at the stars, what did Giglio know of the heavenly bodies? Once,
when on a sweet night in a balcony where they were standing, Angelica
said, 'There is the Bear.' 'Where?' says Giglio. 'Don't be afraid,
Angelica! if a dozen bears come, I will kill them rather than they shall
hurt you.' 'Oh, you silly creature!' says she; 'you are very good, but
you are not very wise.' When they looked at the flowers, Giglio was
utterly unacquainted with botany, and had never heard of Linnaeus.
When the butterflies passed, Giglio knew nothing about them, being as
ignorant of entomology as I am of algebra. So you see, Angelica, though
she liked Giglio pretty well, despised him on account of his ignorance.
I think she probably valued HER OWN LEARNING rather too much; but to
think too well of one's self is the fault of people of all ages and both
sexes. Finally, when nobody else was there, Angelica liked her cousin
well enough.

King Valoroso was very delicate in health, and withal so fond of good
dinners (which were prepared for him by his French cook Marmitonio),
that it was supposed he could not live long. Now the idea of anything
happening to the King struck the artful Prime Minister and the designing
old lady-in-waiting with terror. For, thought Glumboso and the Countess,
'when Prince Giglio marries his cousin and comes to the throne, what a
pretty position we shall be in, whom he dislikes, and who have always
been unkind to him. We shall lose our places in a trice; Mrs. Gruffanuff
will have to give up all the jewels, laces, snuff-boxes, rings, and
watches which belonged to the Queen, Giglio's mother; and Glumboso will
be forced to refund two hundred and seventeen thousand millions nine
hundred and eighty-seven thousand four hundred and thirty-nine pounds,
thirteen shillings, and sixpence halfpenny, money left to Prince Giglio
by his poor dear father.'

So the Lady of Honour and the Prime Minister hated Giglio because they
had done him a wrong; and these unprincipled people invented a hundred
cruel stories about poor Giglio, in order to influence the King, Queen,
and Princess against him; how he was so ignorant that he could not spell
the commonest words, and actually wrote Valoroso Valloroso, and spelt
Angelica with two l's; how he drank a great deal too much wine at
dinner, and was always idling in the stables with the grooms; how he
owed ever so much money at the pastry-cook's and the haberdasher's; how
he used to go to sleep at church; how he was fond of playing cards with
the pages. So did the Queen like playing cards; so did the King go
to sleep at church, and eat and drink too much; and, if Giglio owed
a trifle for tarts, who owed him two hundred and seventeen thousand
millions nine hundred and eighty-seven thousand four hundred and
thirty-nine pounds, thirteen shillings, and sixpence halfpenny, I should
like to know? Detractors and tale-bearers (in my humble opinion) had
much better look at HOME. All this backbiting and slandering had effect
upon Princess Angelica, who began to look coldly on her cousin, then to
laugh at him and scorn him for being so stupid, then to sneer at him for
having vulgar associates; and at Court balls, dinners, and so forth,
to treat him so unkindly that poor Giglio became quite ill, took to his
bed, and sent for the doctor.

His Majesty King Valoroso, as we have seen, had his own reasons for
disliking his nephew; and as for those innocent readers who ask why?--I
beg (with the permission of their dear parents) to refer them to
Shakespeare's pages, where they will read why King John disliked Prince
Arthur. With the Queen, his royal but weak-minded aunt, when Giglio was
out of sight he was out of mind. While she had her whist and her evening
parties, she cared for little else.

I dare say TWO VILLAINS, who shall be nameless, wished Doctor Pildrafto,
the Court Physician, had killed Giglio right out, but he only bled
and physicked him so severely that the Prince was kept to his room for
several months, and grew as thin as a post.

Whilst he was lying sick in this way, there came to the Court of
Paflagonia a famous painter, whose name was Tomaso Lorenzo, and who was
Painter in Ordinary to the King of Crim Tartary, Paflagonia's neighbour.
Tomaso Lorenzo painted all the Court, who were delighted with his works;
for even Countess Gruffanuff looked young and Glumboso good-humoured
in his pictures. 'He flatters very much,' some people said. 'Nay!' says
Princess Angelica, 'I am above flattery, and I think he did not make my
picture handsome enough. I can't bear to hear a man of genius unjustly
cried down, and I hope my dear papa will make Lorenzo a knight of his
Order of the Cucumber.'

The Princess Angelica, although the courtiers vowed Her Royal Highness
could draw so BEAUTIFULLY that the idea of her taking lessons was
absurd, yet chose to have Lorenzo for a teacher, and it was wonderful,
AS LONG AS SHE PAINTED IN HIS STUDIO, what beautiful pictures she made!
Some of the performances were engraved for the Book of Beauty: others
were sold for enormous sums at Charity Bazaars. She wrote the
SIGNATURES under the drawings, no doubt, but I think I know who-did
the pictures--this artful painter, who had come with other designs on
Angelica than merely to teach her to draw.

One day, Lorenzo showed the Princess a portrait of a young man in
armour, with fair hair and the loveliest blue eyes, and an expression at
once melancholy and interesting.

'Dear Signor Lorenzo, who is this?' asked the Princess.

'I never saw anyone so handsome,' says Countess Gruffanuff (the old
humbug).

'That,' said the painter, 'that, Madam, is the portrait of my august
young master, his Royal Highness Bulbo, Crown Prince of Crim Tartary,
Duke of Acroceraunia, Marquis of Poluphloisboio, and Knight Grand Cross
of the Order of the Pumpkin. That is the order of the Pumpkin glittering
on his manly breast, and received by His Royal Highness from his august
father, His Majesty King PADELLA I., for his gallantry at the battle
of Rimbombamento, when he slew with his own princely hand the King
of Ograria and two hundred and eleven giants of the two hundred and
eighteen who formed the King's bodyguard. The remainder were destroyed
by the brave Crim Tartar army after an obstinate combat, in which the
Crim Tartars suffered severely.'

What a Prince! thought Angelica: so brave--so calm-looking--so
young--what a hero!

'He is as accomplished as he is brave,' continued the Court Painter.
'He knows all languages perfectly: sings deliciously: plays every
instrument: composes operas which have been acted a thousand nights
running at the Imperial Theatre of Crim Tartary, and danced in a ballet
there before the King and Queen; in which he looked so beautiful, that
his cousin, the lovely daughter of the King of Circassia, died for love
of him.'

'Why did he not marry the poor Princess?' asked Angelica, with a sigh.

'Because they were FIRST COUSINS, Madam, and the clergy forbid these
unions,' said the Painter. 'And, besides, the young Prince had given his
royal heart ELSEWHERE.'

'And to whom?' asked Her Royal Highness.

'I am not at liberty to mention the Princess's name,' answered the
Painter.

'But you may tell me the first letter of it,' gasped out the Princess.

'That Your Royal Highness is at liberty to guess,' said Lorenzo.

'Does it begin with a Z?' asked Angelica.

The Painter said it wasn't a Z; then she tried a Y; then an X; then a W,
and went so backwards through almost the whole alphabet.

When she came to D, and it wasn't D, she grew very excited; when she
came to C, and it wasn't C, she was still more nervous; when she came
to B, AND IT WASN'T B, 'O dearest Gruffanuff,' she said, 'lend me your
smelling-bottle!' and, hiding her head in the Countess's shoulder, she
faintly whispered, 'Ah, Signor, can it be A?'

'It was A; and though I may not, by my Royal Master's orders, tell Your
Royal Highness the Princess's name, whom he fondly, madly, devotedly,
rapturously loves, I may show you her portrait,' says this slyboots:
and leading the Princess up to a gilt frame, he drew a curtain which was
before it.

O goodness! the frame contained A LOOKING-GLASS! and Angelica saw her
own face!




VII. HOW GIGLIO AND ANGELICA HAD A QUARREL

The Court Painter of His Majesty the King of Crim Tartary returned to
that monarch's dominions, carrying away a number of sketches which he
had made in the Paflagonian capital (you know, of course, my dears, that
the name of that capital is Blombodinga); but the most charming of all
his pieces was a portrait of the Princess Angelica, which all the Crim
Tartar nobles came to see. With this work the King was so delighted,
that he decorated the Painter with his Order of the Pumpkin (sixth
class) and the artist became Sir Tomaso Lorenzo, K.P., thenceforth.

King Valoroso also sent Sir Tomaso his Order of the Cucumber, besides a
handsome order for money, for he painted the King, Queen, and principal
nobility while at Blombodinga, and became all the fashion, to the
perfect rage of all the artists in Paflagonia, where the King used to
point to the portrait of Prince Bulbo, which Sir Tomaso had left behind
him, and say 'Which among you can paint a picture like that?'

It hung in the royal parlour over the royal sideboard, and Princess
Angelica could always look at it as she sat making the tea. Each day it
seemed to grow handsomer and handsomer, and the Princess grew so fond
of looking at it, that she would often spill the tea over the cloth, at
which her father and mother would wink and wag their heads, and say to
each other, 'Aha! we see how things are going.'

In the meantime poor Giglio lay upstairs very sick in his chamber,
though he took all the doctor's horrible medicines like a good young
lad; as I hope YOU do, my dears, when you are ill and mamma sends for
the medical man. And the only person who visited Giglio (besides his
friend the captain of the guard, who was almost always busy or on
parade), was little Betsinda the housemaid, who used to do his bedroom
and sitting-room out, bring him his gruel, and warm his bed.

When the little housemaid came to him in the morning and evening, Prince
Giglio used to say, 'Betsinda, Betsinda, how is the Princess Angelica?'

And Betsinda used to answer, 'The Princess is very well, thank you, my
Lord.' And Giglio would heave a sigh, and think, if Angelica were sick,
I am sure _I_ should not be very well.

Then Giglio would say, 'Betsinda, has the Princess Angelica asked for
me today?' And Betsinda would answer, 'No, my Lord, not today'; or, 'she
was very busy practicing the piano when I saw her'; or, 'she was writing
invitations for an evening party, and did not speak to me'; or make some
excuse or other, not strictly consonant with truth: for Betsinda was
such a good-natured creature that she strove to do everything to prevent
annoyance to Prince Giglio, and even brought him up roast chicken and
jellies from the kitchen (when the Doctor allowed them, and Giglio was
getting better), saying, 'that the Princess had made the jelly, or the
bread-sauce, with her own hands, on purpose for Giglio.'

When Giglio heard this he took heart and began to mend immediately;
and gobbled up all the jelly, and picked the last bone of the
chicken--drumsticks, merry-thought, sides'-bones, back, pope's nose,
and all--thanking his dear Angelica; and he felt so much better the next
day, that he dressed and went downstairs, where, whom should he meet
but Angelica going into the drawing-room? All the covers were off the
chairs, the chandeliers taken out of the bags, the damask curtains
uncovered, the work and things carried away, and the handsomest albums
on the tables. Angelica had her hair in papers: in a word, it was
evident there was going to be a party.

'Heavens, Giglio!' cries Angelica: 'YOU here in such a dress! What a
figure you are!'

'Yes, dear Angelica, I am come downstairs, and feel so well today,
thanks to the FOWL and the JELLY.'

'What do I know about fowls and jellies, that you allude to them in that
rude way?' says Angelica.

'Why, didn't--didn't you send them, Angelica dear?' says Giglio.

'I send them indeed! Angelica dear! No, Giglio dear,' says she, mocking
him, '_I_ was engaged in getting the rooms ready for His Royal Highness
the Prince of Crim Tartary, who is coming to pay my papa's Court a
visit.'

'The--Prince--of--Crim--Tartary!' Giglio said, aghast.

'Yes, the Prince of Crim Tartary,' says Angelica, mocking him. 'I dare
say you never heard of such a country. What DID you ever hear of? You
don't know whether Crim Tartary is on the Red Sea or on the Black Sea, I
dare say.'

'Yes, I do, it's on the Red Sea,' says Giglio, at which the Princess
burst out laughing at him, and said, 'Oh, you ninny! You are so
ignorant, you are really not fit for society! You know nothing but about
horses and dogs, and are only fit to dine in a mess-room with my Royal
father's heaviest dragoons. Don't look so surprised at me, sir: go
and put your best clothes on to receive the Prince, and let me get the
drawing-room ready.'

Giglio said, 'Oh, Angelica, Angelica, I didn't think this of you. THIS
wasn't your language to me when you gave me this ring, and I gave you
mine in the garden, and you gave me that k--'

But what k was we never shall know, for Angelica, in a rage, cried,
'Get out, you saucy, rude creature! How dare you to remind me of your
rudeness? As for your little trumpery twopenny ring, there, sir, there!'
And she flung it out of the window.

'It was my mother's marriage-ring,' cried Giglio.

'_I_ don't care whose marriage-ring it was,' cries Angelica. 'Marry the
person who picks it up if she's a woman; you shan't marry ME. And give
me back MY ring. I've no patience with people who boast about the things
they give away! _I_ know who'll give me much finer things than you ever
gave me. A beggarly ring indeed, not worth five shillings!'

Now Angelica little knew that the ring which Giglio had given her was a
fairy ring: if a man wore it, it made all the women in love with him;
if a woman, all the gentlemen. The Queen, Giglio's mother, quite an
ordinary-looking person, was admired immensely whilst she wore this
ring, and her husband was frantic when she was ill. But when she called
her little Giglio to her, and put the ring on his finger, King Savio did
not seem to care for his wife so much any more, but transferred all his
love to little Giglio. So did everybody love him as long as he had the
ring; but when, as quite a child, he gave it to Angelica, people began
to love and admire HER; and Giglio, as the saying is, played only second
fiddle.

'Yes,' says Angelica, going on in her foolish ungrateful way. '_I_
know who'll give me much finer things than your beggarly little pearl
nonsense.'

'Very good, miss! You may take back your ring too!' says Giglio, his
eyes flashing fire at her, and then, as his eyes had been suddenly
opened, he cried out, 'Ha! what does this mean? Is THIS the woman I have
been in love with all my life? Have I been such a ninny as to throw away
my regard upon you? Why--actually--yes--you are a little crooked!'

'Oh, you wretch!' cries Angelica.

'And, upon my conscience, you--you squint a little.'

'Eh!' cries Angelica.

'And your hair is red--and you are marked with the smallpox--and what?
you have three false teeth--and one leg shorter than the other!'

'You brute, you brute, you!' Angelica screamed out: and as she seized
the ring with one hand, she dealt Giglio one, two, three smacks on the
face, and would have pulled the hair off his head had he not started
laughing, and crying--

'Oh dear me, Angelica, don't pull out MY hair, it hurts! You might
remove a great deal of YOUR OWN, as I perceive, without scissors or
pulling at all. Oh, ho, ho! ha, ha, ha! ho he he!'

And he nearly choked himself with laughing, and she with rage; when,
with a low bow, and dressed in his Court habit, Count Gambabella,
the first lord-in-waiting, entered and said, 'Royal Highnesses! Their
Majesties expect you in the Pink Throne-room, where they await the
arrival of the Prince of CRIM TARTARY.'




VIII. HOW GRUFFANUFF PICKED THE FAIRY RING UP, AND PRINCE BULBO CAME TO
COURT

Prince Bulbo's arrival had set all the court in a flutter: everybody was
ordered to put his or her best clothes on: the footmen had their gala
liveries; the Lord Chancellor his new wig; the Guards their last
new tunics; and Countess Gruffanuff, you may be sure, was glad of an
opportunity of decorating HER old person with her finest things. She was
walking through the court of the Palace on her way to wait upon Their
Majesties, when she espied something glittering on the pavement, and
bade the boy in buttons who was holding up her train, to go and pick up
the article shining yonder. He was an ugly little wretch, in some of the
late groom-porter's old clothes cut down, and much too tight for him;
and yet, when he had taken up the ring (as it turned out to be), and was
carrying it to his mistress, she thought he looked like a little cupid.
He gave the ring to her; it was a trumpery little thing enough, but too
small for any of her old knuckles, so she put it into her pocket.

'Oh, mum!' says the boy, looking at her 'how--how beyoutiful you do
look, mum, today, mum!'

'And you, too, Jacky,' she was going to say; but, looking down
at him--no, he was no longer good-looking at all--but only the
carroty-haired little Jacky of the morning. However, praise is welcome
from the ugliest of men or boys, and Gruffanuff, bidding the boy hold
up her train, walked on in high good-humour. The guards saluted her
with peculiar respect. Captain Hedzoff, in the anteroom, said, 'My
dear madam, you look like an angel today.' And so, bowing and smirking,
Gruffanuff went in and took her place behind her Royal Master and
Mistress, who were in the throne-room, awaiting the Prince of Crim
Tartary. Princess Angelica sat at their feet, and behind the King's
chair stood Prince Giglio, looking very savage.

The Prince of Crim Tartary made his appearance, attended by Baron
Sleibootz, his chamberlain, and followed by a black page carrying the
most beautiful crown you ever saw! He was dressed in his travelling
costume, and his hair, as you see, was a little in disorder. 'I have
ridden three hundred miles since breakfast,' said he, 'so eager was I to
behold the Prin--the Court and august family of Paflagonia, and I could
not wait one minute before appearing in Your Majesties' presences.'

Giglio, from behind the throne, burst out into a roar of contemptuous
laughter; but all the Royal party, in fact, were so flurried, that they
did not hear this little outbreak. 'Your R. H. is welcome in any dress,'
says the King. 'Glumboso, a chair for His Royal Highness.'

'Any dress His Royal Highness wears IS a Court dress,' says Princess
Angelica, smiling graciously.

'Ah! but you should see my other clothes,' said the Prince. 'I should
have had them on, but that stupid carrier has not brought them. Who's
that laughing?'

It was Giglio laughing. 'I was laughing,' he said, 'because you said
just now that you were in such a hurry to see the Princess, that you
could not wait to change your dress; and now you say you come in those
clothes because you have no others.'

'And who are you?' says Prince Bulbo, very fiercely.

'My father was King of this country, and I am his only son, Prince!'
replies Giglio, with equal haughtiness.

'Ha!' said the King and Glumboso, looking very flurried; but the former,
collecting himself, said, 'Dear Prince Bulbo, I forgot to introduce to
Your Royal Highness my dear nephew, His Royal Highness Prince Giglio!
Know each other! Embrace each other! Giglio, give His Royal Highness
your hand!' and Giglio, giving his hand, squeezed poor Bulbo's until the
tears ran out of his eyes. Glumboso now brought a chair for the Royal
visitor, and placed it on the platform on which the King, Queen, and
Prince were seated; but the chair was on the edge of the platform, and
as Bulbo sat down, it toppled over, and he with it, rolling over and
over, and bellowing like a bull. Giglio roared still louder at this
disaster, but it was with laughter; so did all the Court when Prince
Bulbo got up; for though when he entered the room he appeared not very
ridiculous, as he stood up from his fall for a moment he looked so
exceedingly plain and foolish, that nobody could help laughing at him.
When he had entered the room, he was observed to carry a rose in his
hand, which fell out of it as he tumbled.

'My rose! my rose!' cried Bulbo; and his chamberlain dashed forwards and
picked it up, and gave it to the Prince, who put it in his waistcoat.
Then people wondered why they had laughed; there was nothing
particularly ridiculous in him. He was rather short, rather stout,
rather red-haired, but, in fine, for a Prince, not so bad.

So they sat and talked, the Royal personages together, the Crim
Tartar officers with those of Paflagonia--Giglio very comfortable with
Gruffanuff behind the throne. He looked at her with such tender eyes,
that her heart was all in a flutter. 'Oh, dear Prince,' she said, 'how
could you speak so haughtily in presence of Their Majesties? I protest I
thought I should have fainted.'

'I should have caught you in my arms,' said Giglio, looking raptures.

'Why were you so cruel to Prince Bulbo, dear Prince?' says Gruff.


'Because I hate him,' says Gil.

'You are jealous of him, and still love poor Angelica,' cries
Gruffanuff, putting her handkerchief to her eyes.

'I did, but I love her no more!' Giglio cried. 'I despise her! Were she
heiress to twenty thousand thrones, I would despise her and scorn her.
But why speak of thrones? I have lost mine. I am too weak to recover
it--I am alone, and have no friend.'

'Oh, say not so, dear Prince!' says Gruffanuff.

'Besides,' says he, 'I am so happy here BEHIND THE THRONE that I would
not change my place, no, not for the throne of the world!'

'What are you two people chattering about there?' says the Queen, who
was rather good-natured, though not overburthened with wisdom. 'It is
time to dress for dinner. Giglio, show Prince Bulbo to his room. Prince,
if your clothes have not come, we shall be very happy to see you as you
are.' But when Prince Bulbo got to his bedroom, his luggage was there
and unpacked; and the hairdresser coming in, cut and curled him entirely
to his own satisfaction; and when the dinner-bell rang, the Royal
company had not to wait above five-and-twenty minutes until Bulbo
appeared, during which time the King, who could not bear to wait, grew
as sulky as possible. As for Giglio, he never left Madam Gruffanuff all
this time, but stood with her in the embrasure of a window, paying her
compliments. At length the Groom of the Chambers announced His Royal
Highness the Prince of Crim Tartary! and the noble company went into the
royal dining-room. It was quite a small party; only the King and Queen,
the Princess, whom Bulbo took out, the two Princes, Countess Gruffanuff,
Glumboso the Prime Minister, and Prince Bulbo's chamberlain. You may be
sure they had a very good dinner--let every boy or girl think of what he
or she likes best, and fancy it on the table.*

     *Here a very pretty game may be played by all the children
     saying what they like best for dinner.

The Princess talked incessantly all dinner-time to the Prince of Crimea,
who ate an immense deal too much, and never took his eyes off his plate,
except when Giglio, who was carving a goose, sent a quantity of stuffing
and onion sauce into one of them. Giglio only burst out a-laughing
as the Crimean Prince wiped his shirt-front and face with his scented
pocket-handkerchief. He did not make Prince Bulbo any apology. When the
Prince looked at him, Giglio would not look that way. When Prince Bulbo
said, 'Prince Giglio, may I have the honour of taking a glass of wine
with you?' Giglio WOULDN'T answer. All his talk and his eyes were for
Countess Gruffanuff, who you may be sure was pleased with Giglio's
attentions--the vain old creature! When he was not complimenting her,
he was making fun of Prince Bulbo, so loud that Gruffanuff was always
tapping him with her fan, and saying--'Oh, you satirical Prince! Oh,
fie, the Prince will hear!' 'Well, I don't mind,' says Giglio, louder
still. The King and Queen luckily did not hear; for Her Majesty was a
little deaf, and the King thought so much about his own dinner, and,
besides, made such a dreadful noise, hobgobbling in eating it, that
he heard nothing else. After dinner, His Majesty and the Queen went to
sleep in their arm-chairs.

This was the time when Giglio began his tricks with Prince Bulbo, plying
that young gentleman with port, sherry, madeira, champagne, marsala,
cherry-brandy, and pale ale, of all of which Master Bulbo drank without
stint. But in plying his guest, Giglio was obliged to drink himself,
and, I am sorry to say, took more than was good for him, so that the
young men were very noisy, rude, and foolish when they joined the ladies
after dinner; and dearly did they pay for that imprudence, as now, my
darlings, you shall hear!

Bulbo went and sat by the piano, where Angelica was playing and singing,
and he sang out of tune, and he upset the coffee when the footman
brought it, and he laughed out of place, and talked absurdly, and fell
asleep and snored horridly. Booh, the nasty pig! But as he lay there
stretched on the pink satin sofa, Angelica still persisted in thinking
him the most beautiful of human beings. No doubt the magic rose which
Bulbo wore caused this infatuation on Angelica's part; but is she the
first young woman who has thought a silly fellow charming?

Giglio must go and sit by Gruffanuff, whose old face he, too,
every moment began to find more lovely. He paid the most outrageous
compliments to her:--There never was such a darling--Older than he
was?--Fiddle-de-dee! He would marry her--he would have nothing but her!

To marry the heir to the throne! Here was a chance! The artful hussy
actually got a sheet of paper, and wrote upon it, 'This is to give
notice that I, Giglio, only son of Savio, King of Paflagonia, hereby
promise to marry the charming and virtuous Barbara Griselda, Countess
Gruffanuff, and widow of the late Jenkins Gruffanuff, Esq.'

'What is it you are writing, you charming Gruffy?' says Giglio, who was
lolling on the sofa, by the writing-table.

'Only an order for you to sign, dear Prince, for giving coals and
blankets to the poor, this cold weather. Look! the King and Queen are
both asleep, and your Royal Highness's order will do.'

So Giglio, who was very good-natured, as Gruffy well knew, signed the
order immediately; and, when she had it in her pocket, you may fancy
what airs she gave herself. She was ready to flounce out of the room
before the Queen herself, as now she was the wife of the RIGHTFUL King
of Paflagonia! She would not speak to Glumboso, whom she thought a
brute, for depriving her DEAR HUSBAND of the crown! And when candles
came, and she had helped to undress the Queen and Princess, she went
into her own room, and actually practiced on a sheet of paper, 'Griselda
Paflagonia,' 'Barbara Regina,' 'Griselda Barbara, Paf. Reg.,' and I
don't know what signatures besides, against the day when she should be
Queen, forsooth!




IX. HOW BETSINDA GOT THE WARMING PAN

Little Betsinda came in to put Gruffanuff's hair in papers; and the
Countess was so pleased, that, for a wonder, she complimented Betsinda.
'Betsinda!' she said, 'you dressed my hair very nicely today; I promised
you a little present. Here are five sh--no, here is a pretty little
ring, that I picked--that I have had some time.' And she gave Betsinda
the ring she had picked up in the court. It fitted Betsinda exactly.

'It's like the ring the Princess used to wear,' says the maid.

'No such thing,' says Gruffanuff, 'I have had it this ever so long.
There, tuck me up quite comfortable; and now, as it's a very cold night
(the snow was beating in at the window), you may go and warm dear Prince
Giglio's bed, like a good girl, and then you may unrip my green silk,
and then you can just do me up a little cap for the morning, and then
you can mend that hole in my silk stocking, and then you can go to
bed, Betsinda. Mind I shall want my cup of tea at five o'clock in the
morning.'

'I suppose I had best warm both the young gentlemen's beds, Ma'am,' says
Betsinda.

Gruffanuff, for reply, said, 'Hau-au-ho!--Grauhawhoo!--Hong-hrho!' In
fact, she was snoring sound asleep.

Her room, you know, is next to the King and Queen, and the Princess is
next to them. So pretty Betsinda went away for the coals to the kitchen,
and filled the royal warming-pan.

Now, she was a very kind, merry, civil, pretty girl; but there must
have been something very captivating about her this evening, for all
the women in the servants' hall began to scold and abuse her. The
housekeeper said she was a pert, stuck-up thing: the upper-housemaid
asked, how dare she wear such ringlets and ribbons, it was quite
improper! The cook (for there was a woman-cook as well as a man-cook)
said to the kitchen-maid that she never could see anything in that
creetur: but as for the men, every one of them, Coachman, John, Buttons,
the page, and Monsieur, the Prince of Crim Tartary's valet, started up,
and said--

     'My eyes!'  }
     'O mussey!' } 'What a pretty girl Betsinda is!'
     'O jemmany!' }
     'O ciel!'  }

'Hands off; none of your impertinence, you vulgar, low people!' says
Betsinda, walking off with her pan of coals. She heard the young
gentlemen playing at billiards as she went upstairs: first to Prince
Giglio's bed, which she warmed, and then to Prince Bulbo's room.

He came in just as she had done; and as soon as he saw her, 'O! O! O!
O! O! O! what a beyou--oo--ootiful creature you are! You angel--you
peri--you rosebud, let me be thy bulbul--thy Bulbo, too! Fly to the
desert, fly with me! I never saw a young gazelle to glad me with its
dark blue eye that had eyes like shine. Thou nymph of beauty, take, take
this young heart. A truer never did itself sustain within a soldier's
waistcoat. Be mine! Be mine! Be Princess of Crim Tartary! My Royal
father will approve our union; and, as for that little carroty-haired
Angelica, I do not care a fig for her any more.'

'Go away, Your Royal Highness, and go to bed, please,' said Betsinda,
with the warming-pan.

But Bulbo said, 'No, never, till thou swearest to be mine, thou lovely,
blushing chambermaid divine! Here, at thy feet, the Royal Bulbo lies,
the trembling captive of Betsinda's eyes.'

And he went on, making himself SO ABSURD AND RIDICULOUS, that Betsinda,
who was full of fun, gave him a touch with the warming-pan, which, I
promise you, made him cry 'O-o-o-o!' in a very different manner.

Prince Bulbo made such a noise that Prince Giglio, who heard him from
the next room, came in to see what was the matter. As soon as he saw
what was taking place, Giglio, in a fury, rushed on Bulbo, kicked him
in the rudest manner up to the ceiling, and went on kicking him till his
hair was quite out of curl.

Poor Betsinda did not know whether to laugh or to cry; the kicking
certainly must hurt the Prince, but then he looked so droll! When Giglio
had done knocking him up and down to the ground, and whilst he went into
a corner rubbing himself, what do you think Giglio does? He goes down on
his own knees to Betsinda, takes her hand, begs her to accept his heart,
and offers to marry her that moment. Fancy Betsinda's condition, who had
been in love with the Prince ever since she first saw him in the palace
garden, when she was quite a little child.

'Oh, divine Betsinda!' says the Prince, 'how have I lived fifteen years
in thy company without seeing thy perfections? What woman in all
Europe, Asia, Africa, and America, nay, in Australia, only it is not
yet discovered, can presume to be thy equal? Angelica? Pish! Gruffanuff?
Phoo! The Queen? Ha, ha! Thou art my Queen. Thou art the real Angelica,
because thou art really angelic.'

'Oh, Prince! I am but a poor chambermaid,' says Betsinda, looking,
however, very much pleased.

'Didst thou not tend me in my sickness, when all forsook me?' continues
Giglio. 'Did not thy gentle hand smooth my pillow, and bring me jelly
and roast chicken?'

'Yes, dear Prince, I did,' says Betsinda, 'and I sewed Your Royal
Highness's shirt-buttons on too, if you please, Your Royal Highness,'
cries this artless maiden.

When poor Prince Bulbo, who was now madly in love with Betsinda, heard
this declaration, when he saw the unmistakable glances which she flung
upon Giglio, Bulbo began to cry bitterly, and tore quantities of hair
out of his head, till it all covered the room like so much tow.

Betsinda had left the warming-pan on the floor while the princes were
going on with their conversation, and as they began now to quarrel and
be very fierce with one another, she thought proper to run away.

'You great big blubbering booby, tearing your hair in the corner there;
of course you will give me satisfaction for insulting Betsinda. YOU dare
to kneel down at Princess Giglio's knees and kiss her hand!'

'She's not Princess Giglio!' roars out Bulbo. 'She shall be Princess
Bulbo, no other shall be Princess Bulbo.'

'You are engaged to my cousin!' bellows out Giglio. 'I hate your
cousin,' says Bulbo.

'You shall give me satisfaction for insulting her!' cries Giglio in a
fury.

'I'll have your life.'

'I'll run you through.'

'I'll cut your throat.'

'I'll blow your brains out.'

'I'll knock your head off.'

'I'll send a friend to you in the morning.'

'I'll send a bullet into you in the afternoon.'

'We'll meet again,' says Giglio, shaking his fist in Bulbo's face; and
seizing up the warming-pan, he kissed it, because, forsooth, Betsinda
had carried it, and rushed downstairs. What should he see on the landing
but His Majesty talking to Betsinda, whom he called by all sorts of fond
names. His Majesty had heard a row in the building, so he stated, and
smelling something burning, had come out to see what the matter was.

'It's the young gentlemen smoking, perhaps, sir,' says Betsinda.

'Charming chambermaid,' says the King (like all the rest of them),
'never mind the young men! Turn thy eyes on a middle-aged autocrat, who
has been considered not ill-looking in his time.'

'Oh, sir! what will Her Majesty say?' cries Betsinda.

'Her Majesty!' laughs the monarch. 'Her Majesty be hanged. Am I not
Autocrat of Paflagonia? Have I not blocks, ropes, axes, hangmen--ha?
Runs not a river by my palace wall? Have I not sacks to sew up wives
withal? Say but the word, that thou wilt be mine own,--your mistress
straightway in a sack is sewn, and thou the sharer of my heart and
throne.'

When Giglio heard these atrocious sentiments, he forgot the respect
usually paid to Royalty, lifted up the warming-pan, and knocked down the
King as flat as a pancake; after which, Master Giglio took to his
heels and ran away, and Betsinda went off screaming, and the Queen,
Gruffanuff, and the Princess, all came out of their rooms. Fancy their
feelings on beholding their husband, father, sovereign, in this posture!




X. HOW KING VALOROSO WAS IN A DREADFUL PASSION

As soon as the coals began to burn him, the King came to himself
and stood up. 'Ho! my captain of the guards!' His Majesty exclaimed,
stamping his royal feet with rage. O piteous spectacle! the King's nose
was bent quite crooked by the blow of Prince Giglio! His Majesty ground
his teeth with rage. 'Hedzoff,' he said, taking a death-warrant out of
his dressing-gown pocket, 'Hedzoff, good Hedzoff, seize upon the Prince.
Thou'lt find him in his chamber two pair up. But now he dared, with
sacrilegious hand, to strike the sacred night-cap of a king--Hedzoff,
and floor me with a warming-pan! Away, no more demur, the villain dies!
See it be done, or else,--h'm--ha!--h'm! mind shine own eyes!' and
followed by the ladies, and lifting up the tails of his dressing-gown,
the King entered his own apartment.

Captain Hedzoff was very much affected, having a sincere love for
Giglio. 'Poor, poor Giglio!' he said, the tears rolling over his manly
face, and dripping down his moustachios; 'my noble young Prince, is it
my hand must lead thee to death?'

'Lead him to fiddlestick, Hedzoff,' said a female voice. It was
Gruffanuff, who had come out in her dressing-gown when she heard the
noise. 'The King said you were to hang the Prince. Well, hang the
Prince.'

'I don't understand you,' says Hedzoff, who was not a very clever man.

'You Gaby! he didn't say WHICH Prince,' says Gruffanuff.

'No; he didn't say which, certainly,' said Hedzoff.

'Well then, take Bulbo, and hang HIM!'

When Captain Hedzoff heard this, he began to dance about for joy.
'Obedience is a soldier's honour,' says he. 'Prince Bulbo's head will do
capitally,' and he went to arrest the Prince the very first thing next
morning.

He knocked at the door. 'Who's there?' says Bulbo. 'Captain Hedzoff?
Step in, pray, my good Captain; I'm delighted to see you; I have been
expecting you.'

'Have you?' says Hedzoff.

'Sleibootz, my Chamberlain, will act for me,' says the Prince.

'I beg Your Royal Highness's pardon, but you will have to act for
yourself, and it's a pity to wake Baron Sleibootz.'

The Prince Bulbo still seemed to take the matter very coolly. 'Of
course, Captain,' says he, 'you are come about that affair with Prince
Giglio?'

'Precisely,' says Hedzoff, 'that affair of Prince Giglio.'

'Is it to be pistols, or swords, Captain?' asks Bulbo. 'I'm a pretty
good hand with both, and I'll do for Prince Giglio as sure as my name is
My Royal Highness Prince Bulbo.'

'There's some mistake, my Lord,' says the Captain. 'The business is done
with AXES among us.'

'Axes? That's sharp work,' says Bulbo. 'Call my Chamberlain, he'll be my
second, and in ten minutes, I flatter myself, you'll see Master Giglio's
head off his impertinent shoulders. I'm hungry for his blood Hoooo, aw!'
and he looked as savage as an ogre.

'I beg your pardon, sir, but by this warrant I am to take you prisoner,
and hand you over to--to the executioner.'

'Pooh, pooh, my good man!--Stop, I say,--ho!--hulloa!' was all that
this luckless Prince was enabled to say, for Hedzoff's guards seizing
him, tied a handkerchief over his mouth and face, and carried him to the
place of execution.

The King, who happened to be talking to Glumboso, saw him pass, and
took a pinch of snuff and said, 'So much for Giglio. Now let's go to
breakfast.'

The Captain of the Guard handed over his prisoner to the Sheriff, with
the fatal order,

'AT SIGHT CUT OFF THE BEARER'S HEAD. 'VALOROSO XXIV.'

'It's a mistake,' says Bulbo, who did not seem to understand the
business in the least.

'Poo--poo--pooh,' says the Sheriff. 'Fetch Jack Ketch instantly. Jack
Ketch!'

And poor Bulbo was led to the scaffold, where an executioner with a
block and a tremendous axe was always ready in case he should be wanted.

But we must now revert to Giglio and Betsinda.




XI. WHAT GRUFFANUFF DID TO GIGLIO AND BETSINDA

Gruffanuff, who had seen what had happened with the King, and knew that
Giglio must come to grief, got up very early the next morning, and went
to devise some plans for rescuing her darling husband, as the silly old
thing insisted on calling him. She found him walking up and down the
garden, thinking of a rhyme for Betsinda (TINDER and WINDA were all he
could find), and indeed having forgotten all about the past evening,
except that Betsinda was the most lovely of beings.

'Well, dear Giglio,' says Gruff.

'Well, dear Gruffy,' says Giglio, only HE was quite satirical.

'I have been thinking, darling, what you must do in this scrape. You
must fly the country for a while.'

'What scrape?--fly the country? Never without her I love, Countess,'
says Giglio.

'No, she will accompany you, dear Prince,' she says, in her most coaxing
accents. 'First, we must get the jewels belonging to our royal parents.
and those of her and his present Majesty. Here is the key, duck; they
are all yours, you know, by right, for you are the rightful King of
Paflagonia, and your wife will be the rightful Queen.'

'Will she?' says Giglio.

'Yes; and having got the jewels, go to Glumboso's apartment, where,
under his bed, you will find sacks containing money to the amount of
L2I7,000,000,987,439, 13S. 6 1/2d., all belonging to you, for he took
it out of your royal father's room on the day of his death. With this we
will fly.'

'WE will fly?' says Giglio.

'Yes, you and your bride--your affianced love--your Gruffy!' says the
Countess, with a languishing leer.

'YOU my bride!' says Giglio. 'You, you hideous old woman!'

'Oh, you--you wretch! didn't you give me this paper promising marriage?'
cries Gruff.

'Get away, you old goose! I love Betsinda, and Betsinda only!' And in a
fit of terror he ran from her as quickly as he could.

'He! he! he!' shrieks out Gruff; 'a promise is a promise if there are
laws in Paflagonia! And as for that monster, that wretch, that fiend,
that ugly little vixen--as for that upstart, that ingrate, that beast,
Betsinda, Master Giglio will have no little difficulty in discovering
her whereabouts. He may look very long before finding HER, I warrant. He
little knows that Miss Betsinda is--'

Is--what? Now, you shall hear. Poor Betsinda got up at five in winter's
morning to bring her cruel mistress her tea; and instead of finding
her in a good humour, found Gruffy as cross as two sticks. The Countess
boxed Betsinda's ears half a dozen times whilst she was dressing; but
as poor little Betsinda was used to this kind of treatment, she did not
feel any special alarm. 'And now,' says she, 'when Her Majesty rings her
bell twice, I'll trouble you, miss, to attend.'

So when the Queen's bell rang twice, Betsinda came to Her Majesty and
made a pretty little curtsey. The Queen, the Princess, and Gruffanuff
were all three in the room. As soon as they saw her they began,

'You wretch!' says the Queen.

'You little vulgar thing!' says the Princess.

'You beast!' says Gruffanuff.

'Get out of my sight!' says the Queen.

'Go away with you, do!' says the Princess.

'Quit the premises!' says Gruffanuff.

'Alas! and woe is me!' very lamentable events had occurred to Betsinda
that morning, and all in consequence of that fatal warming-pan business
of the previous night. The King had offered to marry her; of course Her
Majesty the Queen was jealous: Bulbo had fallen in love with her; of
course Angelica was furious: Giglio was in love with her, and oh, what a
fury Gruffy was in!

     'Take off that {cap   } I gave you,'
     {petticoat} they said, all
     {gown   } at once,
     and began tearing the clothes off poor Betsinda.

     'How    (the King?'   } cried the Queen,
     dare you  {Prince Bulbo?' } the Princess, and
     flirt with {Prince Giglio?'} Countess.

'Give her the rags she wore when she came into the house, and turn her
out of it!' cries the Queen.

'Mind she does not go with MY shoes on, which I lent her so kindly,'
says the Princess; and indeed the Princess's shoes were a great deal too
big for Betsinda.

'Come with me, you filthy hussy!' and taking up the Queen's poker, the
cruel Gruffanuff drove Betsinda into her room.

The Countess went to the glass box in which she had kept Betsinda's old
cloak and shoe this ever so long, and said, 'Take those rags, you little
beggar creature, and strip off everything belonging to honest people,
and go about your business'; and she actually tore off the poor little
delicate thing's back almost all her things, and told her to be off out
of the house.

Poor Betsinda huddled the cloak round her back, on which were
embroidered the letters PRIN. . . ROSAL. . . and then came a great rent.

As for the shoe, what was she to do with one poor little tootsey sandal?
the string was still to it, so she hung it round her neck.

'Won't you give me a pair of shoes to go out in the snow, mum, if you
please, mum?' cried the poor child.

'No, you wicked beast!' says Gruffanuff, driving her along with the
poker--driving her down the cold stairs--driving her through the cold
hall--flinging her out into the cold street, so that the knocker itself
shed tears to see her!

But a kind fairy made the soft snow warm for her little feet, and she
wrapped herself up in the ermine of her mantle, and was gone!


'And now let us think about breakfast,' says the greedy Queen.

'What dress shall I put on, mamma? the pink or the peagreen?' says
Angelica. 'Which do you think the dear Prince will like best?'

'Mrs. V.!' sings out the King from his dressing-room, 'let us have
sausages for breakfast! Remember we have Prince Bulbo staying with us!'

And they all went to get ready.

Nine o'clock came, and they were all in the breakfast-room, and no
Prince Bulbo as yet. The urn was hissing and humming: the muffins were
smoking--such a heap of muffins! the eggs were done, there was a pot
of raspberry jam, and coffee, and a beautiful chicken and tongue on the
side-table. Marmitonio the cook brought in the sausages. Oh, how nice
they smelt!

'Where is Bulbo?' said the King. 'John, where is His Royal Highness?'
John said he had a took hup His Roilighnessesses shaving-water, and
his clothes and things, and he wasn't in his room, which he sposed His
Royliness was just stepped trout.

'Stepped out before breakfast in the snow! Impossible!' says the King,
sticking his fork into a sausage. 'My dear, take one. Angelica, won't
you have a saveloy?' The Princess took one, being very fond of them; and
at this moment Glumboso entered with Captain Hedzoff, both looking very
much disturbed.

'I am afraid Your Majesty--' cries Glumboso.

'No business before breakfast, Glum!' says the King.' Breakfast first,
business next. Mrs. V., some more sugar!'

'Sire, I am afraid if we wait till after breakfast it will be too late,'
says Glumboso. 'He--he--he'll be hanged at half-past nine.'

'Don't talk about hanging and spoil my breakfast, you unkind, vulgar
man you,' cries the Princess. 'John, some mustard. Pray who is to be
hanged?'

'Sire, it is the Prince,' whispers Glumboso to the King.

'Talk about business after breakfast, I tell you!' says His Majesty,
quite sulky.

'We shall have a war, Sire, depend on it,' says the Minister. 'His
father, King Padella. . .'

'His father, King WHO?' says the King. 'King Padella is not Giglio's
father. My brother, King Savio, was Giglio's father.'

'It's Prince Bulbo they are hanging, Sire, not Prince Giglio,' says the
Prime Minister.

'You told me to hang the Prince, and I took the ugly one,' says Hedzoff.
'I didn't, of course, think Your Majesty intended to murder your own
flesh and blood!'

The King for all reply flung the plate of sausages at Hedzoff's head.
The Princess cried out 'Hee-kareekaree!' and fell down in a fainting
fit.

'Turn the cock of the urn upon Her Royal Highness,' said the King,
and the boiling water gradually revived her. His Majesty looked at
his watch, compared it by the clock in the parlour, and by that of the
church in the square opposite; then he wound it up; then he looked at it
again. 'The great question is,' says he, 'am I fast or am I slow? If I'm
slow, we may as well go on with breakfast. If I'm fast, why, there
is just the possibility of saving Prince Bulbo. It's a doosid awkward
mistake, and upon my word, Hedzoff, I have the greatest mind to have you
hanged too.'

'Sire, I did but my duty; a soldier has but his orders. I didn't expect
after forty-seven years of faithful service that my sovereign would
think of putting me to a felon's death!'

'A hundred thousand plagues upon you! Can't you see that while you are
talking my Bulbo is being hung?' screamed the Princess.

'By Jove! she's always right, that girl, and I'm so absent,' says the
King, looking at his watch again. 'Ha! there go the drums! What a doosid
awkward thing though!'

'Oh, papa, you goose! Write the reprieve, and let me run with it,' cries
the Princess--and she got a sheet of paper, and pen and ink, and laid
them before the King.

'Confound it! where are my spectacles?' the Monarch exclaimed.
'Angelica! go up into my bedroom, look under my pillow, not your
mamma's; there you'll see my keys. Bring them down to me, and--Well,
well! what impetuous things these girls are!' Angelica was gone, and had
run up panting to the bedroom, and found the keys, and was back again
before the King had finished a muffin. 'Now, love,' says he, 'you must
go all the way back for my desk, in which my spectacles are. If you
would but have heard me out. . . Be hanged to her! There she is off
again. Angelica! ANGELICA!' When His Majesty called in his LOUD voice,
she knew she must obey, and came back.

'My dear, when you go out of a room, how often have I told you, SHUT THE
DOOR. That's a darling. That's all.' At last the keys and the desk and
the spectacles were got, and the King mended his pen, and signed his
name to a reprieve, and Angelica ran with it as swift as the wind.
'You'd better stay, my love, and finish the muffins. There's no use
going. Be sure it's too late. Hand me over that raspberry jam, please,'
said the Monarch. 'Bong! Bawong! There goes the half-hour. I knew it
was.'

Angelica ran, and ran, and ran, and ran. She ran up Fore Street, and
down High Street, and through the Market-place, and down to the left,
and over the bridge, and up the blind alley, and back again, and round
by the Castle, and so along by the Haberdasher's on the right, opposite
the lamp-post, and round the square, and she came--she came to the
EXECUTION PLACE, where she saw Bulbo laying his head on the block!!! The
executioner raised his axe, but at that moment the Princess came panting
up and cried 'Reprieve!' 'Reprieve!' screamed the Princess. 'Reprieve!'
shouted all the people. Up the scaffold stairs she sprang, with the
agility of a lighter of lamps; and flinging herself in Bulbo's arms,
regardless of all ceremony, she cried out, 'Oh, my Prince! my lord! my
love! my Bulbo! Thine Angelica has been in time to save thy precious
existence, sweet rosebud; to prevent thy being nipped in thy young
bloom! Had aught befallen thee, Angelica too had died, and welcomed
death that joined her to her Bulbo.'

'H'm! there's no accounting for tastes,' said Bulbo, looking so very
much puzzled and uncomfortable that the Princess, in tones of tenderest
strain, asked the cause of his disquiet.

'I tell you what it is, Angelica,' said he, 'since I came here
yesterday, there has been such a row, and disturbance, and quarrelling,
and fighting, and chopping of heads off, and the deuce to pay, that I am
inclined to go back to Crim Tartary.'

'But with me as thy bride, my Bulbo! Though wherever thou art is Crim
Tartary to me, my bold, my beautiful, my Bulbo!'

'Well, well, I suppose we must be married,' says Bulbo. 'Doctor, you
came to read the Funeral Service--read the Marriage Service, will you?
What must be, must. That will satisfy Angelica, and then, in the name of
peace and quietness, do let us go back to breakfast.'

Bulbo had carried a rose in his mouth all the time of the dismal
ceremony. It was a fairy rose, and he was told by his mother that he
ought never to part with it. So he had kept it between his teeth, even
when he laid his poor head upon the block, hoping vaguely that some
chance would turn up in his favour. As he began to speak to Angelica,
he forgot about the rose, and of course it dropped out of his mouth.
The romantic Princess instantly stooped and seized it. 'Sweet rose!' she
exclaimed, 'that bloomed upon my Bulbo's lip, never, never will I part
from thee!' and she placed it in her bosom. And you know Bulbo COULDN'T
ask her to give the rose back again. And they went to breakfast; and as
they walked, it appeared to Bulbo that Angelica became more exquisitely
lovely every moment.

He was frantic until they were married; and now, strange to say, it was
Angelica who didn't care about him! He knelt down, he kissed her hand,
he prayed and begged; he cried with admiration; while she for her part
said she really thought they might wait; it seemed to her he was not
handsome any more--no, not at all, quite the reverse; and not clever,
no, very stupid; and not well bred, like Giglio; no, on the contrary,
dreadfully vul--

What, I cannot say, for King Valoroso roared out 'POOH, stuff!' in a
terrible voice. 'We will have no more of this shilly-shallying! Call the
Archbishop, and let the Prince and Princess be married offhand!'

So, married they were, and I am sure for my part I trust they will be
happy.




XII. HOW BETSINDA FLED, AND WHAT BECAME OF HER

Betsinda wandered on and on, till she passed through the town gates, and
so on the great Crim Tartary road, the very way on which Giglio too
was going. 'Ah!' thought she, as the diligence passed her, of which the
conductor was blowing a delightful tune on his horn, 'how I should like
to be on that coach!' But the coach and the jingling horses were very
soon gone. She little knew who was in it, though very likely she was
thinking of him all the time.

Then came an empty cart, returning from market; and the driver being
a kind man, and seeing such a very pretty girl trudging along the road
with bare feet, most good-naturedly gave her a seat. He said he lived on
the confines of the forest, where his old father was a woodman, and, if
she liked, he would take her so far on her road. All roads were the same
to little Betsinda, so she very thankfully took this one.

And the carter put a cloth round her bare feet, and gave her some bread
and cold bacon, and was very kind to her. For all that she was very cold
and melancholy. When after travelling on and on, evening came, and all
the black pines were bending with snow, and there, at last, was the
comfortable light beaming in the woodman's windows; and so they arrived,
and went into his cottage. He was an old man, and had a number of
children, who were just at supper, with nice hot bread-and-milk, when
their elder brother arrived with the cart. And they jumped and clapped
their hands; for they were good children; and he had brought them toys
from the town. And when they saw the pretty stranger, they ran to
her, and brought her to the fire, and rubbed her poor little feet, and
brought her bread and milk.

'Look, father!' they said to the old woodman, 'look at this poor girl,
and see what pretty cold feet she has. They are as white as our milk!
And look and see what an odd cloak she has, just like the bit of velvet
that hangs up in our cupboard, and which you found that day the little
cubs were killed by King Padella, in the forest! And look, why, bless
us all! she has got round her neck just such another little shoe as
that you brought home, and have shown us so often--a little blue velvet
shoe!'

'What,' said the old woodman, 'what is all this about a shoe and a
cloak?'

And Betsinda explained that she had been left, when quite a little
child, at the town with this cloak and this shoe. And the persons who
had taken care of her had--had been angry with her, for no fault, she
hoped, of her own. And they had sent her away with her old clothes--and
here, in fact, she was. She remembered having been in a forest--and
perhaps it was a dream--it was so very odd and strange--having lived in
a cave with lions there; and, before that, having lived in a very, very
fine house, as fine as the King's, in the town.

When the woodman heard this, he was so astonished, it was quite curious
to see how astonished he was. He went to his cupboard, and took out of
a stocking a five-shilling piece of King Cavolfiore, and vowed it was
exactly like the young woman. And then he produced the shoe and piece
of velvet which he had kept so long, and compared them with the things
which Betsinda wore. In Betsinda's little shoe was written, 'Hopkins,
maker to the Royal Family'; so in the other shoe was written, 'Hopkins,
maker to the Royal Family.' In the inside of Betsinda's piece of
cloak was embroidered, 'PRIN ROSAL'; in the other piece of cloak was
embroidered 'CESS BA. NO. 246.' So that when put together you read,
'PRINCESS ROSALBA. NO. 246.'

On seeing this, the dear old woodman fell down on his knee, saying,
'O my Princess, O my gracious royal lady, O my rightful Queen of Crim
Tartary,--I hail thee--I acknowledge thee--I do thee homage!' And in
token of his fealty, he rubbed his venerable nose three times on the
ground, and put the Princess's foot on his head.

'Why,' said she, 'my good woodman, you must be a nobleman of my royal
father's Court!' For in her lowly retreat, and under the name of
Betsinda, HER MAJESTY, ROSALBA, Queen of Crim Tartary, had read of the
customs of all foreign courts and nations.

'Marry, indeed, am I, my gracious liege--the poor Lord Spinachi
once--the humble woodman these fifteen years syne. Ever since the tyrant
Padella (may ruin overtake the treacherous knave!) dismissed me from my
post of First Lord.'

'First Lord of the Toothpick and Joint Keeper of the Snuffbox? I mind
me! Thou heldest these posts under our royal Sire. They are restored to
thee, Lord Spinachi! I make thee knight of the second class of our Order
of the Pumpkin (the first class being reserved for crowned heads alone).
Rise, Marquis of Spinachi!' And with indescribable majesty, the Queen,
who had no sword handy, waved the pewter spoon with which she had been
taking her bread-and-milk, over the bald head of the old nobleman, whose
tears absolutely made a puddle on the ground, and whose dear children
went to bed that night Lords and Ladies Bartolomeo, Ubaldo, Catarina,
and Ottavia degli Spinachi!

The acquaintance HER MAJESTY showed with the history, and noble families
of her empire, was wonderful. 'The House of Broccoli should remain
faithful to us,' she said; 'they were ever welcome at our Court. Have
the Articiocchi, as was their wont, turned to the Rising Sun? The family
of Sauerkraut must sure be with us--they were ever welcome in the halls
of King Cavolfiore.' And so she went on enumerating quite a list of
the nobility and gentry of Crim Tartary, so admirably had Her Majesty
profited by her studies while in exile.

The old Marquis of Spinachi said he could answer for them all; that the
whole country groaned under Padella's tyranny, and longed to return to
its rightful sovereign; and late as it was, he sent his children, who
knew the forest well, to summon this nobleman and that; and when his
eldest son, who had been rubbing the horse down and giving him his
supper, came into the house for his own, the Marquis told him to put his
boots on, and a saddle on the mare, and ride hither and thither to such
and such people.


When the young man heard who his companion in the cart had been, he too
knelt down and put her royal foot on his head; he too bedewed the ground
with his tears; he was frantically in love with her, as everybody now
was who saw her: so were the young Lords Bartolomeo and Ubaldo, who
punched each other's little heads out of jealousy; and so, when they
came from east and west at the summons of the Marquis degli Spinachi,
were the Crim Tartar Lords who still remained faithful to the House of
Cavolfiore. They were such very old gentlemen for the most part that Her
Majesty never suspected their absurd passion, and went among them quite
unaware of the havoc her beauty was causing, until an old blind Lord who
had joined her party told her what the truth was; after which, for fear
of making the people too much in love with her, she always wore a veil.
She went about privately, from one nobleman's castle to another; and
they visited among themselves again, and had meetings, and composed
proclamations and counter-proclamations, and distributed all the best
places of the kingdom amongst one another, and selected who of the
opposition party should be executed when the Queen came to her own. And
so in about a year they were ready to move.

The party of Fidelity was in truth composed of very feeble old fogies
for the most part; they went about the country waving their old swords
and flags, and calling 'God save the Queen!' and King Padella happening
to be absent upon an invasion, they had their own way for a little,
and to be sure the people were very enthusiastic whenever they saw the
Queen; otherwise the vulgar took matters very quietly, for they said,
as far as they could recollect, they were pretty well as much taxed in
Cavolfiore's time, as now in Padella's.




XIII. HOW QUEEN ROSALBA CAME TO THE CASTLE OF THE BOLD COUNT HOGGINARMO

Her Majesty, having indeed nothing else to give, made all her followers
Knights of the Pumpkin, and Marquises, Earls, and Baronets; and they had
a little court for her, and made her a little crown of gilt paper, and a
robe of cotton velvet; and they quarrelled about the places to be given
away in her court, and about rank and precedence and dignities;--you
can't think how they quarrelled! The poor Queen was very tired of her
honours before she had had them a month, and I dare say sighed sometimes
even to be a lady's-maid again. But we must all do our duty in our
respective stations, so the Queen resigned herself to perform hers.

We have said how it happened that none of the Usurper's troops came out
to oppose this Army of Fidelity: it pottered along as nimbly as the
gout of the principal commanders allowed: it consisted of twice as many
officers as soldiers: and at length passed near the estates of one of
the most powerful noblemen of the country, who had not declared for the
Queen, but of whom her party had hopes, as he was always quarrelling
with King Padella.

When they came close to his park gates, this nobleman sent to say he
would wait upon Her Majesty: he was a most powerful warrior, and his
name was Count Hogginarmo, whose helmet it took two strong negroes to
carry. He knelt down before her and said, 'Madam and liege lady! it
becomes the great nobles of the Crimean realm to show every outward sign
of respect to the wearer of the Crown, whoever that may be. We testify
to our own nobility in acknowledging yours. The bold Hogginarmo bends
the knee to the first of the aristocracy of his country.'

Rosalba said, 'The bold Count of Hogginarmo was uncommonly kind.' But
she felt afraid of him, even while he was kneeling, and his eyes scowled
at her from between his whiskers, which grew up to them.

'The first Count of the Empire, madam,' he went on, 'salutes the
Sovereign. The Prince addresses himself to the not more noble lady!
Madam, my hand is free, and I offer it, and my heart and my sword to
your service! My three wives lie buried in my ancestral vaults. The
third perished but a year since; and this heart pines for a consort!
Deign to be mine, and I swear to bring to your bridal table the head of
King Padella, the eyes and nose of his son Prince Bulbo, the right hand
and ears of the usurping Sovereign of Paflagonia, which country shall
thenceforth be an appanage to your--to OUR Crown! Say yes; Hogginarmo is
not accustomed to be denied. Indeed I cannot contemplate the possibility
of a refusal: for frightful will be the result; dreadful the murders;
furious the devastations; horrible the tyranny; tremendous the tortures,
misery, taxation, which the people of this realm will endure, if
Hogginarmo's wrath be aroused! I see consent in Your Majesty's lovely
eyes--their glances fill my soul with rapture!'

'Oh, sir!' Rosalba said, withdrawing her hand in great fright. 'Your
Lordship is exceedingly kind; but I am sorry to tell you that I have a
prior attachment to a young gentleman by the name of--Prince Giglio--and
never--never can marry any one but him.'

Who can describe Hogginarmo's wrath at this remark? Rising up from the
ground, he ground his teeth so that fire flashed out of his mouth, from
which at the same time issued remarks and language, so LOUD,
VIOLENT, AND IMPROPER, that this pen shall never repeat them!
'R-r-r-r-rr--Rejected! Fiends and perdition! The bold Hogginarmo
rejected! All the world shall hear of my rage; and you, madam, you above
all shall rue it!' And kicking the two negroes before him, he rushed
away, his whiskers streaming in the wind.

Her Majesty's Privy Council was in a dreadful panic when they saw
Hogginarmo issue from the royal presence in such a towering rage, making
footballs of the poor negroes--a panic which the events justified. They
marched off from Hogginarmo's park very crestfallen; and in another
half-hour they were met by that rapacious chieftain with a few of his
followers, who cut, slashed, charged, whacked, banged, and pommelled
amongst them, took the Queen prisoner, and drove the Army of Fidelity to
I don't know where.

Poor Queen! Hogginarmo, her conqueror, would not condescend to see her.
'Get a horse-van!' he said to his grooms, 'clap the hussy into it, and
send her, with my compliments, to His Majesty King Padella.'

Along with his lovely prisoner, Hogginarmo sent a letter full of servile
compliments and loathsome flatteries to King Padella, for whose life,
and that of his royal family, the HYPOCRITICAL HUMBUG pretended to offer
the most fulsome prayers. And Hogginarmo promised speedily to pay his
humble homage at his august master's throne, of which he begged leave to
be counted the most loyal and constant defender. Such a WARY old BIRD
as King Padella was not to be caught by Master Hogginarmo's CHAFF and we
shall hear presently how the tyrant treated his upstart vassal. No, no;
depend on's, two such rogues do not trust one another.

So this poor Queen was laid in the straw like Margery Daw, and driven
along in the dark ever so many miles to the Court, where King Padella
had now arrived, having vanquished all his enemies, murdered most of
them, and brought some of the richest into captivity with him for the
purpose of torturing them and finding out where they had hidden their
money.

Rosalba heard their shrieks and groans in the dungeon in which she was
thrust; a most awful black hole, full of bats, rats, mice, toads, frogs,
mosquitoes, bugs, fleas, serpents, and every kind of horror. No light
was let into it, otherwise the gaolers might have seen her and fallen in
love with her, as an owl that lived up in the roof of the tower did, and
a cat, you know, who can see in the dark, and having set its green eyes
on Rosalba, never would be got to go back to the turnkey's wife to whom
it belonged. And the toads in the dungeon came and kissed her feet,
and the vipers wound round her neck and arms, and never hurt her, so
charming was this poor Princess in the midst of her misfortunes.

At last, after she had been kept in this place EVER SO LONG, the door of
the dungeon opened, and the terrible KING PADELLA came in.

But what he said and did must be reserved for another chapter, as we
must now back to Prince Giglio.




XIV. WHAT BECAME OF GIGLIO

The idea of marrying such an old creature as Gruffanuff frightened
Prince Giglio so, that he ran up to his room, packed his trunks,
fetched in a couple of porters, and was off to the diligence office in a
twinkling.

It was well that he was so quick in his operations, did not dawdle over
his luggage, and took the early coach, for as soon as the mistake about
Prince Bulbo was found out, that cruel Glumboso sent up a couple of
policemen to Prince Giglio's room, with orders that he should be carried
to Newgate, and his head taken off before twelve o'clock. But the coach
was out of the Paflagonian dominions before two o'clock; and I dare say
the express that was sent after Prince Giglio did not ride very quick,
for many people in Paflagonia had a regard for Giglio, as the son of
their old sovereign; a Prince who, with all his weaknesses, was very
much better than his brother, the usurping, lazy, careless, passionate,
tyrannical, reigning monarch. That Prince busied himself with the balls,
fetes, masquerades, hunting-parties, and so forth, which he thought
proper to give on occasion of his daughter's marriage to Prince Bulbo;
and let us trust was not sorry in his own heart that his brother's son
had escaped the scaffold.

It was very cold weather, and the snow was on the ground, and
Giglio, who gave his name as simple Mr. Giles, was very glad to get a
comfortable place in the coupe of the diligence, where he sat with the
conductor and another gentleman. At the first stage from Blombodinga,
as they stopped to change horses, there came up to the diligence a very
ordinary, vulgar-looking woman, with a bag under her arm, who asked
for a place. All the inside places were taken, and the young woman was
informed that if she wished to travel, she must go upon the roof; and
the passenger inside with Giglio (a rude person, I should think), put
his head out of the window, and said, 'Nice weather for travelling
outside! I wish you a pleasant journey, my dear.' The poor woman coughed
very much, and Giglio pitied her. 'I will give up my place to her,'
says he, 'rather than she should travel in the cold air with that horrid
cough.' On which the vulgar traveller said, 'YOU'D keep her warm, I am
sure, if it's a MUFF she wants.' On which Giglio pulled his nose, boxed
his ears, hit him in the eye, and gave this vulgar person a warning
never to call him MUFF again.

Then he sprang up gaily on to the roof of the diligence, and made
himself very comfortable in the straw.

The vulgar traveller got down only at the next station, and Giglio took
his place again, and talked to the person next to him. She appeared
to be a most agreeable, well-informed, and entertaining female. They
travelled together till night, and she gave Giglio all sorts of things
out of the bag which she carried, and which indeed seemed to contain the
most wonderful collection of articles. He was thirsty--out there came a
pint bottle of Bass's pale ale, and a silver mug! Hungry--she took out
a cold fowl, some slices of ham, bread, salt, and a most delicious piece
of cold plum-pudding, and a little glass of brandy afterwards.

As they travelled, this plain-looking, queer woman talked to Giglio on
a variety of subjects, in which the poor Prince showed his ignorance as
much as she did her capacity. He owned, with many blushes, how ignorant
he was; on which the lady said, 'My dear Gigl--my good Mr. Giles, you
are a young man, and have plenty of time before you. You have nothing to
do but to improve yourself. Who knows but that you may find use for your
knowledge some day? When--when you may be wanted at home, as some people
may be.'

'Good heavens, madam!' says he, 'do you know me?'

'I know a number of funny things,' says the lady. 'I have been at some
people's christenings, and turned away from other folks' doors. I have
seen some people spoilt by good fortune, and others, as I hope, improved
by hardship. I advise you to stay at the town where the coach stops for
the night. Stay there and study, and remember your old friend to whom
you were kind.'

'And who is my old friend?' asked Giglio.

'When you want anything,' says the lady, 'look in this bag, which I
leave to you as a present, and be grateful to--'

'To whom, madam?' says he.

'To the Fairy Blackstick,' says the lady, flying out of the window. And
then Giglio asked the conductor if he knew where the lady was?

'What lady?' says the man; 'there has been no lady in this coach, except
the old woman, who got out at the last stage.' And Giglio thought he
had been dreaming. But there was the bag which Blackstick had given him
lying on his lap; and when he came to the town he took it in his hand
and went into the inn.

They gave him a very bad bedroom, and Giglio, when he woke in the
morning, fancying himself in the Royal Palace at home, called, 'John,
Charles, Thomas! My chocolate--my dressing-gown--my slippers'; but
nobody came. There was no bell, so he went and bawled out for water on
the top of the stairs.

The landlady came up.

'What are you a hollering and a bellaring for here, young man?' says
she.

'There's no warm water--no servants; my boots are not even cleaned.'

'He, he! Clean 'em yourself,' says the landlady. 'You young students
give yourselves pretty airs. I never heard such impudence.'

'I'll quit the house this instant,' says Giglio.

'The sooner the better, young man. Pay your bill and be off. All my
rooms is wanted for gentlefolks, and not for such as you.'

'You may well keep the Bear Inn,' said Giglio. 'You should have yourself
painted as the sign.'

The landlady of the Bear went away GROWLING. And Giglio returned to his
room, where the first thing he saw was the fairy bag lying on the table,
which seemed to give a little hop as he came in. 'I hope it has some
breakfast in it,' says Giglio, 'for I have only a very little
money left.' But on opening the bag, what do you think was there? A
blacking-brush and a pot of Warren's jet, and on the pot was written:

     Poor young men their boots must black:
     Use me and cork me and put me back.

So Giglio laughed and blacked his boots, and put back the brush and the
bottle into the bag.

When he had done dressing himself, the bag gave another little hop, and
he went to it and took out--

1. A tablecloth and a napkin.

2. A sugar-basin full of the best loaf-sugar.

4, 6, 8, 10. Two forks, two teaspoons, two knives, and a pair of
sugar-tongs, and a butter-knife all marked G.

11, 12, 13. A teacup, saucer, and slop-basin.

14. A jug full of delicious cream.

15. A canister with black tea and green.

16. A large tea-urn and boiling water.

17. A saucepan, containing three eggs nicely done.

18. A quarter of a pound of best Epping butter.

19. A brown loaf.

And if he hadn't enough now for a good breakfast, I should like to know
who ever had one?

Giglio, having had his breakfast, popped all the things back into
the bag, and went out looking for lodgings. I forgot to say that this
celebrated university town was called Bosforo.

He took a modest lodging opposite the Schools, paid his bill at the
inn, and went to his apartment with his trunk, carpet-bag, and not
forgetting, we may be sure, his OTHER bag.

When he opened his trunk, which the day before he had filled with his
best clothes, he found it contained only books. And in the first of them
which he opened there was written--

Clothes for the back, books for the head: Read and remember them when
they are read.

And in his bag, when Giglio looked in it, he found a student's cap and
gown, a writing-book full of paper, an inkstand, pens, and a Johnson's
dictionary, which was very useful to him, as his spelling had been sadly
neglected.

So he sat down and worked away, very, very hard for a whole year,
during which 'Mr. Giles' was quite an example to all the students in the
University of Bosforo. He never got into any riots or disturbances. The
Professors all spoke well of him, and the students liked him too; so
that, when at examination, he took all the prizes, viz.

     {The Spelling Prize  {The French Prize
     {The Writing Prize   {The Arithmetic Prize
     {The History Prize   {The Latin Prize
     {The Catechism Prize  {The Good Conduct Prize,

all his fellow-students said, 'Hurrah! Hurray for Giles! Giles is
the boy--the student's joy! Hurray for Giles!' And he brought quite a
quantity of medals, crowns, books, and tokens of distinction home to his
lodgings.

One day after the Examinations, as he was diverting himself at a
coffee-house with two friends--(Did I tell you that in his bag, every
Saturday night, he found just enough to pay his bills, with a guinea
over, for pocket-money? Didn't I tell you? Well, he did, as sure as twice
twenty makes forty-five)--he chanced to look in the Bosforo Chronicle,
and read off, quite easily (for he could spell, read, and write the
longest words now), the following:--

'ROMANTIC CIRCUMSTANCE.--One of the most extraordinary adventures that
we have ever heard has set the neighbouring country of Crim Tartary in a
state of great excitement.

'It will be remembered that when the present revered sovereign of Crim
Tartary, His Majesty King PADELLA, took possession of the throne, after
having vanquished, in the terrific battle of Blunderbusco, the late
King CAVOLFIORE, that Prince's only child, the Princess Rosalba, was not
found in the royal palace, of which King Padella took possession, and,
it was said, had strayed into the forest (being abandoned by all her
attendants) where she had been eaten up by those ferocious lions, the
last pair of which were captured some time since, and brought to the
Tower, after killing several hundred persons.

'His Majesty King Padella, who has the kindest heart in the world,
was grieved at the accident which had occurred to the harmless little
Princess, for whom His Majesty's known benevolence would certainly have
provided a fitting establishment. But her death seemed to be certain.
The mangled remains of a cloak, and a little shoe, were found in the
forest, during a hunting-party, in which the intrepid sovereign of
Crim Tartary slew two of the lions' cubs with his own spear. And these
interesting relics of an innocent little creature were carried home
and kept by their finder, the Baron Spinachi, formerly an officer in
Cavolfiore's household. The Baron was disgraced in consequence of his
known legitimist opinions, and has lived for some time in the humble
capacity of a wood-cutter, in a forest on the outskirts of the Kingdom
of Crim Tartary.

'Last Tuesday week Baron Spinachi and a number of gentlemen, attached
to the former dynasty, appeared in arms, crying, "God save Rosalba,
the first Queen of Crim Tartary!" and surrounding a lady whom report
describes as "BEAUTIFUL EXCEEDINGLY." Her history MAY be authentic, is
certainly most romantic.

'The personage calling herself Rosalba states that she was brought out
of the forest, fifteen years since, by a lady in a car drawn by dragons
(this account is certainly IMPROBABLE), that she was left in the Palace
Garden of Blombodinga, where Her Royal Highness the Princess Angelica,
now married to His Royal Highness Bulbo, Crown Prince of Crim Tartary,
found the child, and, with THAT ELEGANT BENEVOLENCE which has always
distinguished the heiress of the throne of Paflagonia, gave the little
outcast a SHELTER AND A HOME! Her parentage not being known, and her
garb very humble, the foundling was educated in the Palace in a menial
capacity, under the name of BETSINDA.

'She did not give satisfaction, and was dismissed, carrying with her,
certainly, part of a mantle and a shoe, which she had on when first
found. According to her statement she quitted Blombodinga about a year
ago, since which time she has been with the Spinachi family. On the
very same morning the Prince Giglio, nephew to the King of Paflagonia,
a young Prince whose character for TALENT and ORDER were, to say truth,
none of the HIGHEST, also quitted Blombodinga, and has not been since
heard of!'

'What an extraordinary story!' said Smith and Jones, two young students,
Giglio's especial friends.

'Ha! what is this?' Giglio went on, reading--

'SECOND EDITION, EXPRESS.--We hear that the troop under Baron Spinachi
has been surrounded, and utterly routed, by General Count Hogginarmo,
and the soidisant Princess is sent a prisoner to the capital.

'UNIVERSITY NEWS.--Yesterday, at the Schools, the distinguished young
student, Mr. Giles, read a Latin oration, and was complimented by
the Chancellor of Bosforo, Dr. Prugnaro, with the highest University
honour--the wooden spoon.'

'Never mind that stuff,' says GILES, greatly disturbed. 'Come home
with me, my friends. Gallant Smith! intrepid Jones! friends of my
studies--partakers of my academic toils--I have that to tell which shall
astonish your honest minds.'

'Go it, old boy!' cries the impetuous Smith.

'Talk away, my buck!' says Jones, a lively fellow.

With an air of indescribable dignity, Giglio checked their natural, but
no more seemly, familiarity. 'Jones, Smith, my good friends,' said the
PRINCE, 'disguise is henceforth useless; I am no more the humble student
Giles, I am the descendant of a royal line.'

'Atavis edite regibus, I know, old co--' cried Jones. He was going to
say old cock, but a flash from THE ROYAL EYE again awed him.

'Friends,' continued the Prince, 'I am that Giglio, I am, in fact,
Paflagonia. Rise, Smith, and kneel not in the public street. Jones, thou
true heart! My faithless uncle, when I was a baby, filched from me that
brave crown my father left me, bred me, all young and careless of my
rights, like unto hapless Hamlet, Prince of Denmark; and had I any
thoughts about my wrongs, soothed me with promises of near redress. I
should espouse his daughter, young Angelica; we two indeed should reign
in Paflagonia. His words were false--false as Angelica's heart!--false
as Angelica's hair, colour, front teeth! She looked with her skew eyes
upon young Bulbo, Crim Tartary's stupid heir, and she preferred him.'
Twas then I turned my eyes upon Betsinda--Rosalba, as she now is. And
I saw in her the blushing sum of all perfection; the pink of maiden
modesty; the nymph that my fond heart had ever woo'd in dreams,' etc.
etc.

(I don't give this speech, which was very fine, but very long; and
though Smith and Jones knew nothing about the circumstances, my dear
reader does, so I go on.)

The Prince and his young friends hastened home to his apartment,
highly excited by the intelligence, as no doubt by the ROYAL NARRATOR'S
admirable manner of recounting it, and they ran up to his room where he
had worked so hard at his books.

On his writing-table was his bag, grown so long that the Prince could
not help remarking it. He went to it, opened it, and what do you think
he found in it?

A splendid long, gold-handled, red-velvet-scabbarded, cut-and-thrust
sword, and on the sheath was embroidered 'ROSALBA FOR EVER!'

He drew out the sword, which flashed and illuminated the whole room, and
called out 'Rosalba for ever!' Smith and Jones following him, but quite
respectfully this time, and taking the time from His Royal Highness.

And now his trunk opened with a sudden pony, and out there came three
ostrich feathers in a gold crown, surrounding a beautiful shining steel
helmet, a cuirass, a pair of spurs, finally a complete suit of armour.

The books on Giglio's shelves were all gone. Where there had been some
great dictionaries, Giglio's friends found two pairs of jack-boots
labelled, 'Lieutenant Smith,' '--Jones, Esq.,' which fitted them to a
nicety. Besides, there were helmets, back and breast plates, swords,
etc., just like in Mr. G. P. R. James's novels; and that evening three
cavaliers might have been seen issuing from the gates of Bosforo, in
whom the porters, proctors, etc., never thought of recognising the young
Prince and his friends.

They got horses at a livery stable-keeper's, and never drew bridle
until they reached the last town on the frontier before you come to Crim
Tartary. Here, as their animals were tired, and the cavaliers hungry,
they stopped and refreshed at an hostel. I could make a chapter of this
if I were like some writers, but I like to cram my measure tight down,
you see, and give you a great deal for your money, and, in a word, they
had some bread and cheese and ale upstairs on the balcony of the inn.
As they were drinking, drums and trumpets sounded nearer and nearer,
the marketplace was filled with soldiers, and His Royal Highness looking
forth, recognised the Paflagonian banners, and the Paflagonian national
air which the bands were playing.

The troops all made for the tavern at once, and as they came up Giglio
exclaimed, on beholding their leader, 'Whom do I see? Yes! No! It is,
it is! Phoo! No, it can't be! Yes! It is my friend, my gallant faithful
veteran, Captain Hedzoff! Ho! Hedzoff! Knowest thou not thy Prince, thy
Giglio? Good Corporal, methinks we once were friends. Ha, Sergeant, an'
my memory serves me right, we have had many a bout at singlestick.'

'I' faith, we have, a many, good my Lord,' says the Sergeant.

'Tell me, what means this mighty armament,' continued His Royal Highness
from the balcony, 'and whither march my Paflagonians?'

Hedzoff's head fell. 'My Lord,' he said, 'we march as the allies of
great Padella, Crim Tartary's monarch.'

'Crim Tartary's usurper, gallant Hedzoff! Crim Tartary's grim tyrant,
honest Hedzoff!' said the Prince, on the balcony, quite sarcastically.

'A soldier, Prince, must needs obey his orders: mine are to help His
Majesty Padella. And also (though alack that I should say it!) to seize
wherever I should light upon him.'

'First catch your hare! ha, Hedzoff!' exclaimed His Royal Highness.

'--On the body of GIGLIO, whilome Prince of Paflagonia' Hedzoff went on,
with indescribable emotion. 'My Prince, give up your sword without ado.
Look! we are thirty thousand men to one!'

'Give up my sword! Giglio give up his sword!' cried the Prince; and
stepping well forward on to the balcony, the royal youth, WITHOUT
PREPARATION, delivered a speech so magnificent, that no report can do
justice to it. It was all in blank verse (in which, from this time, he
invariably spoke, as more becoming his majestic station). It lasted for
three days and three nights, during which not a single person who heard
him was tired, or remarked the difference between daylight and dark.
The soldiers only cheering tremendously, when occasionally, once in nine
hours, the Prince paused to suck an orange, which Jones took out of the
bag. He explained, in terms which we say we shall not attempt to convey,
the whole history of the previous transaction, and his determination not
only not to give up his sword, but to assume his rightful crown; and
at the end of this extraordinary, this truly GIGANTIC effort, Captain
Hedzoff flung up his helmet, and cried, 'Hurray! Hurray! Long live King
Giglio!'

Such were the consequences of having employed his time well at College!

When the excitement had ceased, beer was ordered out for the army, and
their Sovereign himself did not disdain a little! And now it was with
some alarm that Captain Hedzoff told him his division was only the
advanced guard of the Paflagonian contingent, hastening to King
Padella's aid; the main force being a day's march in the rear under His
Royal Highness Prince Bulbo.

'We will wait here, good friend, to beat the Prince,' His Majesty said,
'and THEN will make his royal father wince.'




XV. WE RETURN TO ROSALBA

King Padella made very similar proposals to Rosalba to those which she
had received from the various princes who, as we have seen, had fallen
in love with her. His Majesty was a widower, and offered to marry his
fair captive that instant, but she declined his invitation in her usual
polite gentle manner, stating that Prince Giglio was her love, and
that any other union was out of the question. Having tried tears and
supplications in vain, this violent-tempered monarch menaced her with
threats and tortures; but she declared she would rather suffer all these
than accept the hand of her father's murderer, who left her finally,
uttering the most awful imprecations, and bidding her prepare for death
on the following morning.

All night long the King spent in advising how he should get rid of this
obdurate young creature. Cutting off her head was much too easy a death
for her; hanging was so common in His Majesty's dominions that it no
longer afforded him any sport; finally, he bethought himself of a pair
of fierce lions which had lately been sent to him as presents, and he
determined, with these ferocious brutes, to hunt poor Rosalba down.
Adjoining his castle was an amphitheatre where the Prince indulged in
bull-baiting, rat-hunting, and other ferocious sports. The two lions
were kept in a cage under this place; their roaring might be heard over
the whole city, the inhabitants of which, I am sorry to say, thronged in
numbers to see a poor young lady gobbled up by two wild beasts.

The King took his place in the royal box, having the officers of his
Court around and the Count Hogginarmo by his side, upon whom His Majesty
was observed to look very fiercely; the fact is, royal spies had told
the monarch of Hogginarmo's behaviour, his proposals to Rosalba, and his
offer to fight for the crown. Black as thunder looked King Padella at
this proud noble, as they sat in the front seats of the theatre waiting
to see the tragedy whereof poor Rosalba was to be the heroine.

At length that Princess was brought out in her nightgown, with all her
beautiful hair falling down her back, and looking so pretty that even
the beef-eaters and keepers of the wild animals wept plentifully at
seeing her. And she walked with her poor little feet (only luckily the
arena was covered with sawdust), and went and leaned up against a great
stone in the centre of the amphitheatre, round which the Court and the
people were seated in boxes, with bars before them, for fear of
the great, fierce, red-maned, black-throated, long-tailed, roaring,
bellowing, rushing lions. And now the gates were opened, and with a
wurrawarrurawarar two great lean, hungry, roaring lions rushed out of
their den, where they had been kept for three weeks on nothing but a
little toast-and-water, and dashed straight up to the stone where poor
Rosalba was waiting. Commend her to your patron saints, all you kind
people, for she is in a dreadful state!

There was a hum and a buzz all through the circus, and the fierce King
Padella even felt a little compassion. But Count Hogginarmo, seated by
His Majesty, roared out 'Hurray! Now for it! Soo-soo-soo!' that nobleman
being uncommonly angry still at Rosalba's refusal of him.

But O strange event! O remarkable circumstance! O extraordinary
coincidence, which I am sure none of you could BY ANY POSSIBILITY have
divined! When the lions came to Rosalba, instead of devouring her with
their great teeth, it was with kisses they gobbled her up! They licked
her pretty feet, they nuzzled their noses in her lap, they moo'd, they
seemed to say, 'Dear, dear sister don't you recollect your brothers in
the forest?' And she put her pretty white arms round their tawny necks,
and kissed them.

King Padella was immensely astonished. The Count Hogginarmo was
extremely disgusted. 'Pooh!' the Count cried. 'Gammon!' exclaimed his
Lordship.' These lions are tame beasts come from Wombwell's or Astley's.
It is a shame to put people off in this way. I believe they are little
boys dressed up in door-mats. They are no lions at all.'

'Ha!' said the King, 'you dare to say "gammon" to your Sovereign, do
you? These lions are no lions at all, aren't they? Ho! my beef-eaters!
Ho! my bodyguard! Take this Count Hogginarmo and fling him into the
circus! Give him a sword and buckler, let him keep his armour on, and
his weather-eye out, and fight these lions.'

The haughty Hogginarmo laid down his opera-glass, and looked scowling
round at the King and his attendants. 'Touch me not, dogs!' he said,
'or by St. Nicholas the Elder, I will gore you! Your Majesty thinks
Hogginarmo is afraid? No, not of a hundred thousand lions! Follow me
down into the circus, King Padella, and match thyself against one of
yon brutes. Thou darest not. Let them both come on, then!' And opening a
grating of the box, he jumped lightly down into the circus.

              WURRA WURRA WURRA WUR-AW-AW-AW!!!
                  In about two minutes
                The Count Hogginarmo was
                     GOBBLED UP
                         by
                     those lions,
                 bones, boots, and all,
                        and
                    There was an
                     End of him.

At this, the King said, 'Serve him right, the rebellious ruffian! And
now, as those lions won't eat that young woman--'

'Let her off!--let her off!' cried the crowd.

'NO!' roared the King. 'Let the beef-eaters go down and chop her into
small pieces. If the lions defend her, let the archers shoot them to
death. That hussy shall die in tortures!'

'A-a-ah!' cried the crowd. 'Shame! shame!'

'Who dares cry out shame?' cried the furious potentate (so little can
tyrants command their passions). 'Fling any scoundrel who says a word
down among the lions!'

I warrant you there was a dead silence then, which was broken by a Pang
arang pang pangkarangpang, and a Knight and a Herald rode in at the
further end of the circus: the Knight, in full armour, with his vizor
up, and bearing a letter on the point of his lance.

'Ha!' exclaimed the King, 'by my fey, 'tis Elephant and Castle,
pursuivant of my brother of Paflagonia; and the Knight, an' my memory
serves me, is the gallant Captain Hedzoff! What news from Paflagonia,
gallant Hedzoff? Elephant and Castle, beshrew me, thy trumpeting must
have made thee thirsty. What will my trusty herald like to drink?'

'Bespeaking first safe conduct from your Lordship,' said Captain
Hedzoff, 'before we take a drink of anything, permit us to deliver our
King's message.'

'My Lordship, ha!' said Crim Tartary, frowning terrifically. 'That title
soundeth strange in the anointed ears of a crowned King. Straightway
speak out your message, Knight and Herald!'

Reining up his charger in a most elegant manner close under the King's
balcony, Hedzoff turned to the Herald, and bade him begin.

Elephant and Castle, dropping his trumpet over his shoulder, took a
large sheet of paper out of his hat, and began to read:--

'O Yes! O Yes! O Yes! Know all men by these presents, that we, Giglio,
King of Paflagonia, Grand Duke of Cappadocia, Sovereign Prince of Turkey
and the Sausage Islands, having assumed our rightful throne and title,
long time falsely borne by our usurping Uncle, styling himself King of
Paflagonia--'

'Ha!' growled Padella.

'Hereby summon the false traitor, Padella, calling himself King of Crim
Tartary--'

The King's curses were dreadful. 'Go on, Elephant and Castle!' said the
intrepid Hedzoff.

'--To release from cowardly imprisonment his liege lady and rightful
Sovereign, ROSALBA, Queen of Crim Tartary, and restore her to her royal
throne: in default of which, I, Giglio, proclaim the said Padella sneak,
traitor, humbug, usurper, and coward. I challenge him to meet me, with
fists or with pistols, with battle-axe or sword, with blunderbuss or
singlestick, alone or at the head of his army, on foot or on horseback;
and will prove my words upon his wicked ugly body!'

'God save the King!' said Captain Hedzoff, executing a demivolte, two
semilunes, and three caracols.

'Is that all?' said Padella, with the terrific calm of concentrated
fury.

'That, sir, is all my royal master's message. Here is His Majesty's
letter in autograph, and here is his glove, and if any gentleman of
Crim Tartary chooses to find fault with His Majesty's expressions, I,
Tuffskin Hedzoff, Captain of the Guard, am very much at his service,'
and he waved his lance, and looked at the assembly all round.

'And what says my good brother of Paflagonia, my dear son's
father-in-law, to this rubbish?' asked the King.

'The King's uncle hath been deprived of the crown he unjustly wore,'
said Hedzoff gravely. 'He and his axminister, Glumboso, are now in
prison waiting the sentence of my royal master. After the battle of
Bombardaro--'

'Of what?' asked the surprised Padella.

'Of Bombardaro, where my liege, his present Majesty, would have
performed prodigies of velour, but that the whole of his uncle's army
came over to our side, with the exception of Prince Bulbo.'

'Ah! my boy, my boy, my Bulbo was no traitor!' cried Padella.

'Prince Bulbo, far from coming over to us, ran away, sir; but I caught
him. The Prince is a prisoner in our army, and the most terrific
tortures await him if a hair of the Princess Rosalba's head is injured.'

'Do they?' exclaimed the furious Padella, who was now perfectly LIVID
with rage.' Do they indeed? So much the worse for Bulbo. I've twenty
sons as lovely each as Bulbo. Not one but is as fit to reign as Bulbo.
Whip, whack, flog, starve, rack, punish, torture Bulbo--break all his
bones--roast him or flay him alive--pull all his pretty teeth out one by
one! But justly dear as Bulbo is to me,--joy of my eyes, fond treasure
of my soul!--Ha, ha, ha, ha! revenge is dearer still. Ho! tortures,
rack-men, executioners--light up the fires and make the pincers hot! get
lots of boiling lead!--Bring out ROSALBA!'




XVI. HOW HEDZOFF RODE BACK AGAIN TO KING GIGLIO

Captain Hedzoff rode away when King Padella uttered this cruel command,
having done his duty in delivering the message with which his royal
master had entrusted him. Of course he was very sorry for Rosalba, but
what could he do?

So he returned to King Giglio's camp, and found the young monarch in a
disturbed state of mind, smoking cigars in the royal tent. His
Majesty's agitation was not appeased by the news that was brought by
his ambassador. 'The brutal ruthless ruffian royal wretch!' Giglio
exclaimed. 'As England's poesy has well remarked, "The man that lays
his hand upon a woman, save in the way of kindness, is a villain." Ha,
Hedzoff!'

'That he is, your Majesty,' said the attendant.

'And didst thou see her flung into the oil? and didn't the soothing
oil--the emollient oil, refuse to boil, good Hedzoff--and to spoil the
fairest lady ever eyes did look on?'

'Faith, good my liege, I had no heart to look and see a beauteous lady
boiling down; I took your royal message to Padella, and bore his back
to you. I told him you would hold Prince Bulbo answerable. He only said
that he had twenty sons as good as Bulbo, and forthwith he bade the
ruthless executioners proceed.'

'O cruel father--O unhappy son!' cried the King. 'Go, some of you, and
bring Prince Bulbo hither.'

Bulbo was brought in chains, looking very uncomfortable. Though a
prisoner, he had been tolerably happy, perhaps because his mind was at
rest, and all the fighting was over, and he was playing at marbles with
his guards when the King sent for him.

'Oh, my poor Bulbo,' said His Majesty, with looks of infinite
compassion, 'hast thou heard the news?' (for you see Giglio wanted to
break the thing gently to the Prince), 'thy brutal father has condemned
Rosalba--p-p-p-ut her to death, P-p-p-prince Bulbo!'

'What, killed Betsinda! Boo-hoo-hoo,' cried out Bulbo. 'Betsinda! pretty
Betsinda! dear Betsinda! She was the dearest little girl in the world.
I love her better twenty thousand times even than Angelica,' and he went
on expressing his grief in so hearty and unaffected a manner that the
King was quite touched by it, and said, shaking Bulbo's hand, that he
wished he had known Bulbo sooner.

Bulbo, quite unconsciously, and meaning for the best, offered to come
and sit with His Majesty, and smoke a cigar with him, and console him.
The ROYAL KINDNESS supplied Bulbo with a cigar; he had not had one, he
said, since he was taken prisoner.

And now think what must have been the feelings of the most MERCIFUL OF
MONARCHS, when he informed his prisoner that, in consequence of King
Padella's cruel and DASTARDLY BEHAVIOUR to Rosalba, Prince Bulbo must
instantly be executed! The noble Giglio could not restrain his tears,
nor could the Grenadiers, nor the officers, nor could Bulbo himself,
when the matter was explained to him, and he was brought to understand
that His Majesty's promise, of course, was ABOVE EVERY THING, and Bulbo
must submit. So poor Bulbo was led out, Hedzoff trying to console him,
by pointing out that if he had won the battle of Bombardaro, he might
have hanged Prince Giglio. 'Yes! But that is no comfort to me now!' said
poor Bulbo; nor indeed was it, poor fellow!

He was told the business would be done the next morning at eight, and
was taken back to his dungeon, where every attention was paid to him.
The gaoler's wife sent him tea, and the turnkey's daughter begged him
to write his name in her album, where a many gentlemen had written it on
like occasions! 'Bother your album!' says Bulbo. The Undertaker came and
measured him for the handsomest coffin which money could buy--even this
didn't console Bulbo. The Cook brought him dishes which he once used to
like; but he wouldn't touch them: he sat down and began writing an adieu
to Angelica, as the clock kept always ticking, and the hands drawing
nearer to next morning. The Barber came in at night, and offered to
shave him for the next day. Prince Bulbo kicked him away, and went
on writing a few words to Princess Angelica, as the clock kept always
ticking, and the hands hopping nearer and nearer to next morning. He got
up on the top of a hatbox, on the top of a chair, on the top of his bed,
on the top of his table, and looked out to see whether he might escape
as the clock kept always ticking and the hands drawing nearer, and
nearer, and nearer.

But looking out of the window was one thing, and jumping another: and
the town clock struck seven. So he got into bed for a little sleep, but
the gaoler came and woke him, and said, 'Git up, your Royal Ighness, if
you please, it's TEN MINUTES TO EIGHT!'

So poor Bulbo got up: he had gone to bed in his clothes (the lazy boy),
and he shook himself, and said he didn't mind about dressing, or having
any breakfast, thank you; and he saw the soldiers who had come for him.
'Lead on!' he said; and they led the way, deeply affected; and they came
into the courtyard, and out into the square, and there was King Giglio
come to take leave of him, and His Majesty most kindly shook hands with
him, and the 'Take off that marched on:--when hark!

Haw--wurraw--wurraw--aworr!

A roar of wild beasts was heard. And who should come riding into the
town, frightening away the boys, and even the beadle and policeman, but
ROSALBA!

The fact is, that when Captain Hedzoff entered into the court of
Snapdragon Castle, and was discoursing with King Padella, the lions made
a dash at the open gate, gobbled up the six beef-eaters in a jiffy, and
away they went with Rosalba on the back of one of them, and they carried
her, turn and turn about, till they came to the city where Prince
Giglio's army was encamped.

When the KING heard of the QUEEN'S arrival, you may think how he rushed
out of his breakfast-room to hand Her Majesty off her lion! The lions
were grown as fat as pigs now, having had Hogginarmo and all those
beefeaters, and were so tame, anybody might pat them.

While Giglio knelt (most gracefully) and helped the Princess, Bulbo,
for his part, rushed up and kissed the lion. He flung his arms round the
forest monarch; he hugged him, and laughed and cried for joy. 'Oh, you
darling old beast, oh, how glad I am to see you, and the dear, dear
Bets--that is, Rosalba.'

'What, is it you? poor Bulbo!' said the Queen.' Oh, how glad I am to see
you,' and she gave him her hand to kiss. King Giglio slapped him most
kindly on the back, and said, 'Bulbo, my boy, I am delighted, for your
sake, that Her Majesty has arrived.'

'So am I,' said Bulbo; 'and YOU KNOW WHY.' Captain Hedzoff here came up.
'Sire, it is half-past eight: shall we proceed with the execution?'

'Execution! what for?' asked Bulbo.

'An officer only knows his orders,' replied Captain Hedzoff, showing his
warrant, on which His Majesty King Giglio smilingly said, 'Prince Bulbo
was reprieved this time,' and most graciously invited him to breakfast.




XVII. HOW A TREMENDOUS BATTLE TOOK PLACE, AND WHO WON IT

As soon as King Padella heard, what we know already, that his victim,
the lovely Rosalba, had escaped him, His Majesty's fury knew no bounds,
and he pitched the Lord Chancellor, Lord Chamberlain, and every officer
of the Crown whom he could set eyes on, into the cauldron of boiling oil
prepared for the Princess. Then he ordered out his whole army, horse,
foot, and artillery; and set forth at the head of an innumerable host,
and I should think twenty thousand drummers, trumpeters, and fifers.

King Giglio's advance guard, you may be sure, kept that monarch
acquainted with the enemy's dealings, and he was in nowise disconcerted.
He was much too polite to alarm the Princess, his lovely guest, with
any unnecessary rumours of battles impending; on the contrary, he did
everything to amuse and divert her; gave her a most elegant breakfast,
dinner, lunch, and got up a ball for her that evening, when he danced
with her every single dance.

Poor Bulbo was taken into favour again, and allowed to go quite free
now. He had new clothes given him, was called 'My good cousin' by His
Majesty, and was treated with the greatest distinction by everybody.
But it was easy to see he was very melancholy. The fact is, the sight of
Betsinda, who looked perfectly lovely in an elegant new dress, set
poor Bulbo frantic in love with her again. And he never thought about
Angelica, now Princess Bulbo, whom he had left at home, and who, as we
know, did not care much about him.

The King, dancing the twenty-fifth polka with Rosalba, remarked with
wonder the ring she wore; and then Rosalba told him how she had got it
from Gruffanuff, who no doubt had picked it up when Angelica flung it
away.

'Yes,' says the Fairy Blackstick, who had come to see the young people,
and who had very likely certain plans regarding them. 'That ring I gave
the Queen, Giglio's mother, who was not, saving your presence, a very
wise woman; it is enchanted, and whoever wears it looks beautiful in the
eyes of the world, I made poor Prince Bulbo, when he was christened, the
present of a rose which made him look handsome while he had it; but he
gave it to Angelica, who instantly looked beautiful again, whilst Bulbo
relapsed into his natural plainness.'

'Rosalba needs no ring, I am sure,' says Giglio, with a low bow. 'She is
beautiful enough, in my eyes, without any enchanted aid.'

'Oh, sir!' said Rosalba.

'Take off the ring and try,' said the King, and resolutely drew the ring
off her finger. In HIS eyes she looked just as handsome as before!

The King was thinking of throwing the ring away, as it was so dangerous
and made all the people so mad about Rosalba; but being a Prince of
great humour, and good humour too, he cast eyes upon a poor youth who
happened to be looking on very disconsolately, and said--

'Bulbo, my poor lad! come and try on this ring. The Princess Rosalba
makes it a present to you.'

The magic properties of this ring were uncommonly strong, for no sooner
had Bulbo put it on, but lo and behold, he appeared a personable,
agreeable young Prince enough--with a fine complexion, fair hair, rather
stout, and with bandy legs; but these were encased in such a beautiful
pair of yellow morocco boots that nobody remarked them. And Bulbo's
spirits rose up almost immediately after he had looked in the glass, and
he talked to their Majesties in the most lively, agreeable manner, and
danced opposite the Queen with one of the prettiest maids of honour, and
after looking at Her Majesty, could not help saying--

'How very odd! she is very pretty, but not so EXTRAORDINARILY handsome.'

'Oh no, by no means!' says the Maid of Honour.

'But what care I, dear sir,' says the Queen, who overheard them, 'if YOU
think I am good-looking enough?'

His Majesty's glance in reply to this affectionate speech was such that
no painter could draw it. And the Fairy Blackstick said, 'Bless you, my
darling children! Now you are united and happy; and now you see what I
said from the first, that a little misfortune has done you both good.
YOU, Giglio, had you been bred in prosperity, would scarcely have
learned to read or write--you would have been idle and extravagant, and
could not have been a good King as now you will be. You, Rosalba, would
have been so flattered, that your little head might have been turned
like Angelica's, who thought herself too good for Giglio.'

'As if anybody could be good enough for HIM,' cried Rosalba.

'Oh, you, you darling!' says Giglio. And so she was; and he was just
holding out his arms in order to give her a hug before the whole
company, when a messenger came rushing in, and said, 'My Lord, the
enemy!'

'To arms!' cries Giglio.

'Oh, mercy!' says Rosalba, and fainted of course.

He snatched one kiss from her lips, and rushed FORTH TO THE FIELD of
battle!

The Fairy had provided King Giglio with a suit of armour, which was not
only embroidered all over with jewels, and blinding to your eyes to
look at, but was water-proof, gun-proof, and sword-proof; so that in the
midst of the very hottest battles His Majesty rode about as calmly as if
he had been a British Grenadier at Alma. Were I engaged in fighting for
my country, _I_ should like such a suit of armour as Prince Giglio wore;
but, you know, he was a Prince of a fairy tale, and they always have
these wonderful things.

Besides the fairy armour, the Prince had a fairy horse, which would
gallop at any pace you pleased; and a fairy sword, which would lengthen
and run through a whole regiment of enemies at once. With such a weapon
at command, I wonder, for my part, he thought of ordering his army out;
but forth they all came, in magnificent new uniforms, Hedzoff and the
Prince's two college friends each commanding a division, and His Majesty
prancing in person at the head of them all.

Ah! if I had the pen of a Sir Archibald Alison, my dear friends, would
I not now entertain you with the account of a most tremendous shindy?
Should not fine blows be struck? dreadful wounds be delivered? arrows
darken the air? cannon balls crash through the battalions? cavalry
charge infantry? infantry pitch into cavalry? bugles blow; drums beat;
horses neigh; fifes sing; soldiers roar, swear, hurray; officers shout
out 'Forward, my men!' 'This way, lads!' 'Give it 'em, boys!' 'Fight for
King Giglio, and the cause of right!' 'King Padella for ever!' Would I
not describe all this, I say, and in the very finest language too? But
this humble pen does not possess the skill necessary for the description
of combats. In a word, the overthrow of King Padella's army was so
complete, that if they had been Russians you could not have wished them
to be more utterly smashed and confounded.

As for that usurping monarch, having performed acts of velour much more
considerable than could be expected of a royal ruffian and usurper,
who had such a bad cause, and who was so cruel to women,--as for King
Padella, I say, when his army ran away, the King ran away too, kicking
his first general, Prince Punchikoff, from his saddle, and galloping
away on the Prince's horse, having, indeed, had twenty-five or
twenty-six of his own shot under him. Hedzoff coming up, and finding
Punchikoff down, as you may imagine, very speedily disposed of HIM.
Meanwhile King Padella was scampering off as hard as his horse could
lay legs to ground. Fast as he scampered, I promise you somebody else
galloped faster; and that individual, as no doubt you are aware, was the
Royal Giglio, who kept bawling out, 'Stay, traitor! Turn, miscreant, and
defend thyself! Stand, tyrant, coward, ruffian, royal wretch, till I cut
thy ugly head from thy usurping shoulders!' And, with his fairy sword,
which elongated itself at will, His Majesty kept poking and prodding
Padella in the back, until that wicked monarch roared with anguish.

When he was fairly brought to bay, Padella turned and dealt Prince
Giglio a prodigious crack over the sconce with his battle-axe, a most
enormous weapon, which had cut down I don't know how many regiments in
the course of the afternoon. But, Law bless you! though the blow fell
right down on His Majesty's helmet, it made no more impression than if
Padella had struck him with a pat of butter: his battle-axe crumpled up
in Padella's hand, and the Royal Giglio laughed for very scorn at the
impotent efforts of that atrocious usurper.

At the ill success of his blow the Crim Tartar monarch was justly
irritated. 'If,' says he to Giglio, 'you ride a fairy horse, and wear
fairy armour, what on earth is the use of my hitting you? I may as well
give myself up a prisoner at once. Your Majesty won't, I suppose, be so
mean as to strike a poor fellow who can't strike again?'

The justice of Padella's remark struck the magnanimous Giglio. 'Do you
yield yourself a prisoner, Padella?' says he.

'Of course I do,' says Padella.

'Do you acknowledge Rosalba as your rightful Queen, and give up the
crown and all your treasures to your rightful mistress?'

'If I must, I must,' says Padella, who was naturally very sulky.

By this time King Giglio's aides-de-camp had come up, whom His Majesty
ordered to bind the prisoner. And they tied his hands behind him, and
bound his legs tight under his horse, having set him with his face to
the tail; and in this fashion he was led back to King Giglio's quarters,
and thrust into the very dungeon where young Bulbo had been confined.

Padella (who was a very different person in the depth of his distress,
to Padella, the proud wearer of the Crim Tartar crown), now most
affectionately and earnestly asked to see his son--his dear eldest
boy--his darling Bulbo; and that good-natured young man never once
reproached his haughty parent for his unkind conduct the day before,
when he would have left Bulbo to be shot without any pity, but came to
see his father, and spoke to him through the grating of the door, beyond
which he was not allowed to go; and brought him some sandwiches from the
grand supper which His Majesty was giving above stairs, in honour of the
brilliant victory which had just been achieved.

'I cannot stay with you long, sir,' says Bulbo, who was in his best ball
dress, as he handed his father in the prog, 'I am engaged to dance the
next quadrille with Her Majesty Queen Rosalba, and I hear the fiddles
playing at this very moment.'

So Bulbo went back to the ball-room and the wretched Padella ate his
solitary supper in silence and tears.

All was now joy in King Giglio's circle. Dancing, feasting, fun,
illuminations, and jollifications of all sorts ensued. The people
through whose villages they passed were ordered to illuminate their
cottages at night, and scatter flowers on the roads during the day. They
were requested, and I promise you they did not like to refuse, to serve
the troops liberally with eatables and wine; besides, the army was
enriched by the immense quantity of plunder which was found in King
Padella's camp, and taken from his soldiers; who (after they had given
up everything) were allowed to fraternise with the conquerors; and the
united forces marched back by easy stages towards King Giglio's capital,
his royal banner and that of Queen Rosalba being carried in front of the
troops. Hedzoff was made a Duke and a Field-Marshal. Smith and Jones
were promoted to be Earls; the Crim Tartar Order of the Pumpkin and the
Paflagonian decoration of the Cucumber were freely distributed by their
Majesties to the army. Queen Rosalba wore the Paflagonian Ribbon of
the Cucumber across her riding-habit, whilst King Giglio never appeared
without the grand Cordon of the Pumpkin. How the people cheered them as
they rode along side by side! They were pronounced to be the handsomest
couple ever seen: that was a matter of course; but they really WERE very
handsome, and, had they been otherwise, would have looked so, they were
so happy! Their Majesties were never separated during the whole day, but
breakfasted, dined, and supped together always, and rode side by side,
interchanging elegant compliments, and indulging in the most delightful
conversation. At night, Her Majesty's ladies of honour (who had
all rallied round her the day after King Padella's defeat) came and
conducted her to the apartments prepared for her; whilst King Giglio,
surrounded by his gentlemen, withdrew to his own Royal quarters. It was
agreed they should be married as soon as they reached the capital, and
orders were dispatched to the Archbishop of Blombodinga, to hold himself
in readiness to perform the interesting ceremony. Duke Hedzoff carried
the message, and gave instructions to have the Royal Castle splendidly
refurnished and painted afresh. The Duke seized Glumboso, the Ex-Prime
Minister, and made him refund that considerable sum of money which the
old scoundrel had secreted out of the late King's treasure. He also
clapped Valoroso into prison (who, by the way, had been dethroned
for some considerable period past), and when the Ex-Monarch weakly
remonstrated, Hedzoff said, 'A soldier, sir, knows but his duty; my
orders are to lock you up along with the Ex-King Padella, whom I have
brought hither a prisoner under guard.' So these two Ex-Royal personages
were sent for a year to the House of Correction, and thereafter were
obliged to become monks of the severest Order of Flagellants, in which
state, by fasting, by vigils, by flogging (which they administered
to one another, humbly but resolutely), no doubt they exhibited a
repentance for their past misdeeds, usurpations, and private and public
crimes.

As for Glumboso, that rogue was sent to the galleys, and never had an
opportunity to steal any more.




XVIII. HOW THEY ALL JOURNEYED BACK TO THE CAPITAL

The Fairy Blackstick, by whose means this young King and Queen had
certainly won their respective crowns back, would come not unfrequently,
to pay them a little visit--as they were riding in their triumphal
progress towards Giglio's capital--change her wand into a pony, and
travel by their Majesties' side, giving them the very best advice. I am
not sure that King Giglio did not think the Fairy and her advice rather
a bore, fancying it was his own velour and merits which had put him on
his throne, and conquered Padella: and, in fine, I fear he rather gave
himself airs towards his best friend and patroness. She exhorted him to
deal justly by his subjects, to draw mildly on the taxes, never to break
his promise when he had once given it--and in all respects to be a good
King.

'A good King, my dear Fairy!' cries Rosalba. 'Of course he will. Break
his promise! can you fancy my Giglio would ever do anything so improper,
so unlike him? No! never!' And she looked fondly towards Giglio, whom
she thought a pattern of perfection.

'Why is Fairy Blackstick always advising me, and telling me how to
manage my government, and warning me to keep my word? Does she suppose
that I am not a man of sense, and a man of honour?' asks Giglio testily.
'Methinks she rather presumes upon her position.'

'Hush! dear Giglio,' says Rosalba. 'You know Blackstick has been very
kind to us, and we must not offend her.' But the Fairy was not listening
to Giglio's testy observations, she had fallen back, and was trotting
on her pony now, by Master Bulbo's side, who rode a donkey, and made
himself generally beloved in the army by his cheerfulness, kindness, and
good-humour to everybody. He was eager to see his darling Angelica. He
thought there never was such a charming being. Blackstick did not tell
him it was the possession of the magic rose that made Angelica so lovely
in his eyes. She brought him the very best accounts of his little wife,
whose misfortunes and humiliations had indeed very greatly improved
her; and, you see, she could whisk off on her wand a hundred miles in a
minute, and be back in no time, and so carry polite messages from Bulbo
to Angelica, and from Angelica to Bulbo, and comfort that young man upon
his journey.

When the Royal party arrived at the last stage before you reach
Blombodinga, who should be in waiting, in her carriage there with her
lady of honour by her side, but the Princess Angelica! She rushed into
her husband's arms, scarcely stopping to make a passing curtsey to the
King and Queen. She had no eyes but for Bulbo, who appeared perfectly
lovely to her on account of the fairy ring which he wore; whilst she
herself, wearing the magic rose in her bonnet, seemed entirely beautiful
to the enraptured Bulbo.

A splendid luncheon was served to the Royal party, of which the
Archbishop, the Chancellor, Duke Hedzoff, Countess Gruffanuff, and all
our friends partook, the Fairy Blackstick being seated on the left of
King Giglio, with Bulbo and Angelica beside her. You could hear the
joy-bells ringing in the capital, and the guns which the citizens were
firing off in honour of their Majesties.

'What can have induced that hideous old Gruffanuff to dress herself up
in such an absurd way? Did you ask her to be your bridesmaid, my dear?'
says Giglio to Rosalba. 'What a figure of fun Gruffy is!'

Gruffy was seated opposite their Majesties, between the Archbishop and
the Lord Chancellor, and a figure of fun she certainly was, for she was
dressed in a low white silk dress, with lace over, a wreath of white
roses on her wig, a splendid lace veil, and her yellow old neck was
covered with diamonds. She ogled the King in such a manner that His
Majesty burst out laughing.

'Eleven o'clock!' cries Giglio, as the great Cathedral bell of
Blombodinga tolled that hour. 'Gentlemen and ladies, we must be
starting. Archbishop, you must be at church, I think, before twelve?'

'We must be at church before twelve,' sighs out Gruffanuff in a
languishing voice, hiding her old face behind her fan.

'And then I shall be the happiest man in my dominions,' cries Giglio,
with an elegant bow to the blushing Rosalba.

'Oh, my Giglio! Oh, my dear Majesty!' exclaims Gruffanuff; 'and can it
be that this happy moment at length has arrived--'

'Of course it has arrived,' says the King.

'--and that I am about to become the enraptured bride of my adored
Giglio!' continues Gruffanuff. 'Lend me a smelling-bottle, somebody. I
certainly shall faint with joy.'

'YOU my bride?' roars out Giglio.

'YOU marry my Prince?' cried poor little Rosalba.

'Pooh! Nonsense! The woman's mad!' exclaims the King. And all the
courtiers exhibited by their countenances and expressions, marks of
surprise, or ridicule, or incredulity, or wonder.

'I should like to know who else is going to be married, if I am not?'
shrieks out Gruffanuff. 'I should like to know if King Giglio is a
gentleman, and if there is such a thing as justice in Paflagonia? Lord
Chancellor! my Lord Archbishop! will your Lordships sit by and see a
poor, fond, confiding, tender creature put upon? Has not Prince Giglio
promised to marry his Barbara? Is not this Giglio's signature? Does not
this paper declare that he is mine, and only mine?' And she handed
to his Grace the Archbishop the document which the Prince signed
that evening when she wore the magic ring, and Giglio drank so much
champagne. And the old Archbishop, taking out his eyeglasses, read--

"'This is to give notice, that I, Giglio, only son of Savio, King of
Paflagonia, hereby promise to marry the charming Barbara Griselda,
Countess Gruffanuff, and widow of the late Jenkins Gruffanuff, Esq."

'H'm,' says the Archbishop, 'the document is certainly a--a document.'

'Phoo!' says the Lord Chancellor, 'the signature is not in His Majesty's
handwriting.' Indeed, since his studies at Bosforo, Giglio had made an
immense improvement in caligraphy.

'Is it your handwriting, Giglio?' cries the Fairy Blackstick, with an
awful severity of countenance.

'Y--y--y--es,' poor Giglio gasps out, 'I had quite forgotten the
confounded paper: she can't mean to hold me by it. You old wretch, what
will you take to let me off? Help the Queen, some one--Her Majesty has
fainted.'

'Chop her head off!'} exclaim the impetuous 'Smother the old witch!' }
Hedzoff, the ardent Smith, and 'Pitch her into the river!'} the faithful
Jones.

But Gruffanuff flung her arms round the Archbishop's neck, and bellowed
out, 'Justice, justice, my Lord Chancellor!' so loudly, that her
piercing shrieks caused everybody to pause. As for Rosalba, she was
borne away lifeless by her ladies; and you may imagine the look of agony
which Giglio cast towards that lovely being, as his hope, his joy, his
darling, his all in all, was thus removed, and in her place the horrid
old Gruffanuff rushed up to his side, and once more shrieked out,
'Justice, justice!'

'Won't you take that sum of money which Glumboso hid?' says Giglio; 'two
hundred and eighteen thousand millions, or thereabouts. It's a handsome
sum.'

'I will have that and you too!' says Gruffanuff.

'Let us throw the crown jewels into the bargain,' gasps out Giglio.

'I will wear them by my Giglio's side!' says Gruffanuff.

'Will half, three-quarters, five-sixths, nineteen-twentieths, of my
kingdom do, Countess?' asks the trembling monarch.

'What were all Europe to me without YOU, my Giglio?' cries Gruff,
kissing his hand.

'I won't, I can't, I shan't,--I'll resign the crown first,' shouts
Giglio, tearing away his hand; but Gruff clung to it.

'I have a competency, my love,' she says, 'and with thee and a cottage
thy Barbara will be happy.'

Giglio was half mad with rage by this time. 'I will not marry her,'
says he. 'Oh, Fairy, Fairy, give me counsel?' And as he spoke he looked
wildly round at the severe face of the Fairy Blackstick.

"'Why is Fairy Blackstick always advising me, and warning me to keep my
word? Does she suppose that I am not a man of honour?"' said the Fairy,
quoting Giglio's own haughty words. He quailed under the brightness
of her eyes; he felt that there was no escape for him from that awful
inquisition.

'Well, Archbishop,' said he in a dreadful voice, that made his Grace
start, 'since this Fairy has led me to the height of happiness but to
dash me down into the depths of despair, since I am to lose Rosalba, let
me at least keep my honour. Get up, Countess, and let us be married; I
can keep my word, but I can die afterwards.'

'Oh, dear Giglio,' cries Gruffanuff, skipping up, 'I knew, I knew I
could trust thee--I knew that my Prince was the soul of honour. Jump
into your carriages, ladies and gentlemen, and let us go to church at
once; and as for dying, dear Giglio, no, no:--thou wilt forget that
insignificant little chambermaid of a Queen--thou wilt live to be
consoled by thy Barbara! She wishes to be a Queen, and not a Queen
Dowager, my gracious Lord!' And hanging upon poor Giglio's arm, and
leering and grinning in his face in the most disgusting manner, this old
wretch tripped off in her white satin shoes, and jumped into the very
carriage which had been got ready to convey Giglio and Rosalba to
church. The cannons roared again, the bells pealed triple-bobmajors, the
people came out flinging flowers upon the path of the royal bride and
bridegroom, and Gruff looked out of the gilt coach window and bowed and
grinned to them. Phoo! the horrid old wretch!




XIX. AND NOW WE COME TO THE LAST SCENE IN THE PANTOMIME

The many ups and downs of her life had given the Princess Rosalba
prodigious strength of mind, and that highly principled young
woman presently recovered from her fainting-fit, out of which Fairy
Blackstick, by a precious essence which the Fairy always carried in her
pocket, awakened her. Instead of tearing her hair, crying, and bemoaning
herself, and fainting again, as many young women would have done,
Rosalba remembered that she owed an example of firmness to her subjects;
and though she loved Giglio more than her life, was determined, as she
told the Fairy, not to interfere between him and justice, or to cause
him to break his royal word.

'I cannot marry him, but I shall love him always,' says she to
Blackstick; 'I will go and be present at his marriage with the Countess,
and sign the book, and wish them happy with all my heart. I will see,
when I get home, whether I cannot make the new Queen some handsome
presents. The Crim Tartary crown diamonds are uncommonly fine, and I
shall never have any use for them. I will live and die unmarried like
Queen Elizabeth, and, of course, I shall leave my crown to Giglio when
I quit this world. Let us go and see them married, my dear Fairy, let me
say one last farewell to him; and then, if you please, I will return to
my own dominions.'

So the Fairy kissed Rosalba with peculiar tenderness, and at once
changed her wand into a very comfortable coach-and-four, with a steady
coachman, and two respectable footmen behind, and the Fairy and Rosalba
got into the coach, which Angelica and Bulbo entered after them. As
for honest Bulbo, he was blubbering in the most pathetic manner, quite
overcome by Rosalba's misfortune. She was touched by the honest fellow's
sympathy, promised to restore to him the confiscated estates of Duke
Padella his father, and created him, as he sat there in the coach,
Prince, Highness, and First Grandee of the Crim Tartar Empire. The
coach moved on, and, being a fairy coach, soon came up with the bridal
procession.

Before the ceremony at church it was the custom in Paflagonia, as it is
in other countries, for the bride and bridegroom to sign the Contract
of Marriage, which was to be witnessed by the Chancellor, Minister, Lord
Mayor, and principal officers of state. Now, as the royal palace was
being painted and furnished anew, it was not ready for the reception of
the King and his bride, who proposed at first to take up their residence
at the Prince's palace, that one which Valoroso occupied when Angelica
was born, and before he usurped the throne.

So the marriage party drove up to the palace: the dignitaries got out of
their carriages and stood aside: poor Rosalba stepped out of her coach,
supported by Bulbo, and stood almost fainting up against the railings
so as to have a last look of her dear Giglio. As for Blackstick, she,
according to her custom, had flown out of the coach window in some
inscrutable manner, and was now standing at the palace door.

Giglio came up the steps with his horrible bride on his arm, looking
as pale as if he was going to execution. He only frowned at the Fairy
Blackstick--he was angry with her, and thought she came to insult his
misery.

'Get out of the way, pray,' says Gruffanuff haughtily. 'I wonder why you
are always poking your nose into other people's affairs?'

'Are you determined to make this poor young man unhappy?' says
Blackstick.

'To marry him, yes! What business is it of yours? Pray, madam, don't say
"you" to a Queen,' cries Gruffanuff.

'You won't take the money he offered you?'

'No.'

'You won't let him off his bargain, though you know you cheated him when
you made him sign the paper?'

'Impudence! Policemen, remove this woman!' cries Gruffanuff. And the
policemen were rushing forward, but with a wave of her wand the Fairy
struck them all like so many statues in their places.

'You won't take anything in exchange for your bond, Mrs. Gruffanuff,'
cries the Fairy, with awful severity. 'I speak for the last time.'

'No!' shrieks Gruffanuff, stamping with her foot. 'I'll have my husband,
my husband, my husband!'

'YOU SHALL HAVE YOUR HUSBAND!' the Fairy Blackstick cried; and advancing
a step, laid her hand upon the nose of the KNOCKER.

As she touched it, the brass nose seemed to elongate, the open mouth
opened still wider, and uttered a roar which made everybody start.
The eyes rolled wildly; the arms and legs uncurled themselves, writhed
about, and seemed to lengthen with each twist; the knocker expanded into
a figure in yellow livery, six feet high; the screws by which it was
fixed to the door unloosed themselves, and JENKINS GRUFFANUFF once more
trod the threshold off which he had been lifted more than twenty years
ago!

'Master's not at home,' says Jenkins, just in his old voice; and Mrs.
Jenkins, giving a dreadful YOUP, fell down in a fit, in which nobody
minded her.

For everybody was shouting, 'Huzzay! huzzay!' 'Hip, hip, hurray!' 'Long
live the King and Queen!' 'Were such things ever seen?' 'No, never,
never, never!' 'The Fairy Blackstick for ever!'

The bells were ringing double peals, the guns roaring and banging most
prodigiously. Bulbo was embracing everybody; the Lord Chancellor was
flinging up his wig and shouting like a madman; Hedzoff had got the
Archbishop round the waist, and they were dancing a jig for joy; and as
for Giglio, I leave you to imagine what HE was doing, and if he kissed
Rosalba once, twice--twenty thousand times, I'm sure I don't think he
was wrong.

So Gruffanuff opened the hall door with a low bow, just as he had been
accustomed to do, and they all went in and signed the book, and then
they went to church and were married, and the Fairy Blackstick sailed
away on her cane, and was never more heard of in Paflagonia.

and here ends the Fireside Pantomime.

========================================
========================================

THE BEDFORD-ROW CONSPIRACY

By William Makepeace Thackeray


Contents.

  I.   Of the loves of Mr. Perkins and Miss Gorgon, and of the two
  great factions in the town of Oldborough.

  II.  Shows how the plot began to thicken in or about Bedford Row.

  III. Behind the scenes.


  Note:

  A story of Charles de Bernard furnished the plot of
  "The Bedford-Row Conspiracy."




THE BEDFORD-ROW CONSPIRACY




CHAPTER I.


OF THE LOVES OF MR. PERKINS AND MISS GORGON, AND OF THE TWO GREAT
FACTIONS IN THE TOWN OF OLDBOROUGH.

"My dear John," cried Lucy, with a very wise look indeed, "it must and
shall be so. As for Doughty Street, with our means, a house is out of
the question. We must keep three servants, and Aunt Biggs says the taxes
are one-and-twenty pounds a year."

"I have seen a sweet place at Chelsea," remarked John: "Paradise Row,
No. 17,--garden--greenhouse--fifty pounds a year--omnibus to town within
a mile."

"What! that I may be left alone all day, and you spend a fortune in
driving backward and forward in those horrid breakneck cabs? My darling,
I should die there--die of fright, I know I should. Did you not say
yourself that the road was not as yet lighted, and that the place
swarmed with public-houses and dreadful tipsy Irish bricklayers? Would
you kill me, John?"

"My da-arling," said John, with tremendous fondness, clutching Miss
Lucy suddenly round the waist, and rapping the hand of that young person
violently against his waistcoat,--"My da-arling, don't say such things,
even in a joke. If I objected to the chambers, it is only because you,
my love, with your birth and connections, ought to have a house of your
own. The chambers are quite large enough and certainly quite good enough
for me." And so, after some more sweet parley on the part of these
young people, it was agreed that they should take up their abode,
when married, in a part of the House number One hundred and something,
Bedford Row.

It will be necessary to explain to the reader that John was no other
than John Perkins, Esquire, of the Middle Temple, barrister-at-law, and
that Miss Lucy was the daughter of the late Captain Gorgon, and Marianne
Biggs, his wife. The Captain being of noble connections, younger son of
a baronet, cousin to Lord X----, and related to the Y---- family, had
angered all his relatives by marrying a very silly pretty young woman,
who kept a ladies'-school at Canterbury. She had six hundred pounds
to her fortune, which the Captain laid out in the purchase of a sweet
travelling-carriage and dressing-case for himself; and going abroad with
his lady, spent several years in the principal prisons of Europe, in one
of which he died. His wife and daughter were meantime supported by the
contributions of Mrs. Jemima Biggs, who still kept the ladies'-school.

At last a dear old relative--such a one as one reads of in
romances--died and left seven thousand pounds apiece to the two sisters,
whereupon the elder gave up schooling and retired to London; and the
younger managed to live with some comfort and decency at Brussels,
upon two hundred and ten pounds per annum. Mrs. Gorgon never touched
a shilling of her capital, for the very good reason that it was placed
entirely out of her reach; so that when she died, her daughter found
herself in possession of a sum of money that is not always to be met
with in this world.

Her aunt the baronet's lady, and her aunt the ex-schoolmistress, both
wrote very pressing invitations to her, and she resided with each for
six months after her arrival in England. Now, for a second time, she had
come to Mrs. Biggs, Caroline Place, Mecklenburgh Square. It was under
the roof of that respectable old lady that John Perkins, Esquire, being
invited to take tea, wooed and won Miss Gorgon.

Having thus described the circumstances of Miss Gorgon's life, let us
pass for a moment from that young lady, and lift up the veil of mystery
which envelopes the deeds and character of Perkins.

Perkins, too, was an orphan; and he and his Lucy, of summer evenings,
when Sol descending lingered fondly yet about the minarets of the
Foundling, and gilded the grassplots of Mecklenburgh Square--Perkins,
I say, and Lucy would often sit together in the summer-house of that
pleasure-ground, and muse upon the strange coincidences of their life.
Lucy was motherless and fatherless; so too was Perkins. If Perkins was
brotherless and sisterless, was not Lucy likewise an only child? Perkins
was twenty-three: his age and Lucy's united, amounted to forty-six; and
it was to be remarked, as a fact still more extraordinary, that while
Lucy's relatives were AUNTS, John's were UNCLES. Mysterious spirit of
love! let us treat thee with respect and whisper not too many of thy
secrets. The fact is, John and Lucy were a pair of fools (as every young
couple OUGHT to be who have hearts that are worth a farthing), and were
ready to find coincidences, sympathies, hidden gushes of feeling, mystic
unions of the soul, and what not, in every single circumstance that
occurred from the rising of the sun to the going down thereof, and in
the intervals. Bedford Row, where Perkins lived, is not very far from
Mecklenburgh Square; and John used to say that he felt a comfort that
his house and Lucy's were served by the same muffin-man.

Further comment is needless. A more honest, simple, clever,
warm-hearted, soft, whimsical, romantical, high-spirited young fellow
than John Perkins did not exist. When his father, Doctor Perkins, died,
this, his only son, was placed under the care of John Perkins, Esquire,
of the house of Perkins, Scully, and Perkins, those celebrated attorneys
in the trading town of Oldborough, which the second partner, William
Pitt Scully, Esquire, represented in Parliament and in London.

All John's fortune was the house in Bedford Row, which, at his father's
death, was let out into chambers, and brought in a clear hundred a
year. Under his uncle's roof at Oldborough, where he lived with thirteen
red-haired male and female cousins, he was only charged fifty pounds
for board, clothes, and pocket-money, and the remainder of his rents
was carefully put by for him until his majority. When he approached
that period--when he came to belong to two spouting-clubs at Oldborough,
among the young merchants and lawyers'-clerks--to blow the flute nicely,
and play a good game at billiards--to have written one or two smart
things in the Oldborough Sentinel--to be fond of smoking (in which act
he was discovered by his fainting aunt at three o'clock one morning)--in
one word, when John Perkins arrived at manhood, he discovered that he
was quite unfit to be an attorney, that he detested all the ways of his
uncle's stern, dull, vulgar, regular, red-headed family, and he vowed
that he would go to London and make his fortune. Thither he went, his
aunt and cousins, who were all "serious," vowing that he was a lost boy;
and when his history opens, John had been two years in the metropolis,
inhabiting his own garrets; and a very nice compact set of apartments,
looking into the back-garden, at this moment falling vacant, the prudent
Lucy Gorgon had visited them, and vowed that she and her John should
there commence housekeeping.

All these explanations are tedious, but necessary; and furthermore, it
must be said, that as John's uncle's partner was the Liberal member for
Oldborough, so Lucy's uncle was its Ministerial representative.

This gentleman, the brother of the deceased Captain Gorgon, lived at the
paternal mansion of Gorgon Castle, and rejoiced in the name and title of
Sir George Grimsby Gorgon.

He, too, like his younger brother, had married a lady beneath his own
rank in life; having espoused the daughter and heiress of Mr. Hicks, the
great brewer at Oldborough, who held numerous mortgages on the Gorgon
property, all of which he yielded up, together with his daughter
Juliana, to the care of the baronet.

What Lady Gorgon was in character, this history will show. In person,
if she may be compared to any vulgar animal, one of her father's heavy,
healthy, broad-flanked, Roman-nosed white dray-horses might, to the
poetic mind, appear to resemble her. At twenty she was a splendid
creature, and though not at her full growth, yet remarkable for strength
and sinew; at forty-five she was as fine a woman as any in His Majesty's
dominions. Five feet seven in height, thirteen stone, her own teeth and
hair, she looked as if she were the mother of a regiment of Grenadier
Guards. She had three daughters of her own size, and at length, ten
years after the birth of the last of the young ladies, a son--one
son--George Augustus Frederick Grimsby Gorgon, the godson of a royal
duke, whose steady officer in waiting Sir George had been for many
years.

It is needless to say, after entering so largely into a description
of Lady Gorgon, that her husband was a little shrivelled wizen-faced
creature, eight inches shorter than her Ladyship. This is the way of
the world, as every single reader of this book must have remarked; for
frolic love delights to join giants and pigmies of different sexes in
the bonds of matrimony. When you saw her Ladyship in flame-coloured
satin and gorgeous toque and feathers, entering the drawing-room, as
footmen along the stairs shouted melodiously, "Sir George and Lady
Gorgon," you beheld in her company a small withered old gentleman, with
powder and large royal household buttons, who tripped at her elbow as a
little weak-legged colt does at the side of a stout mare.

The little General had been present at about a hundred and twenty
pitched battles on Hounslow Heath and Wormwood Scrubs, but had never
drawn his sword against an enemy. As might be expected, therefore, his
talk and tenue were outrageously military. He had the whole Army List by
heart--that is, as far as the field-officers: all below them he scorned.
A bugle at Gorgon Castle always sounded at breakfast, and dinner: a gun
announced sunset. He clung to his pigtail for many years after the army
had forsaken that ornament, and could never be brought to think much of
the Peninsular men for giving it up. When he spoke of the Duke, he used
to call him "MY LORD WELLINGTON--I RECOLLECT HIM AS CAPTAIN WELLESLEY."
He swore fearfully in conversation, was most regular at church, and
regularly read to his family and domestics the morning and evening
prayer; he bullied his daughters, seemed to bully his wife, who led him
whither she chose; gave grand entertainments, and never asked a friend
by chance; had splendid liveries, and starved his people; and was
as dull, stingy, pompous, insolent, cringing, ill-tempered a little
creature as ever was known.

With such qualities you may fancy that he was generally admired in
society and by his country. So he was: and I never knew a man so
endowed whose way through life was not safe--who had fewer pangs of
conscience--more positive enjoyments--more respect shown to him--more
favours granted to him, than such a one as my friend the General.

Her Ladyship was just suited to him, and they did in reality admire
each other hugely. Previously to her marriage with the baronet, many
love-passages had passed between her and William Pitt Scully, Esquire,
the attorney; and there was especially one story, a propos of certain
syllabubs and Sally-Lunn cakes, which seemed to show that matters had
gone very far. Be this as it may, no sooner did the General (Major
Gorgon he was then) cast an eye on her, than Scully's five years' fabric
of love was instantly dashed to the ground. She cut him pitilessly,
cut Sally Scully, his sister, her dearest friend and confidante, and
bestowed her big person upon the little aide-de-camp at the end of a
fortnight's wooing. In the course of time their mutual fathers died;
the Gorgon estates were unencumbered: patron of both the seats in the
borough of Oldborough, and occupant of one, Sir George Grimsby Gorgon,
Baronet, was a personage of no small importance.

He was, it scarcely need to be said, a Tory; and this was the reason
why William Pitt Scully, Esquire, of the firm of Perkins and Scully,
deserted those principles in which he had been bred and christened;
deserted that church which he had frequented, for he could not bear to
see Sir George and my Lady flaunting in their grand pew;--deserted, I
say, the church, adopted the conventicle, and became one of the most
zealous and eloquent supporters that Freedom has known in our time.
Scully, of the house of Scully and Perkins, was a dangerous enemy. In
five years from that marriage, which snatched from the jilted solicitor
his heart's young affections, Sir George Gorgon found that he must
actually spend seven hundred pounds to keep his two seats. At the next
election, a Liberal was set up against his man, and actually ran
him hard; and finally, at the end of eighteen years, the rejected
Scully--the mean attorney--was actually the FIRST Member for Oldborough,
Sir George Grimsby Gorgon, Baronet, being only the second!

The agony of that day cannot be imagined--the dreadful curses of Sir
George, who saw fifteen hundred a year robbed from under his very
nose--the religious resignation of my Lady--the hideous window-smashing
that took place at the "Gorgon Arms," and the discomfiture of the pelted
Mayor and Corporation. The very next Sunday, Scully was reconciled to
the church (or attended it in the morning, and the meeting twice in the
afternoon), and as Doctor Snorter uttered the prayer for the High Court
of Parliament, his eye, the eye of his whole party--turned towards Lady
Gorgon and Sir George in a most unholy triumph. Sir George (who always
stood during prayers, like a military man) fairly sank down among the
hassocks, and Lady Gorgon was heard to sob as audibly as ever did little
beadle-belaboured urchin.

Scully, when at Oldborough, came from that day forth to church. "What,"
said he, "was it to him? were we not all brethren?" Old Perkins,
however, kept religiously to the Squaretoes congregation. In fact, to
tell the truth, this subject had been debated between the partners,
who saw the advantage of courting both the Establishment and the
Dissenters--a manoeuvre which, I need not say, is repeated in almost
every country town in England, where a solicitor's house has this kind
of power and connection.

Three months after this election came the races at Oldborough, and the
race-ball. Gorgon was so infuriated by his defeat, that he gave "the
Gorgon cup and cover," a matter of fifteen pounds. Scully, "although
anxious," as he wrote from town, "anxious beyond measure to preserve
the breed of horses for which our beloved country has ever been famous,
could attend no such sports as these, which but too often degenerated
into vice." It was voted a shabby excuse. Lady Gorgon was radiant in her
barouche and four, and gladly became the patroness of the ball that was
to ensue; and which all the gentry and townspeople, Tory and Whig, were
in the custom of attending. The ball took place on the last day of the
races. On that day, the walls of the market-house, the principal public
buildings, and the "Gorgon Arms Hotel" itself, were plastered with the
following:--

"Letter from our distinguished representative, William P. Scully,
Esquire, etc., etc.

                           "HOUSE OF COMMONS:  June 1, 18--.

"MY DEAR HEELTAP,--You know my opinion about horseracing, and though
I blame neither you nor any brother Englishman who enjoys that manly
sport, you will, I am sure, appreciate the conscientious motives
which induce me not to appear among my friends and constituents on the
festival of the 3rd, 4th, and 5th instant. If _I_, however, cannot
allow my name to appear among your list of stewards, ONE at least of the
representatives of Oldborough has no such scruples. Sir George Gorgon is
among you: and though I differ from that honourable Baronet on more than
ONE VITAL POINT, I am glad to think that he is with you. A gentleman, a
soldier, a man of property in the county, how can he be better employed
than in forwarding the county's amusements, and in forwarding the
happiness of all?

"Had I no such scruples as those to which I have just alluded, I must
still have refrained from coming among you. Your great Oldborough
common-drainage and inclosure bill comes on to-morrow, and I shall be AT
MY POST. I am sure, if Sir George Gorgon were here, he and I should
on this occasion vote side by side, and that party strife would be
forgotten in the object of our common interest--OUR DEAR NATIVE TOWN.

"There is, however, another occasion at hand, in which I shall be
proud to meet him. Your ball is on the night of the 6th. Party
forgotten--brotherly union--innocent mirth--beauty, OUR DEAR TOWN'S
BEAUTY, our daughters in the joy of their expanding loveliness, our
matrons in the exquisite contemplation of their children's bliss--can
you, can I, can Whig or Tory, can any Briton be indifferent to a scene
like this, or refuse to join in this heart-stirring festival? If there
BE such let them pardon me--I, for one, my dear Heeltap, will be among
you on Friday night--ay, and hereby invite all pretty Tory Misses, who
are in want of a partner.

"I am here in the very midst of good things, you know, and we old folks
like A SUPPER after a dance. Please to accept a brace of bucks and a
turtle, which come herewith. My worthy colleague, who was so liberal
last year of his soup to the poor, will not, I trust, refuse to taste
a little of Alderman Birch's--'tis offered on my part with hearty
goodwill. Hey for the 6th, and vive la joie!

                "Ever, my dear Heeltap, your faithful

                                 "W. PITT SCULLY.

"P.S.--Of course this letter is STRICTLY PRIVATE. Say that the venison,
etc. came from a WELL-WISHER TO OLDBOROUGH."

This amazing letter was published, in defiance of Mr. Scully's
injunctions, by the enthusiastic Heeltap, who said, bluntly, in a
preface, "that he saw no reason why Mr. Scully should be ashamed of his
action, and he, for his part, was glad to let all friends at Oldborough
know of it."

The allusion about the Gorgon soup was killing: thirteen paupers in
Oldborough had, it was confidently asserted, died of it. Lady Gorgon,
on the reading of this letter, was struck completely dumb; Sir George
Gorgon was wild. Ten dozen of champagne was he obliged to send down to
the "Gorgon Arms," to be added to the festival. He would have stayed
away if he could, but he dared not.

At nine o'clock, he in general's uniform; his wife in blue satin and
diamonds; his daughters in blue crape and white roses; his niece, Lucy
Gorgon, in white muslin; his son, George Augustus Frederick Grimsby
Gorgon, in a blue velvet jacket, sugar-loaf buttons, and nankeens,
entered the north door of the ballroom, to much cheering, and the sound
of "God save the King!"

At that very same moment, and from the south door, issued William Pitt
Scully, Esquire, M.P., and his staff. Mr. Scully had a brand-new blue
coat and brass buttons, buff waistcoat, white kerseymere tights, pumps
with large rosettes, and pink silk stockings.

"This wool," said he to a friend, "was grown on Oldborough sheep,
this cloth was spun in Oldborough looms, these buttons were cast in
an Oldborough manufactory, these shoes were made by an Oldborough
tradesman, this HEART first beat in Oldborough town, and pray Heaven may
be buried there!"

Could anything resist a man like this? John Perkins, who had come down
as one of Scully's aides-de-camp, in a fit of generous enthusiasm,
leaped on a whist-table, flung up a pocket-handkerchief, and
shrieked--"SCULLY FOR EVER!"

Heeltap, who was generally drunk, fairly burst into tears, and the grave
tradesmen and Whig gentry, who had dined with the Member at his inn, and
accompanied him thence to the "Gorgon Arms," lifted their deep voices
and shouted "Hear!" "Good!" "Bravo!" "Noble!" "Scully for ever!" "God
bless him!" and "Hurrah!"

The scene was tumultuously affecting; and when young Perkins sprang down
from the table and came blushing up to the Member, that gentleman said,
"Thank you, Jack! THANK you, my boy! THANK you," in a way which made
Perkins think that his supreme cup of bliss was quaffed; that he had but
to die: for that life had no other such joy in store for him. Scully
was Perkins's Napoleon--he yielded himself up to the attorney, body and
soul.

Whilst this scene was going on under one chandelier of the ballroom,
beneath the other scarlet little General Gorgon, sumptuous Lady Gorgon,
the daughters and niece Gorgons, were standing surrounded by their Tory
court, who affected to sneer and titter at the Whig demonstrations which
were taking place.

"What a howwid thmell of whithkey!" lisped Cornet Fitch, of the
Dragoons, to Miss Lucy, confidentially. "And the--the are what they call
Whigth, are they? He! he!"

"They are drunk, ----me, --drunk, by ----!" said the General to the
Mayor.

"WHICH is Scully?" said Lady Gorgon, lifting her glass gravely (she was
at that very moment thinking of the syllabubs). "Is it that tipsy man in
the green coat, or that vulgar creature in the blue one?"

"Law, my Lady," said the Mayoress, "have you forgotten him? Why, that's
him in blue and buff."

"And a monthous fine man, too," said Cornet Fitch. "I wish we had him in
our twoop--he'th thix feet thwee, if he'th an inch; ain't he, Genewal?"

No reply.

"And heavens! Mamma," shrieked the three Gorgons in a breath, "see, one
creature is on the whist-table. Oh, the wretch!

"I'm sure he's very good-looking," said Lucy, simply.

Lady Gorgon darted at her an angry look, and was about to say something
very contemptuous, when, at that instant, John Perkins's shout taking
effect, Master George Augustus Frederick Grimsby Gorgon, not knowing
better, incontinently raised a small shout on his side.

"Hear! good! bravo!" exclaimed he; "Scully for ever! Hurra-a-a-ay!" and
fell skipping about like the Whigs opposite.

"Silence, you brute you!" groaned Lady Gorgon; and seizing him by the
shirt-frill and coat-collar, carried him away to his nurse, who, with
many other maids of the Whig and Tory parties, stood giggling and
peeping at the landing-place.

Fancy how all these small incidents augmented the heap of Lady Gorgon's
anger and injuries! She was a dull phlegmatic woman for the most part,
and contented herself generally with merely despising her neighbours;
but oh! what a fine active hatred raged in her bosom for victorious
Scully! At this moment Mr. Perkins had finished shaking hands with his
Napoleon--Napoleon seemed bent upon some tremendous enterprise. He was
looking at Lady Gorgon very hard.

"She's a fine woman," said Scully, thoughtfully; he was still holding
the hand of Perkins. And then, after a pause, "Gad! I think I'll try."

"Try what, sir?"

"She's a DEUCED fine woman!" burst out again the tender solicitor. "I
WILL go. Springer, tell the fiddlers to strike up."

Springer scuttled across the room, and gave the leader of the band a
knowing nod. Suddenly, "God save the King" ceased, and "Sir Roger
de Coverley" began. The rival forces eyed each other; Mr. Scully,
accompanied by his friend, came forward, looking very red, and fumbling
two large kid gloves.

"HE'S GOING TO ASK ME TO DANCE," hissed out Lady Gorgon, with a dreadful
intuition, and she drew back behind her lord.

"D---- it, madam, THEN DANCE with him!" said the General. "Don't you see
that the scoundrel is carrying it all his own way! ---- him! and ----
him! and ---- him!" (All of which dashes the reader may fill up with
oaths of such strength as may be requisite).

"General!" cried Lady Gorgon, but could say no more. Scully was before
her.

"Madam!" exclaimed the Liberal Member for Oldborough, "in a moment
like this--I say--that is--that on the present occasion--your
Ladyship--unaccustomed as I am--pooh, psha--WILL your Ladyship give me
the distinguished honour and pleasure of going down the country-dance
with your Ladyship?"

An immense heave of her Ladyship's ample chest was perceptible. Yards of
blond lace, which might be compared to a foam of the sea, were agitated
at the same moment, and by the same mighty emotion. The river of
diamonds which flowed round her Ladyship's neck, seemed to swell and to
shine more than ever. The tall plumes on her ambrosial head bowed down
beneath the storm. In other words, Lady Gorgon, in a furious rage,
which she was compelled to restrain, trembled, drew up, and bowing
majestically, said,--

"Sir, I shall have much pleasure." With this, she extended her hand.
Scully, trembling, thrust forward one of his huge kid-gloves, and led
her to the head of the country-dance. John Perkins--who I presume
had been drinking pretty freely, so as to have forgotten his ordinary
bashfulness--looked at the three Gorgons in blue, then at the pretty
smiling one in white, and stepping up to her, without the smallest
hesitation, asked her if she would dance with him.

The young lady smilingly agreed. The great example of Scully and Lady
Gorgon was followed by all dancing men and women. Political enmities
were forgotten. Whig voters invited Tory voters' wives to the dance. The
daughters of Reform accepted the hands of the sons of Conservatism. The
reconciliation of the Romans and Sabines was not more touching than this
sweet fusion. Whack--whack! Springer clapped his hands; and the fiddlers
adroitly obeying the cheerful signal, began playing "Sir Roger de
Coverley" louder than ever.

I do not know by what extraordinary charm (nescio qua praeter solitum,
etc.), but young Perkins, who all his life had hated country-dances, was
delighted with this one, and skipped and laughed, poussetting, crossing,
down-the-middling, with his merry little partner, till every one of the
bettermost sort of the thirty-nine couples had dropped panting away, and
till the youngest Miss Gorgon, coming up to his partner, said in a loud
hissing scornful whisper, "Lucy, Mamma thinks you have danced quite
enough with this--this person." And Lucy, blushing, starting back, and
looking at Perkins in a very melancholy way, made him a little curtsey,
and went off to the Gorgonian party with her cousin. Perkins was too
frightened to lead her back to her place--too frightened at first, and
then too angry. "Person!" said he: his soul swelled with a desperate
republicanism: he went back to his patron more of a Radical than ever.

He found that gentleman in the solitary tea-room, pacing up and down
before the observant landlady and handmaidens of the "Gorgon Arms,"
wiping his brows, gnawing his fingers--his ears looming over his stiff
white shirt-collar as red as fire. Once more the great man seized John
Perkins's hand as the latter came up.

"D---- the aristocrats!" roared the ex-follower of Squaretoes.

"And so say I! but what's the matter, sir?"

"What's the matter?--Why, that woman--that infernal, haughty,
straitlaced, cold-blooded brewer's daughter! I loved that woman, sir--I
KISSED that woman, sir, twenty years ago: we were all but engaged, sir:
we've walked for hours and hours, sir--us and the governess--I've got
a lock of her hair, sir, among my papers now; and to-night, would you
believe it?--as soon as she got to the bottom of the set, away she
went--not one word would she speak to me all the way down: and when I
wanted to lead her to her place, and asked her if she would have a glass
of negus, 'Sir,' says she, 'I have done my duty; I bear no malice: but
I consider you a traitor to Sir George Gorgon's family--a traitor and
an upstart! I consider your speaking to me as a piece of insolent
vulgarity, and beg you will leave me to myself!' There's her speech,
sir. Twenty people heard it, and all of her Tory set too. I'll tell you
what, Jack: at the next election I'll put YOU up. Oh that woman! that
woman!--and to think that I love her still!" Here Mr. Scully paused,
and fiercely consoled himself by swallowing three cups of Mrs. Rincer's
green tea.

The fact is, that Lady Gorgon's passion had completely got the better of
her reason. Her Ladyship was naturally cold, and artificially extremely
squeamish; and when this great red-faced enemy of hers looked tenderly
at her through his red little eyes, and squeezed her hand and attempted
to renew old acquaintance, she felt such an intolerable disgust at his
triumph, at his familiarity, and at the remembrance of her own former
liking for him, that she gave utterance to the speech above correctly
reported. The Tories were delighted with her spirit, and Cornet Fitch,
with much glee, told the story to the General; but that officer, who was
at whist with some of his friends, flung down his cards, and coming up
to his lady, said briefly,--

"Madam, you are a fool!"

"I will NOT stay here to be bearded by that disgusting man!--Mr. Fitch,
call my people.--Henrietta, bring Miss Lucy from that linendraper with
whom she is dancing. I will not stay, General, once for all."

Henrietta ran--she hated her cousin: Cornet Fitch was departing. "Stop,
Fitch," said Sir George, seizing him by the arm. "You are a fool, Lady
Gorgon," said he, "and I repeat it--a ---- fool! This fellow Scully
is carrying all before him: he has talked with everybody, laughed with
everybody--and you, with your infernal airs--a brewer's daughter, by
----, must sit like a queen and not speak to a soul! You've lost me one
seat of my borough, with your infernal pride--fifteen hundred a year,
by Jove!--and you think you will bully me out of another. No, madam, you
SHALL stay, and stay supper too;--and the girls shall dance with every
cursed chimney-sweep and butcher in the room: they shall--confound me!"

Her Ladyship saw that it was necessary to submit; and Mr. Springer, the
master of the ceremonies, was called, and requested to point out
some eligible partners for the young ladies. One went off with a
Whig auctioneer; another figured in a quadrille with a very Liberal
apothecary; and the third, Miss Henrietta, remained.

"Hallo you, sir!" roared the little General to John Perkins, who was
passing by. John turned round and faced him.

"You were dancing with my niece just now--show us your skill now, and
dance with one of my daughters. Stand up, Miss Henrietta Gorgon--Mr.
What's-your-name?"

"My name," said John, with marked and majestic emphasis, "is PERKINS."
And he looked towards Lucy, who dared not look again.

"Miss Gorgon--Mr. Perkins. There, now go and dance."

"Mr. Perkins regrets, madam," said John, making a bow to Miss Henrietta,
"that he is not able to dance this evening. I am this moment obliged to
look to the supper; but you will find, no doubt, some other PERSON who
will have much pleasure."

"Go to ----, sir!" screamed the General, starting up, and shaking his
cane.

"Calm yourself, dearest George," said Lady Gorgon, clinging fondly to
him. Fitch twiddled his moustaches. Miss Henrietta Gorgon stared
with open mouth. The silks of the surrounding dowagers rustled--the
countenances of all looked grave.

"I will follow you, sir, wherever you please; and you may hear of me
whenever you like," said Mr. Perkins, bowing and retiring. He heard
little Lucy sobbing in a corner. He was lost at once--lost in love; he
felt as if he could combat fifty generals! he never was so happy in his
life.

The supper came; but as that meal cost five shillings a head, General
Gorgon dismissed the four spinsters of his family homewards in the
carriage, and so saved himself a pound. This added to Jack Perkins's
wrath; he had hoped to have seen Miss Lucy once more. He was a steward,
and, in the General's teeth, would have done his duty. He was thinking
how he would have helped her to the most delicate chicken-wings and
blancmanges, how he WOULD have made her take champagne. Under the noses
of indignant aunt and uncle, what glorious fun it would have been!

Out of place as Mr. Scully's present was, and though Lady Gorgon and her
party sneered at the vulgar notion of venison and turtle for supper,
all the world at Oldborough ate very greedily of those two substantial
dishes; and the Mayor's wife became from that day forth a mortal
enemy of the Gorgons: for, sitting near her Ladyship, who refused the
proffered soup and meat, the Mayoress thought herself obliged to follow
this disagreeable example. She sent away the plate of turtle with a
sigh, saying, however, to the baronet's lady, "I thought, mem, that the
LORD MAYOR OF LONDON always had turtle to his supper?"

"And what if he didn't, Biddy?" said his Honour the Mayor; "a good
thing's a good thing, and here goes!" wherewith he plunged his spoon
into the savoury mess. The Mayoress, as we have said, dared not; but she
hated Lady Gorgon, and remembered it at the next election.

The pride, in fact, and insolence of the Gorgon party rendered every
person in the room hostile to them; so soon as, gorged with meat, they
began to find that courage which Britons invariably derive from their
victuals. The show of the Gorgon plate seemed to offend the people. The
Gorgon champagne was a long time, too, in making its appearance. Arrive,
however, it did. The people were waiting for it; the young ladies, not
accustomed to that drink, declined pledging their admirers until it
was produced; the men, too, despised the bucellas and sherry, and were
looking continually towards the door. At last, Mr. Rincer, the landlord,
Mr. Hock, Sir George's butler, and sundry others entered the room. Bang!
went the corks--fizz the foamy liquor sparkled into all sorts of glasses
that were held out for its reception. Mr. Hock helped Sir George and his
party, who drank with great gusto; the wine which was administered to
the persons immediately around Mr. Scully was likewise pronounced to
be good. But Mr. Perkins, who had taken his seat among the humbler
individuals, and in the very middle of the table, observed that all
these persons, after drinking, made to each other very wry and ominous
faces, and whispered much. He tasted his wine: it was a villanous
compound of sugar, vitriol, soda-water, and green gooseberries. At
this moment a great clatter of forks was made by the president's and
vice-president's party. Silence for a toast--'twas silence all.

"Landlord," said Mr. Perkins, starting up (the rogue, where did his
impudence come from?) "have you any champagne of YOUR OWN?"

"Silence! down!" roared the Tories, the ladies looking aghast. "Silence,
sit down you!" shrieked the well-known voice of the General.

"I beg your pardon, General," said young John Perkins; "but where COULD
you have bought this champagne? My worthy friend I know is going to
propose the ladies; let us at any rate drink such a toast in good wine."
("Hear, hear!") "Drink her Ladyship's health in THIS stuff? I declare to
goodness I would sooner drink it in beer!"

No pen can describe the uproar which arose: the anguish of the
Gorgonites--the shrieks, jeers, cheers, ironic cries of "Swipes!" etc.,
which proceeded from the less genteel but more enthusiastic Scullyites.

"This vulgarity is too much," said Lady Gorgon, rising; and Mrs.
Mayoress and the ladies of the party did so too.

The General, two squires, the clergyman, the Gorgon apothecary and
attorney, with their respective ladies, followed her: they were plainly
beaten from the field. Such of the Tories as dared remained, and in
inglorious compromise shared the jovial Whig feast.

"Gentlemen and ladies," hiccupped Mr. Heeltap, "I'll give you a toast.
'Champagne to our real--hic--friends,' no, 'Real champagne to our
friends,' and--hic--pooh! 'Champagne to our friends, and real pain to
our enemies,'--huzzay!"

The Scully faction on this day bore the victory away, and if the polite
reader has been shocked by certain vulgarities on the part of Mr.
Scully and his friends, he must remember imprimis that Oldborough was
an inconsiderable place--that the inhabitants thereof were chiefly
tradespeople, not of refined habits--that Mr. Scully himself had only
for three months mingled among the aristocracy--that his young friend
Perkins was violently angry--and finally, and to conclude, that the
proud vulgarity of the great Sir George Gorgon and his family was
infinitely more odious and contemptible than the mean vulgarity of the
Scullyites and their leader.

Immediately after this event, Mr. Scully and his young friend Perkins
returned to town; the latter to his garrets in Bedford Row--the former
to his apartments on the first floor of the same house. He lived here to
superintend his legal business: his London agents, Messrs. Higgs, Biggs,
and Blatherwick, occupying the ground floor; the junior partner, Mr.
Gustavus Blatherwick, the second flat of the house. Scully made no
secret of his profession or residence: he was an attorney, and proud of
it; he was the grandson of a labourer, and thanked God for it; he had
made his fortune by his own honest labour, and why should he be ashamed
of it?

And now, having explained at full length who the several heroes and
heroines of this history were, and how they conducted themselves in the
country, let us describe their behaviour in London, and the great events
which occurred there.

You must know that Mr. Perkins bore away the tenderest recollections
of the young lady with whom he had danced at the Oldborough ball, and,
having taken particular care to find out where she dwelt when in the
metropolis, managed soon to become acquainted with Aunt Biggs, and made
himself so amiable to that lady, that she begged he would pass all his
disengaged evenings at her lodgings in Caroline Place. Mrs. Biggs was
perfectly aware that the young gentleman did not come for her bohea
and muffins, so much as for the sweeter conversation of her niece, Miss
Gorgon; but seeing that these two young people were of an age when ideas
of love and marriage will spring up, do what you will; seeing that her
niece had a fortune, and Mr. Perkins had the prospect of a place, and
was moreover a very amiable and well-disposed young fellow, she thought
her niece could not do better than marry him; and Miss Gorgon thought
so too. Now the public will be able to understand the meaning of that
important conversation which is recorded at the very commencement of
this history.

Lady Gorgon and her family were likewise in town; but, when in the
metropolis, they never took notice of their relative, Miss Lucy: the
idea of acknowledging an ex-schoolmistress living in Mecklenburgh Square
being much too preposterous for a person of my Lady Gorgon's breeding
and fashion. She did not, therefore, know of the progress which sly
Perkins was making all this while; for Lucy Gorgon did not think it was
at all necessary to inform her Ladyship how deeply she was smitten
by the wicked young gentleman who had made all the disturbance at the
Oldborough ball.

The intimacy of these young persons had, in fact, become so close, that
on a certain sunshiny Sunday in December, after having accompanied Aunt
Biggs to church, they had pursued their walk as far as that rendezvous
of lovers, the Regent's Park, and were talking of their coming marriage,
with much confidential tenderness, before the bears in the Zoological
Gardens.

Miss Lucy was ever and anon feeding those interesting animals with buns,
to perform which act of charity she had clambered up on the parapet
which surrounds their den. Mr. Perkins was below; and Miss Lucy, having
distributed her buns, was on the point of following,--but whether from
timidity, or whether from a desire to do young Perkins an essential
service, I know not: however, she found herself quite unwilling to jump
down unaided.

"My dearest John," said she, "I never can jump that."

Whereupon John stepped up, put one hand round Lucy's waist; and as one
of hers gently fell upon his shoulder, Mr. Perkins took the other and
said,--

"Now jump."

Hoop! jump she did, and so excessively active and clever was Mr. John
Perkins, that he jumped Miss Lucy plump into the middle of a group
formed of--

Lady Gorgon;

The Misses Gorgon;

Master George Augustus Frederick Grimsby Gorgon;

And a footman, poodle, and French governess: who had all been for two or
three minutes listening to the billings and cooings of these imprudent
young lovers.



CHAPTER II.


SHOWS HOW THE PLOT BEGAN TO THICKEN IN OR ABOUT BEDFORD ROW.

"Miss Lucy!"

"Upon my word!"

"I'm hanged if it aren't Lucy! How do, Lucy?" uttered Lady, the Misses,
and Master Gorgon in a breath.

Lucy came forward, bending down her ambrosial curls, and blushing, as a
modest young woman should: for, in truth, the scrape was very awkward.
And as for John Perkins, he made a start, and then a step forwards, and
then two backwards, and then began laying hands upon his black satin
stock--in short, the sun did not shine at that moment upon a man who
looked so exquisitely foolish.

"Miss Lucy Gorgon, is your aunt--is Mrs. Briggs here?" said Lady Gorgon,
drawing herself up with much state.

"Mrs. Biggs, Aunt?" said Lucy demurely.

"Biggs or Briggs, madam, it is not of the slightest consequence.
I presume that persons in my rank of life are not expected to know
everybody's name in Magdeburg Square?" (Lady Gorgon had a house in Baker
Street, and a dismal house it was.) "NOT here," continued she, rightly
interpreting Lucy's silence, "NOT here?--and may I ask how long is it
that young ladies have been allowed to walk abroad without chaperons,
and to--to take a part in such scenes as that which we have just seen
acted?"

To this question--and indeed it was rather difficult to answer--Miss
Gorgon had no reply. There were the six grey eyes of her cousins
glowering at her; there was George Augustus Frederick examining her with
an air of extreme wonder, Mademoiselle the governess turning her looks
demurely away, and awful Lady Gorgon glancing fiercely at her in front.
Not mentioning the footman and poodle, what could a poor modest timid
girl plead before such an inquisition, especially when she was clearly
guilty? Add to this, that as Lady Gorgon, that majestic woman, always
remarkable for her size and insolence of demeanour, had planted herself
in the middle of the path, and spoke at the extreme pitch of her voice,
many persons walking in the neighbourhood had heard her Ladyship's
speech and stopped, and seemed disposed to await the rejoinder.

"For Heaven's sake, Aunt, don't draw a crowd around us," said Lucy, who,
indeed, was glad of the only escape that lay in her power. "I will
tell you of the--of the circumstances of--of my engagement with this
gentleman--with Mr. Perkins," added she, in a softer tone--so soft that
the 'ERKINS was quite inaudible.

"A Mr. What? An engagement without consulting your guardians!" screamed
her Ladyship. "This must be looked to! Jerningham, call round my
carriage. Mademoiselle, you will have the goodness to walk home with
Master Gorgon, and carry him, if you please, where there is wet; and,
girls, as the day is fine, you will do likewise. Jerningham, you will
attend the young ladies. Miss Gorgon, I will thank you to follow me
immediately." And so saying, and looking at the crowd with ineffable
scorn, and at Mr. Perkins not at all, the lady bustled away forwards,
the files of Gorgon daughters and governess closing round and enveloping
poor Lucy, who found herself carried forward against her will, and in a
minute seated in her aunt's coach, along with that tremendous person.

Her case was bad enough, but what was it to Perkins's? Fancy his blank
surprise and rage at having his love thus suddenly ravished from
him, and his delicious tete-a-tete interrupted. He managed, in an
inconceivably short space of time, to conjure up half-a-million
obstacles to his union. What should he do? he would rush on to Baker
Street, and wait there until his Lucy left Lady Gorgon's house.

He could find no vehicle in the Regent's Park, and was in consequence
obliged to make his journey on foot. Of course, he nearly killed himself
with running, and ran so quick, that he was just in time to see the two
ladies step out of Lady Gorgon's carriage at her own house, and to hear
Jerningham's fellow-footman roar to the Gorgonian coachman, "Half-past
seven!" at which hour we are, to this day, convinced that Lady Gorgon
was going out to dine. Mr. Jerningham's associate having banged to the
door, with an insolent look towards Perkins, who was prying in with the
most suspicious and indecent curiosity, retired, exclaiming, "That chap
has a hi to our great-coats, I reckon!" and left John Perkins to pace
the street and be miserable.

John Perkins then walked resolutely up and down dismal Baker Street,
determined on an eclaircissement. He was for some time occupied in
thinking how it was that the Gorgons were not at church, they who made
such a parade of piety; and John Perkins smiled as he passed the chapel,
and saw that two CHARITY SERMONS were to be preached that day--and
therefore it was that General Gorgon read prayers to his family at home
in the morning.

Perkins, at last, saw that little General, in blue frock-coat and
spotless buff gloves, saunter scowling home; and half an hour before his
arrival had witnessed the entrance of Jerningham, and the three gaunt
Miss Gorgons, poodle, son-and-heir, and French governess, protected by
him, into Sir George's mansion.

"Can she be going to stay all night?" mused poor John, after being on
the watch for three hours: when presently, to his inexpressible delight,
he saw a very dirty hackney-coach clatter up to the Gorgon door, out of
which first issued the ruby plush breeches and stalwart calves of Mr.
Jerningham; these were followed by his body, and then the gentleman,
ringing modestly, was admitted.

Again the door opened: a lady came out, nor was she followed by the
footman, who crossed his legs at the door-post and allowed her to mount
the jingling vehicle as best she might. Mr. Jerningham had witnessed the
scene in the Park Gardens, had listened to the altercation through the
library keyhole, and had been mighty sulky at being ordered to call a
coach for this young woman. He did not therefore deign to assist her to
mount.

But there was ONE who did! Perkins was by the side of his Lucy: he
had seen her start back and cry, "La, John!"--had felt her squeeze his
arm--had mounted with her into the coach, and then shouted with a voice
of thunder to the coachman, "Caroline Place, Mecklenburgh Square."

But Mr. Jerningham would have been much more surprised and puzzled if
he had waited one minute longer, and seen this Mr. Perkins, who had
so gallantly escaladed the hackney-coach, step out of it with the most
mortified, miserable, chap-fallen countenance possible.

The fact is, he had found poor Lucy sobbing fit to break her heart, and
instead of consoling her, as he expected, he only seemed to irritate her
further: for she said, "Mr. Perkins--I beg--I insist, that you leave the
carriage." And when Perkins made some movement (which, not being in
the vehicle at the time, we have never been able to comprehend), she
suddenly sprang from the back-seat and began pulling at a large piece
of cord which communicated with the wrist of the gentleman driving; and,
screaming to him at the top of her voice, bade him immediately stop.

This Mr. Coachman did, with a curious, puzzled, grinning air.

Perkins descended, and on being asked, "Vere ham I to drive the young
'oman, sir?" I am sorry to say muttered something like an oath, and
uttered the above-mentioned words, "Caroline Place, Mecklenburgh
Square," in a tone which I should be inclined to describe as both dogged
and sheepish--very different from that cheery voice which he had used
when he first gave the order.

Poor Lucy, in the course of those fatal three hours which had passed
while Mr. Perkins was pacing up and down Baker Street, had received a
lecture which lasted exactly one hundred and eighty minutes--from her
aunt first, then from her uncle, whom we have seen marching homewards,
and often from both together.

Sir George Gorgon and his lady poured out such a flood of advice and
abuse against the poor girl, that she came away from the interview quite
timid and cowering; and when she saw John Perkins (the sly rogue! how
well he thought he had managed the trick!) she shrank from him as if
he had been a demon of wickedness, ordered him out of the carriage, and
went home by herself, convinced that she had committed some tremendous
sin.

While, then, her coach jingled away to Caroline Place, Perkins,
once more alone, bent his steps in the same direction. A desperate,
heart-stricken man, he passed by the beloved's door, saw lights in the
front drawing-room, felt probably that she was there; but he could not
go in. Moodily he paced down Doughty Street, and turning abruptly
into Bedford Row, rushed into his own chambers, where Mrs. Snooks, the
laundress, had prepared his humble Sabbath meal.

A cheerful fire blazed in his garret, and Mrs. Snooks had prepared for
him the favourite blade-bone he loved (blest four-days' dinner for
a bachelor--roast, cold, hashed, grilled bladebone, the fourth being
better than the first); but although he usually did rejoice in this
meal--ordinarily, indeed, grumbling that there was not enough to satisfy
him--he, on this occasion, after two mouthfuls, flung down his knife and
fork, and buried his two claws in his hair.

"Snooks," said he at last, very moodily, "remove this d---- mutton, give
me my writing things, and some hot brandy-and-water."

This was done without much alarm: for you must know that Perkins used to
dabble in poetry, and ordinarily prepare himself for composition by this
kind of stimulus.

He wrote hastily a few lines.

"Snooks, put on your bonnet," said he, "and carry this--YOU KNOW WHERE!"
he added, in a hollow, heart-breaking tone of voice, that affected poor
Snooks almost to tears. She went, however, with the note, which was to
this purpose:--

"Lucy! Lucy! my soul's love--what, what has happened? I am writing
this"--(a gulp of brandy-and-water)--"in a state bordering on
distraction--madness--insanity" (another). "Why did you send me out of
the coach in that cruel cruel way? Write to me a word, a line--tell
me, tell me, I may come to you--and leave me not in this agonising
condition; your faithful" (glog--glog--glog--the whole glass)--"J.P."

He never signed John Perkins in full--he couldn't, it was so unromantic.

Well, this missive was despatched by Mrs. Snooks, and Perkins, in
a fearful state of excitement, haggard, wild, and with more
brandy-and-water, awaited the return of his messenger.

When at length, after about an absence of forty years, as it seemed to
him, the old lady returned with a large packet, Perkins seized it with
a trembling hand, and was yet more frightened to see the handwriting of
Mrs. or Miss Biggs.

"MY DEAR MR. PERKINS," she began--"Although I am not your soul's adored,
I performed her part for once, since I have read your letter, as I told
her. You need not be very much alarmed, although Lucy is at this moment
in bed and unwell: for the poor girl has had a sad scene at her grand
uncle's house in Baker Street, and came home very much affected. Rest,
however, will restore her, for she is not one of your nervous sort; and
I hope when you come in the morning, you will see her as blooming as she
was when you went out to-day on that unlucky walk.

"See what Sir George Gorgon says of us all! You won't challenge him, I
know, as he is to be your uncle, and so I may show you his letter.

"Good-night, my dear John. Do not go QUITE distracted before morning;
and believe me your loving aunt,
                                           "JEMIMA BIGGS."

                                "41 BAKER STREET:  11th December.

"MAJOR-GENERAL SIR GEORGE GORGON has heard with the utmost disgust and
surprise of the engagement which Miss Lucy Gorgon has thought fit to
form.

"The Major-General cannot conceal his indignation at the share which
Miss Biggs has taken in this disgraceful transaction.

"Sir George Gorgon puts an absolute veto upon all further communication
between his niece and the low-born adventurer who has been admitted into
her society, and begs to say that Lieutenant Fitch, of the Lifeguards,
is the gentleman who he intends shall marry Miss Gorgon.

"It is the Major-General's wish, that on the 28th Miss Gorgon should be
ready to come to his house, in Baker Street, where she will be more safe
from impertinent intrusions than she has been in Mucklebury Square.

       "MRS. BIGGS,
          "Caroline Place,
              "Mecklenburgh Square."

When poor John Perkins read this epistle, blank rage and wonder filled
his soul, at the audacity of the little General, who thus, without
the smallest title in the world, pretended to dispose of the hand
and fortune of his niece. The fact is, that Sir George had such a
transcendent notion of his own dignity and station, that it never for a
moment entered his head that his niece, or anybody else connected with
him, should take a single step in life without previously receiving his
orders; and Mr. Fitch, a baronet's son, having expressed an admiration
of Lucy, Sir George had determined that his suit should be accepted, and
really considered Lucy's preference of another as downright treason.

John Perkins determined on the death of Fitch as the very least
reparation that should satisfy him; and vowed too that some of the
General's blood should be shed for the words which he had dared to
utter.

We have said that William Pitt Scully, Esquire, M.P., occupied the first
floor of Mr. Perkins's house in Bedford Row: and the reader is further
to be informed that an immense friendship had sprung up between these
two gentlemen. The fact is, that poor John was very much flattered
by Scully's notice, and began in a very short time to fancy himself
a political personage; for he had made several of Scully's speeches,
written more than one letter from him to his constituents, and, in
a word, acted as his gratis clerk. At least a guinea a week did Mr.
Perkins save to the pockets of Mr. Scully, and with hearty good will
too, for he adored the great William Pitt, and believed every word that
dropped from the pompous lips of that gentleman.

Well, after having discussed Sir George Gorgon's letter, poor Perkins,
in the utmost fury of mind that his darling should be slandered so,
feeling a desire for fresh air, determined to descend to the garden and
smoke a cigar in that rural quiet spot. The night was very calm. The
moonbeams slept softly upon the herbage of Gray's Inn gardens, and
bathed with silver splendour Theobald's Row. A million of little frisky
twinkling stars attended their queen, who looked with bland round face
upon their gambols, as they peeped in and out from the azure heavens.
Along Gray's Inn wall a lazy row of cabs stood listlessly, for who would
call a cab on such a night? Meanwhile their drivers, at the alehouse
near, smoked the short pipe or quaffed the foaming beer. Perhaps from
Gray's Inn Lane some broken sounds of Irish revelry might rise. Issuing
perhaps from Raymond Buildings gate, six lawyers' clerks might whoop a
tipsy song--or the loud watchman yell the passing hour; but beyond this
all was silence; and young Perkins, as he sat in the summerhouse at the
bottom of the garden, and contemplated the peaceful heaven, felt some
influences of it entering into his soul, and almost forgetting revenge,
thought but of peace and love.

Presently, he was aware there was someone else pacing the garden.
Who could it be?--Not Blatherwick, for he passed the Sabbath with his
grandmamma at Clapham; not Scully surely, for he always went to Bethesda
Chapel, and to a select prayer-meeting afterwards. Alas! it WAS Scully;
for though that gentleman SAID that he went to chapel, we have it for
a fact that he did not always keep his promise, and was at this moment
employed in rehearsing an extempore speech, which he proposed to deliver
at St. Stephen's.

"Had I, sir," spouted he, with folded arms, slowly pacing to and
fro--"Had I, sir, entertained the smallest possible intention of
addressing the House on the present occasion--hum, on the present
occasion--I would have endeavoured to prepare myself in a way that
should have at least shown my sense of the greatness of the subject
before the House's consideration, and the nature of the distinguished
audience I have the honour to address. I am, sir, a plain man--born
of the people--myself one of the people, having won, thank Heaven, an
honourable fortune and position by my own honest labour; and standing
here as I do--"

                    *          *          *

Here Mr. Scully (it may be said that he never made a speech without
bragging about himself: and an excellent plan it is, for people cannot
help believing you at last)--here, I say, Mr. Scully, who had one arm
raised, felt himself suddenly tipped on the shoulder, and heard a voice
saying, "Your money or your life!"

The honourable gentleman twirled round as if he had been shot; the
papers on which a great part of this impromptu was written dropped from
his lifted hand, and some of them were actually borne on the air into
neighbouring gardens. The man was, in fact, in the direst fright.

"It's only I," said Perkins, with rather a forced laugh, when he saw the
effect that his wit had produced.

"Only you! And pray what the dev--what right have you to--to come upon
a man of my rank in that way, and disturb me in the midst of very
important meditations?" asked Mr. Scully, beginning to grow fierce.

"I want your advice," said Perkins, "on a matter of the very greatest
importance to me. You know my idea of marrying?"

"Marry!" said Scully; "I thought you had given up that silly scheme. And
how, pray, do you intend to live?"

"Why, my intended has a couple of hundreds a year, and my clerkship in
the Tape and Sealing-Wax Office will be as much more."

"Clerkship--Tape and Sealing-Wax Office--Government sinecure!--Why, good
heavens! John Perkins, you don't tell ME that you are going to accept
any such thing?"

"It is a very small salary, certainly," said John, who had a decent
notion of his own merits; "but consider, six months vacation, two hours
in the day, and those spent over the newspapers. After all, it's--"

"After all it's a swindle," roared out Mr. Scully--"a swindle upon the
country; an infamous tax upon the people, who starve that you may
fatten in idleness. But take this clerkship in the Tape and Sealing-Wax
Office," continued the patriot, his bosom heaving with noble
indignation, and his eye flashing the purest fire,--"TAKE this
clerkship, John Perkins, and sanction tyranny, by becoming one of its
agents; sanction dishonesty by sharing in its plunder--do this, BUT
never more be friend of mine. Had I a child," said the patriot, clasping
his hands and raising his eyes to heaven, "I would rather see him dead,
sir--dead, dead at my feet, than the servant of a Government which all
honest men despise." And here, giving a searching glance at Perkins, Mr.
Scully began tramping up and down the garden in a perfect fury.

"Good heavens!" exclaimed the timid John Perkins--"don't say SO. My
dear Mr. Scully, I'm not the dishonest character you suppose me to be--I
never looked at the matter in this light. I'll--I'll consider of it.
I'll tell Crampton that I will give up the place; but for Heaven's sake,
don't let me forfeit YOUR friendship, which is dearer to me than any
place in the world."

Mr. Scully pressed his hand, and said nothing; and though their
interview lasted a full half-hour longer, during which they paced up and
down the gravel walk, we shall not breathe a single syllable of their
conversation, as it has nothing to do with our tale.

The next morning, after an interview with Miss Lucy, John Perkins,
Esquire, was seen to issue from Mrs. Biggs's house, looking particularly
pale, melancholy, and thoughtful; and he did not stop until he reached a
certain door in Downing Street, where was the office of a certain great
Minister, and the offices of the clerks in his Lordship's department.

The head of them was Mr. Josiah Crampton, who has now to be introduced
to the public. He was a little old gentleman, some sixty years of age,
maternal uncle to John Perkins; a bachelor, who had been about forty-two
years employed in the department of which he was now the head.

After waiting four hours in an ante-room, where a number of Irishmen,
some newspaper editors, many pompous-looking political personages asking
for the "first lord," a few sauntering clerks, and numbers of swift
active messengers passed to and fro;--after waiting for four hours,
making drawings on the blotting-book, and reading the Morning Post
for that day week, Mr. Perkins was informed that he might go into his
uncle's room, and did so accordingly.

He found a little hard old gentleman seated at a table covered with
every variety of sealing-wax, blotting-paper, envelopes, despatch-boxes,
green tapers, etc. etc. An immense fire was blazing in the grate, an
immense sheet-almanack hung over that, a screen, three or four chairs,
and a faded Turkey carpet, formed the rest of the furniture of this
remarkable room--which I have described thus particularly, because in
the course of a long official life, I have remarked that such is the
invariable decoration of political rooms.

"Well, John," said the little hard old gentleman, pointing to an
arm-chair, "I'm told you've been here since eleven. Why the deuce do you
come so early?"

"I had important business," answered Mr. Perkins, stoutly; and as his
uncle looked up with a comical expression of wonder, John began in a
solemn tone to deliver a little speech which he had composed, and which
proved him to be a very worthy, easy, silly fellow.

"Sir," said Mr. Perkins, "you have known for some time past the nature
of my political opinions, and the intimacy which I have had the honour
to form with one--with some of the leading members of the Liberal
party." (A grin from Mr. Crampton.) "When first, by your kindness, I was
promised the clerkship in the Tape and Sealing-Wax Office, my opinions
were not formed as they are now; and having taken the advice of the
gentlemen with whom I act,"--(an enormous grin)--"the advice, I say,
of the gentlemen with whom I act, and the counsel likewise of my own
conscience, I am compelled, with the deepest grief, to say, my dear
uncle, that I--I--"

"That you--what, sir?" exclaimed little Mr. Crampton, bouncing off his
chair. "You don't mean to say that you are such a fool as to decline the
place?"

"I do decline the place," said Perkins, whose blood rose at the word
"fool." "As a man of honour, I cannot take it."

"Not take it! and how are you to live? On the rent of that house of
yours? For, by gad, sir, if you give up the clerkship, I never will give
you a shilling."

"It cannot be helped," said Mr. Perkins, looking as much like a martyr
as he possibly could, and thinking himself a very fine fellow. "I have
talents, sir, which I hope to cultivate; and am member of a profession
by which a man may hope to rise to the very highest offices of the
State."

"Profession, talents, offices of the State! Are you mad, John Perkins,
that you come to me with such insufferable twaddle as this? Why, do you
think if you HAD been capable of rising at the bar, I would have taken
so much trouble about getting you a place? No, sir; you are too fond of
pleasure, and bed, and tea-parties, and small-talk, and reading novels,
and playing the flute, and writing sonnets. You would no more rise
at the bar than my messenger, sir. It was because I knew your
disposition--that hopeless, careless, irresolute good-humour of
yours--that I had determined to keep you out of danger, by placing you
in a snug shelter, where the storms of the world would not come near
you. You must have principles forsooth! and you must marry Miss Gorgon,
of course: and by the time you have gone ten circuits, and had six
children, you will have eaten up every shilling of your wife's fortune,
and be as briefless as you are now. Who the deuce has put all this
nonsense into your head? I think I know."

Mr. Perkins's ears tingled as these hard words saluted them; and he
scarcely knew whether he ought to knock his uncle down, or fall at his
feet and say, "Uncle, I have been a fool, and I know it." The fact is,
that in his interview with Miss Gorgon and her aunt in the morning,
when he came to tell them of the resolution he had formed to give up
the place, both the ladies and John himself had agreed, with a thousand
rapturous tears and exclamations, that he was one of the noblest young
men that ever lived, had acted as became himself, and might with perfect
propriety give up the place, his talents being so prodigious that no
power on earth could hinder him from being Lord Chancellor. Indeed, John
and Lucy had always thought the clerkship quite beneath him, and were
not a little glad, perhaps, at finding a pretext for decently refusing
it. But as Perkins was a young gentleman whose candour was such that he
was always swayed by the opinions of the last speaker, he did begin to
feel now the truth of his uncle's statements, however disagreeable they
might be.

Mr. Crampton continued:--

"I think I know the cause of your patriotism. Has not William Pitt
Scully, Esquire, had something to do with it?"

Mr. Perkins COULD not turn any redder than he was, but confessed with
deep humiliation that "he HAD consulted Mr. Scully among other friends."

Mr. Crampton smiled--drew a letter from a heap before him, and tearing
off the signature, handed over the document to his nephew. It contained
the following paragraphs:--

"Hawksby has sounded Scully: we can have him any day we want him. He
talks very big at present, and says he would not take anything under
a... This is absurd. He has a Yorkshire nephew coming up to town, and
wants a place for him. There is one vacant in the Tape Office, he says:
have you not a promise of it?"

"I can't--I can't believe it," said John; "this, sir, is some weak
invention of the enemy. Scully is the most honourable man breathing."

"Mr. Scully is a gentleman in a very fair way to make a fortune,"
answered Mr. Crampton. "Look you, John--it is just as well for your sake
that I should give you the news a few weeks before the papers, for I
don't want you to be ruined, if I can help it, as I don't wish to have
you on my hands. We know all the particulars of Scully's history. He was
a Tory attorney at Oldborough; he was jilted by the present Lady Gorgon,
turned Radical, and fought Sir George in his own borough. Sir George
would have had the peerage he is dying for, had he not lost that second
seat (by-the-by, my Lady will be here in five minutes), and Scully
is now quite firm there. Well, my dear lad, we have bought your
incorruptible Scully. Look here,"--and Mr. Crampton produced three
Morning Posts.

"'THE HONOURABLE HENRY HAWKSBY'S DINNER-PARTY.--Lord So-and-So--Duke of
So-and-So--W. Pitt Scully, Esq. M.P.'

"Hawksby is our neutral, our dinner-giver.

"'LADY DIANA DOLDRUM'S ROUT.--W. Pitt Scully, Esq,' again.

"'THE EARL OF MANTRAP'S GRAND DINNER.'--A Duke--four Lords--'Mr. Scully,
and Sir George Gorgon.'"

"Well, but I don't see how you have bought him; look at his votes."

"My dear John," said Mr. Crampton, jingling his watch-seals very
complacently, "I am letting you into fearful secrets. The great common
end of party is to buy your opponents--the great statesman buys them for
nothing."

Here the attendant genius of Mr. Crampton made his appearance, and
whispered something, to which the little gentleman said, "Show her
Ladyship in,"--when the attendant disappeared.

"John," said Mr. Crampton, with a very queer smile, "you can't stay in
this room while Lady Gorgon is with me; but there is a little clerk's
room behind the screen there, where you can wait until I call you."

John retired, and as he closed the door of communication, strange to
say, little Mr. Crampton sprang up and said, "Confound the young ninny,
he has shut the door!"

Mr. Crampton then, remembering that he wanted a map in the next room,
sprang into it, left the door half open in coming out, and was in
time to receive Her Ladyship with smiling face as she, ushered by Mr.
Strongitharm, majestically sailed in.



CHAPTER III.


BEHIND THE SCENES.

In issuing from and leaving open the door of the inner room, Mr.
Crampton had bestowed upon Mr. Perkins a look so peculiarly arch, that
even he, simple as he was, began to imagine that some mystery was about
to be cleared up, or some mighty matter to be discussed. Presently
he heard the well-known voice of Lady Gorgon in conversation with his
uncle. What could their talk be about? Mr. Perkins was dying to know,
and--shall we say it?--advanced to the door on tiptoe and listened with
all his might.

Her Ladyship, that Juno of a woman, if she had not borrowed Venus's
girdle to render herself irresistible, at least had adopted a tender,
coaxing, wheedling, frisky tone, quite different from her ordinary
dignified style of conversation. She called Mr. Crampton a naughty man,
for neglecting his old friends, vowed that Sir George was quite hurt at
his not coming to dine--nor fixing a day when he would come--and added,
with a most engaging ogle, that she had three fine girls at home,
who would perhaps make an evening pass pleasantly, even to such a gay
bachelor as Mr. Crampton.

"Madam," said he, with much gravity, "the daughters of such a mother
must be charming; but I, who have seen your Ladyship, am, alas! proof
against even them."

Both parties here heaved tremendous sighs and affected to be wonderfully
unhappy about something.

"I wish," after a pause, said Lady Gorgon--"I wish, dear Mr. Crampton,
you would not use that odious title 'my Ladyship:' you know it always
makes me melancholy."

"Melancholy, my dear Lady Gorgon; and why?"

"Because it makes me think of another title that ought to have been
mine--ours (I speak for dear Sir George's and my darling boy's sake,
Heaven knows, not mine). What a sad disappointment it has been to my
husband, that after all his services, all the promises he has had, they
have never given him his peerage. As for me, you know--"

"For you, my dear madam, I know quite well that you care for no such
bauble as a coronet, except in so far as it may confer honour upon those
most dear to you--excellent wife and noble mother as you are. Heigho!
what a happy man is Sir George!"

Here there was another pause, and if Mr. Perkins could have seen what
was taking place behind the screen, he would have beheld little Mr.
Crampton looking into Lady Gorgon's face, with as love-sick a Romeo-gaze
as he could possibly counterfeit; while her Ladyship, blushing somewhat
and turning her own grey gogglers up to heaven, received all his words
for gospel, and sat fancying herself to be the best, most meritorious,
and most beautiful creature in the three kingdoms.

"You men are terrible flatterers," continued she; "but you say right:
for myself I value not these empty distinctions. I am growing old, Mr.
Crampton,--yes, indeed, I am, although you smile so incredulously,--and
let me add, that MY thoughts are fixed upon HIGHER things than earthly
crowns. But tell me, you who are all in all with Lord Bagwig, are we
never to have our peerage? His Majesty, I know, is not averse; the
services of dear Sir George to a member of His Majesty's august family,
I know, have been appreciated in the highest quarter. Ever since the
peace we have had a promise. Four hundred pounds has Sir George spent at
the Heralds' Office (I myself am of one of the most ancient families
in the kingdom, Mr. Crampton), and the poor dear man's health is really
ruined by the anxious sickening feeling of hope so long delayed."

Mr. Crampton now assumed an air of much solemnity.

"My dear Lady Gorgon," said he, "will you let me be frank with you, and
will you promise solemnly that what I am going to tell you shall never
be repeated to a single soul?"

Lady Gorgon promised.

"Well, then, since the truth you must know, you yourselves have been in
part the cause of the delay of which you complain. You gave us two votes
five years ago; you now only give us one. If Sir George were to go up
to the Peers, we should lose even that one vote; and would it be common
sense in us to incur such a loss? Mr. Scully, the Liberal, would return
another Member of his own way of thinking; and as for the Lords, we
have, you know, a majority there."

"Oh, that horrid man!" said Lady Gorgon, cursing Mr. Scully in her
heart, and beginning to play a rapid tattoo with her feet, "that
miscreant, that traitor, that--that attorney has been our ruin."

"Horrid man, if you please, but give me leave to tell you that the
horrid man is not the sole cause of your ruin--if ruin you will call it.
I am sorry to say that I do candidly think Ministers believe that Sir
George Gorgon has lost his influence in Oldborough as much through his
own fault as through Mr. Scully's cleverness."

"Our own fault! Good heavens! Have we not done everything--everything
that persons of our station in the county could do, to keep those
misguided men? Have we not remonstrated, threatened, taken away our
custom from the Mayor, established a Conservative apothecary--in
fact, done all that gentlemen could do? But these are such times, Mr.
Crampton: the spirit of revolution is abroad, and the great families of
England are menaced by democratic insolence."

This was Sir George Gorgon's speech always after dinner, and was
delivered by his lady with a great deal of stateliness. Somewhat,
perhaps, to her annoyance, Mr. Crampton only smiled, shook his head, and
said--

"Nonsense, my dear Lady Gorgon--pardon the phrase, but I am a plain old
man, and call things by their names. Now, will you let me whisper in
your ear one word of truth? You have tried all sorts of remonstrances,
and exerted yourself to maintain your influence in every way, except the
right one, and that is--"

"What, in Heaven's name?"

"Conciliation. We know your situation in the borough. Mr. Scully's
whole history, and, pardon me for saying so (but we men in office know
everything), yours--"

Lady Gorgon's ears and cheeks now assumed the hottest hue of crimson.
She thought of her former passages with Scully, and of the days
when--but never mind when: for she suffered her veil to fall, and buried
her head in the folds of her handkerchief. Vain folds! The wily
little Mr. Crampton could see all that passed behind the cambric, and
continued--

"Yes, madam, we know the absurd hopes that were formed by a certain
attorney twenty years since. We know how, up to this moment, he boasts
of certain walks--"

"With the governess--we were always with the governess!" shrieked out
Lady Gorgon, clasping her hands. "She was not the wisest of women."

"With the governess, of course," said Mr. Crampton, firmly. "Do you
suppose that any man dare breathe a syllable against your spotless
reputation? Never, my dear madam; but what I would urge is this--you
have treated your disappointed admirer too cruelly."

"What! the traitor who has robbed us of our rights?"

"He never would have robbed you of your rights if you had been more kind
to him. You should be gentle, madam; you should forgive him--you should
be friends with him."

"With a traitor, never!"

"Think what made him a traitor, Lady Gorgon; look in your glass, and say
if there be not some excuse for him? Think of the feelings of the man
who saw beauty such as yours--I am a plain man and must speak--virtue
such as yours, in the possession of a rival. By heavens, madam, I think
he was RIGHT to hate Sir George Gorgon! Would you have him allow such a
prize to be ravished from him without a pang on his part?"

"He was, I believe, very much attached to me," said Lady Gorgon, quite
delighted; "but you must be aware that a young man of his station in
life could not look up to a person of my rank."

"Surely not: it was monstrous pride and arrogance in Mr. Scully. But
que voulez-vous? Such is the world's way. Scully could not help loving
you--who that knows you can? I am a plain man, and say what I think.
He loves you still. Why make an enemy of him, who would at a word be at
your feet? Dearest Lady Gorgon, listen to me. Sir George Gorgon and Mr.
Scully have already met--their meeting was our contrivance. It is for
our interest, for yours, that they should be friends. If there were two
Ministerial Members for Oldborough, do you think your husband's peerage
would be less secure? I am not at liberty to tell you all I know on this
subject; but do, I entreat you, be reconciled to him."

And after a little more conversation, which was carried on by Mr.
Crampton in the same tender way, this important interview closed, and
Lady Gorgon, folding her shawl round her, threaded certain mysterious
passages and found her way to her carriage in Whitehall.

"I hope you have not been listening, you rogue?" said Mr. Crampton to
his nephew, who blushed most absurdly by way of answer. "You would have
heard great State secrets, if you had dared to do so. That woman is
perpetually here, and if peerages are to be had for the asking, she
ought to have been a duchess by this time. I would not have admitted her
but for a reason that I have. Go you now and ponder upon what you have
heard and seen. Be on good terms with Scully, and, above all, speak not
a word concerning our interview--no, not a word even to your mistress.
By the way, I presume, sir, you will recall your resignation?"

The bewildered Perkins was about to stammer out a speech, when his
uncle, cutting it short, pushed him gently out of the door.

                    *          *          *

At the period when the important events occurred which have been
recorded here, parties ran very high, and a mighty struggle for the
vacant Speakership was about to come on. The Right Honourable Robert
Pincher was the Ministerial candidate, and Sir Charles Macabaw was
patronised by the Opposition. The two Members for Oldborough of course
took different sides, the baronet being of the Pincher faction, while
Mr. William Pitt Scully strongly supported the Macabaw party.

It was Mr. Scully's intention to deliver an impromptu speech upon the
occasion of the election, and he and his faithful Perkins prepared
it between them: for the latter gentleman had wisely kept his uncle's
counsel and his own and Mr. Scully was quite ignorant of the conspiracy
that was brooding. Indeed, so artfully had that young Machiavel of a
Perkins conducted himself, that when asked by his patron whether he had
given up his place in the Tape and Sealing Wax Office, he replied that
"he HAD tendered his resignation," but did not say one word about having
recalled it.

"You were right, my boy, quite right," said Mr. Scully. "A man of
uncompromising principles should make no compromise." And herewith he
sat down and wrote off a couple of letters, one to Mr. Hawksby, telling
him that the place in the Sealing-Wax Office was, as he had reason to
know, vacant; and the other to his nephew, stating that it was to be
his. "Under the rose, my dear Bob," added Mr. Scully, "it will cost you
five hundred pounds; but you cannot invest your money better."

It is needless to state that the affair was to be conducted "with the
strictest secresy and honour," and that the money was to pass through
Mr. Scully's hands.

While, however, the great Pincher and Macabaw question was yet
undecided, an event occurred to Mr. Scully, which had a great influence
upon his after-life. A second grand banquet was given at the Earl of
Mantrap's: Lady Mantrap requested him to conduct Lady Gorgon to dinner;
and the latter, with a charming timidity, and a gracious melancholy look
into his face (after which her veined eyelids veiled her azure eyes),
put her hand into the trembling one of Mr. Scully and said as much as
looks could say, "Forgive and forget."

Down went Scully to dinner. There were dukes on his right hand and earls
on his left; there were but two persons without title in the midst of
that glittering assemblage; the very servants looked like noblemen. The
cook had done wonders; the wines were cool and rich, and Lady Gorgon was
splendid! What attention did everybody pay to her and to him! Why WOULD
she go on gazing into his face with that tender imploring look? In
other words, Scully, after partaking of soup and fish (he, during their
discussion, had been thinking over all the former love-and-hate passages
between himself and Lady Gorgon), turned very red, and began talking to
her.

"Were you not at the opera on Tuesday?" began he, assuming at once the
airs of a man of fashion. "I thought I caught a glimpse of you in the
Duchess of Diddlebury's box."

"Opera, Mr. Scully?" (pronouncing the word "Scully" with the utmost
softness). "Ah, no! we seldom go, and yet too often. For serious persons
the enchantments of that place are too dangerous. I am so nervous--so
delicate; the smallest trifle so agitates, depresses, or irritates me,
that I dare not yield myself up to the excitement of music. I am too
passionately attached to it; and, shall I tell you? it has such a
strange influence upon me, that the smallest false note almost drives me
to distraction, and for that very reason I hardly ever go to a concert
or a ball."

"Egad," thought Scully, "I recollect when she would dance down a matter
of five-and-forty couple, and jingle away at the 'Battle of Prague' all
day."

She continued: "Don't you recollect, I do, with--oh, what regret!--that
day at Oldborough race-ball, when I behaved with such sad rudeness to
you? You will scarcely believe me, and yet I assure you 'tis the fact,
the music had made me almost mad. Do let me ask your pardon for my
conduct. I was not myself. Oh, Mr. Scully! I am no worldly woman; I
know my duties, and I feel my wrongs. Nights and days have I lain awake
weeping and thinking of that unhappy day--that I should ever speak so to
an old friend; for we WERE old friends, were we not?"

Scully did not speak; but his eyes were bursting out of his head, and
his face was the exact colour of a deputy-lieutenant's uniform.

"That I should ever forget myself and you so! How I have been longing
for this opportunity to ask you to forgive me! I asked Lady Mantrap,
when I heard you were to be here, to invite me to her party. Come, I
know you will forgive me--your eyes say you will. You used to look so in
old days, and forgive me my caprices THEN. Do give me a little wine--we
will drink to the memory of old days."

Her eyes filled with tears; and poor Scully's hand caused such a
rattling and trembling of the glass and the decanter that the Duke
of Doldrum--who had been, during the course of this whispered
sentimentality, describing a famous run with the Queen's hounds at the
top of his voice--stopped at the jingling of the glass, and his tale
was lost for ever. Scully hastily drank his wine, and Lady Gorgon turned
round to her next neighbour, a little gentleman in black, between whom
and herself certain conscious looks passed.

"I am glad poor Sir George is not here," said he, smiling.

Lady Gorgon said, "Pooh, for shame!" The little gentleman was no other
than Josiah Crampton, Esquire, that eminent financier, and he was now
going through the curious calculation before mentioned, by which you BUY
A MAN FOR NOTHING. He intended to pay the very same price for Sir George
Gorgon, too; but there was no need to tell the baronet so; only of this
the reader must be made aware.

While Mr. Crampton was conducting this intrigue, which was to bring a
new recruit to the Ministerial ranks, his mighty spirit condescended to
ponder upon subjects of infinitely less importance, and to arrange plans
for the welfare of his nephew and the young woman to whom he had made
a present of his heart. These young persons, as we said before, had
arranged to live in Mr. Perkins's own house in Bedford Row. It was of a
peculiar construction, and might more properly be called a house and
a half: for a snug little tenement of four chambers protruded from the
back of the house into the garden. These rooms communicated with the
drawing-rooms occupied by Mr. Scully; and Perkins, who acted as his
friend and secretary, used frequently to sit in the one nearest the
Member's study, in order that he might be close at hand to confer
with that great man. The rooms had a private entrance too, were newly
decorated, and in them the young couple proposed to live; the kitchen
and garrets being theirs likewise. What more could they need? We
are obliged to be particular in describing these apartments, for
extraordinary events occurred therein.

To say the truth, until the present period Mr. Crampton had taken no
great interest in his nephew's marriage, or, indeed, in the young man
himself. The old gentleman was of a saturnine turn, and inclined
to undervalue the qualities of Mr. Perkins, which were idleness,
simplicity, enthusiasm, and easy good-nature.

"Such fellows never do anything in the world," he would say, and for
such he had accordingly the most profound contempt. But when, after
John Perkins's repeated entreaties, he had been induced to make the
acquaintance of Miss Gorgon, he became instantly charmed with her, and
warmly espoused her cause against her overbearing relations.

At his suggestion she wrote back to decline Sir George Gorgon's
peremptory invitation, and hinted at the same time that she had attained
an age and a position which enabled her to be the mistress of her own
actions. To this letter there came an answer from Lady Gorgon which we
shall not copy, but which simply stated that Miss Lucy Gorgon's conduct
was unchristian, ungrateful, unladylike, and immodest; that the Gorgon
family disowned her for the future, and left her at liberty to form
whatever base connections she pleased.

"A pretty world this," said Mr. Crampton, in a great rage, when the
letter was shown to him. "This same fellow, Scully, dissuades my nephew
from taking a place, because Scully wants it for himself. This prude of
a Lady Gorgon cries out shame, and disowns an innocent amiable girl: she
a heartless jilt herself once, and a heartless flirt now. The Pharisees,
the Pharisees! And to call mine a base family, too!"

Now, Lady Gorgon did not in the least know Mr. Crampton's connection
with Mr. Perkins, or she would have been much more guarded in her
language; but whether she knew it or not, the old gentleman felt a huge
indignation, and determined to have his revenge.

"That's right, Uncle! SHALL I call Gorgon out?" said the impetuous young
Perkins, who was all for blood.

"John, you are a fool," said his uncle. "You shall have a better
revenge: you shall be married from Sir George Gorgon's house, and you
shall see Mr. William Pitt Scully sold for nothing." This to the veteran
diplomatist seemed to be the highest triumph which man could possibly
enjoy.

It was very soon to take place: and, as has been the case ever since the
world began, woman, lovely woman was to be the cause of Scully's fall.
The tender scene at Lord Mantrap's was followed by many others equally
sentimental. Sir George Gorgon called upon his colleague the very next
day, and brought with him a card from Lady Gorgon inviting Mr. Scully
to dinner. The attorney eagerly accepted the invitation, was received
in Baker Street by the whole amiable family with much respectful
cordiality, and was pressed to repeat his visits as country neighbours
should. More than once did he call, and somehow always at the hour when
Sir George was away at his club, or riding in the Park, or elsewhere
engaged. Sir George Gorgon was very old, very feeble, very much
shattered in constitution. Lady Gorgon used to impart her fears to Mr.
Scully every time he called there, and the sympathising attorney used to
console her as best he might. Sir George's country agent neglected the
property--his lady consulted Mr. Scully concerning it. He knew to a
fraction how large her jointure was; how she was to have Gorgon Castle
for her life; and how, in the event of the young baronet's death (he,
too, was a sickly poor boy), the chief part of the estates, bought by
her money, would be at her absolute disposal.

"What a pity these odious politics prevent me from having you for our
agent," would Lady Gorgon say; and indeed Scully thought it was a pity
too. Ambitious Scully! what wild notions filled his brain. He used to
take leave of Lady Gorgon and ruminate upon these things; and when he
was gone, Sir George and her Ladyship used to laugh.

"If we can but commit him--if we can but make him vote for Pincher,"
said the General, "my peerage is secure. Hawksby and Crampton as good as
told me so."

The point had been urged upon Mr. Scully repeatedly and adroitly. "Is
not Pincher a more experienced man than Macabaw?" would Sir George say
to his guest over their wine. Scully allowed it. "Can't you vote for
him on personal grounds, and say so in the House?" Scully wished he
could--how he wished he could! Every time the General coughed, Scully
saw his friend's desperate situation more and more, and thought how
pleasant it would be to be lord of Gorgon Castle. "Knowing my property,"
cried Sir George, "as you do, and with your talents and integrity, what
a comfort it would be could I leave you as guardian to my boy! But these
cursed politics prevent it, my dear fellow. Why WILL you be a Radical?"
And Scully cursed politics too. "Hang the low-bred rogue," added Sir
George, when William Pitt Scully left the house: "he will do everything
but promise."

"My dear General," said Lady Gorgon, sidling up to him and patting him
on his old yellow cheek--"My dear Georgy, tell me one thing,--are you
jealous?"

"Jealous, my dear! and jealous of THAT fellow--pshaw!"

"Well, then, give me leave, and you shall have the promise to-morrow."

                    *          *          *

To-morrow arrived. It was a remarkably fine day, and in the forenoon
Mr. Perkins gave his accustomed knock at Scully's study, which was only
separated from his own sitting-room by a double door. John had wisely
followed his uncle's advice, and was on the best terms with the
honourable Member.

"Here are a few sentences," said he, "which I think may suit
your purpose. Great public services--undeniable merit--years of
integrity--cause of reform, and Macabaw for ever!" He put down the
paper. It was, in fact, a speech in favour of Mr. Macabaw.

"Hush," said Scully, rather surlily; for he was thinking how
disagreeable it was to support Macabaw; and besides, there were clerks
in the room, whom the thoughtless Perkins had not at first perceived. As
soon as that gentleman saw them, "You are busy, I see," continued he in
a lower tone. "I came to say that I must be off duty to-day, for I am
engaged to take a walk with some ladies of my acquaintance."

So saying, the light-hearted young man placed his hat unceremoniously on
his head, and went off through his own door, humming a song. He was in
such high spirits that he did not even think of closing the doors of
communication, and Scully looked after him with a sneer.

"Ladies, forsooth," thought he; "I know who they are. This precious girl
that he is fooling with, for one, I suppose." He was right: Perkins was
off on the wings of love, to see Miss Lucy; and she and Aunt Biggs
and Uncle Crampton had promised this very day to come and look at the
apartments which Mrs. John Perkins was to occupy with her happy husband.

"Poor devil," so continued Mr. Scully's meditations, "it is almost too
bad to do him out of his place; but my Bob wants it, and John's girl
has, I hear, seven thousand pounds. His uncle will get him another place
before all that money is spent." And herewith Mr. Scully began conning
the speech which Perkins had made for him.

He had not read it more than six times,--in truth, he was getting it by
heart,--when his head clerk came to him from the front room, bearing
a card: a footman had brought it, who said his lady was waiting below.
Lady Gorgon's name was on the card! To seize his hat and rush downstairs
was, with Mr. Scully, the work of an infinitesimal portion of time.

It was indeed Lady Gorgon in her Gorgonian chariot.

"Mr. Scully," said she, popping her head out of window and smiling in a
most engaging way, "I want to speak to you, on something very particular
INDEED"--and she held him out her hand. Scully pressed it most tenderly:
he hoped all heads in Bedford Row were at the windows to see him. "I
can't ask you into the carriage, for you see the governess is with me,
and I want to talk secrets to you."

"Shall I go and make a little promenade?" said mademoiselle, innocently.
And her mistress hated her for that speech.

"No. Mr. Scully, I am sure, will let me come in for five minutes?"

Mr. Scully was only too happy. My Lady descended and walked upstairs,
leaning on the happy solicitor's arm. But how should he manage? The
front room was consecrated to clerks; there were clerks too, as ill-luck
would have it, in his private room. "Perkins is out for the day,"
thought Scully; "I will take her into his room." And into Perkins's
room he took her--ay, and he shut the double doors after him too, and
trembled as he thought of his own happiness.

"What a charming little study," said Lady Gorgon, seating herself. And
indeed it was very pretty: for Perkins had furnished it beautifully, and
laid out a neat tray with cakes, a cold fowl, and sherry, to entertain
his party withal. "And do you bachelors always live so well?" continued
she, pointing to the little cold collation.

Mr. Scully looked rather blank when he saw it, and a dreadful suspicion
crossed his soul; but there was no need to trouble Lady Gorgon with
explanations: therefore, at once, and with much presence of mind, he
asked her to partake of his bachelor's fare (she would refuse Mr. Scully
nothing that day). A pretty sight would it have been for young Perkins
to see strangers so unceremoniously devouring his feast. She drank--Mr.
Scully drank--and so emboldened was he by the draught that he actually
seated himself by the side of Lady Gorgon, on John Perkins's new sofa.

Her Ladyship had of course something to say to him. She was a pious
woman, and had suddenly conceived a violent wish for building a chapel
of ease at Oldborough, to which she entreated him to subscribe. She
enlarged upon the benefits that the town would derive from it, spoke
of Sunday-schools, sweet spiritual instruction, and the duty of all
well-minded persons to give aid to the scheme.

"I will subscribe a hundred pounds," said Scully, at the end of her
Ladyship's harangue: "would I not do anything for you?"

"Thank you, thank you, dear Mr. Scully," said the enthusiastic woman.
(How the "dear" went burning through his soul!) "Ah!" added she, "if
you WOULD but do anything for me--if you, who are so eminently, so truly
distinguished, in a religious point of view, would but see the truth
in politics too; and if I could see your name among those of the true
patriot party in this empire, how blest--oh! how blest should I be! Poor
Sir George often says he should go to his grave happy, could he but
see you the guardian of his boy; and I, your old friend (for we WERE
friends, William), how have I wept to think of you as one of those who
are bringing our monarchy to ruin. Do, do promise me this too!" And she
took his hand and pressed it between hers.

The heart of William Pitt Scully, during this speech, was thumping
up and down with a frightful velocity and strength. His old love, the
agency of the Gorgon property--the dear widow--five thousand a year
clear--a thousand delicious hopes rushed madly through his brain, and
almost took away his reason. And there she sat--she, the loved one,
pressing his hand and looking softly into his eyes.

Down, down he plumped on his knees.

"Juliana!" shrieked he, "don't take away your hand! My love--my only
love!--speak but those blessed words again! Call me William once more,
and do with me what you will."

Juliana cast down her eyes and said, in the very smallest type,
"William!"

                    *          *          *
--when the door opened, and in walked Mr. Crampton, leading Mrs. Biggs,
who could hardly contain herself for laughing, and Mr. John Perkins, who
was squeezing the arm of Miss Lucy. They had heard every word of the two
last speeches.

For at the very moment when Lady Gorgon had stopped at Mr. Scully's
door, the four above-named individuals had issued from Great James
Street into Bedford Row.

Lucy cried out that it was her aunt's carriage, and they all saw Mr.
Scully come out, bare-headed, in the sunshine, and my Lady descend, and
the pair go into the house. They meanwhile entered by Mr. Perkins's own
private door, and had been occupied in examining the delightful rooms
on the ground-floor, which were to be his dining-room and library--from
which they ascended a stair to visit the other two rooms, which were to
form Mrs. John Perkins's drawing-room and bedroom. Now whether it was
that they trod softly, or that the stairs were covered with a grand new
carpet and drugget, as was the case, or that the party within were too
much occupied in themselves to heed any outward disturbances, I know
not; but Lucy, who was advancing with John (he was saying something
about one of the apartments, the rogue!)--Lucy started and whispered,
"There is somebody in the rooms!" and at that instant began the speech
already reported, "THANK YOU, THANK YOU, DEAR MR. SCULLY," etc. etc.,
which was delivered by Lady Gorgon in a full clear voice; for, to do her
Ladyship justice, SHE had not one single grain of love for Mr. Scully,
and during the delivery of her little oration, was as cool as the
coolest cucumber.

Then began the impassioned rejoinder, to which the four listened on
the landing-place; and then the little "William," as narrated above: at
which juncture Mr. Crampton thought proper to rattle at the door, and,
after a brief pause, to enter with his party.

"William" had had time to bounce off his knees, and was on a chair at
the other end of the room.

"What, Lady Gorgon!" said Mr. Crampton, with excellent surprise, "how
delighted I am to see you! Always, I see employed in works of charity"
(the chapel-of-ease paper was on her knees), "and on such an occasion,
too,--it is really the most wonderful coincidence! My dear madam, here
is a silly fellow, a nephew of mine, who is going to marry a silly girl,
a niece of your own."

"Sir, I--" began Lady Gorgon, rising.

"They heard every word," whispered Mr. Crampton eagerly. "Come forward,
Mr. Perkins, and show yourself." Mr. Perkins made a genteel bow. "Miss
Lucy, please to shake hands with your aunt; and this, my dear madam, is
Mrs. Biggs, of Mecklenburgh Square, who, if she were not too old, might
marry a gentleman in the Treasury, who is your very humble servant." And
with this gallant speech, old Mr. Crampton began helping everybody to
sherry and cake.

As for William Pitt Scully, he had disappeared, evaporated, in the
most absurd sneaking way imaginable. Lady Gorgon made good her retreat
presently, with much dignity, her countenance undismayed, and her face
turned resolutely to the foe.

                    *          *          *

About five days afterwards, that memorable contest took place in the
House of Commons, in which the partisans of Mr. Macabaw were so very
nearly getting him the Speakership. On the day that the report of the
debate appeared in the Times, there appeared also an announcement in the
Gazette as follows:--

"The King has been pleased to appoint John Perkins, Esquire, to be
Deputy-Subcomptroller of His Majesty's Tape Office and Custos of the
Sealing-Wax Department."

Mr. Crampton showed this to his nephew with great glee, and was
chuckling to think how Mr. William Pitt Scully would be annoyed, who
had expected the place, when Perkins burst out laughing and said, "By
heavens, here is my own speech! Scully has spoken every word of it; he
has only put in Mr. Pincher's name in the place of Mr. Macabaw's."

"He is ours now," responded his uncle, "and I told you WE WOULD HAVE HIM
FOR NOTHING. I told you, too, that you should be married from Sir George
Gorgon's, and here is proof of it."

It was a letter from Lady Gorgon, in which she said that, "had she known
Mr. Perkins to be a nephew of her friend Mr. Crampton, she never for
a moment would have opposed his marriage with her niece, and she
had written that morning to her dear Lucy, begging that the marriage
breakfast should take place in Baker Street."

"It shall be in Mecklenburgh Square," said John Perkins stoutly; and in
Mecklenburgh Square it was.

William Pitt Scully, Esquire, was, as Mr. Crampton said, hugely annoyed
at the loss of the place for his nephew. He had still, however, his
hopes to look forward to, but these were unluckily dashed by the coming
in of the Whigs. As for Sir George Gorgon, when he came to ask about his
peerage, Hawksby told him that they could not afford to lose him in the
Commons, for a Liberal Member would infallibly fill his place.

And now that the Tories are out and the Whigs are in, strange to say a
Liberal does fill his place. This Liberal is no other than Sir George
Gorgon himself, who is still longing to be a lord, and his lady is still
devout and intriguing. So that the Members for Oldborough have
changed sides, and taunt each other with apostasy, and hate each other
cordially. Mr. Crampton still chuckles over the manner in which he
tricked them both, and talks of those five minutes during which he
stood on the landing-place, and hatched and executed his "Bedford-Row
Conspiracy."

========================================
========================================

MEN'S WIVES

By William Makepeace Thackeray



Contents.

The Ravenswing.

I. Which is entirely introductory--contains an account of Miss Crump,
her suitors, and her family circle.

II. In which Mr. Walker makes three attempts to ascertain the dwelling
of Morgiana.

III. What came of Mr. Walker's discovery of the "Bootjack."

IV. In which the heroine has a number more lovers, and cuts a very
dashing figure in the world.

V. In which Mr. Walker falls into difficulties, and Mrs. Walker makes
many foolish attempts to rescue him.

VI. In which Mr. Walker still remains in difficulties, but shows great
resignation under his misfortunes.

VII. In which Morgiana advances towards fame and honour, and in which
several great literary characters make their appearance.

VIII. In which Mr. Walker shows great prudence and forbearance.


Mr. and Mrs. Frank Berry.

I. The fight at Slaughter House.

II. The combat at Versailles.


Dennis Haggarty's wife.




MEN'S WIVES, BY G. FITZ-BOODLE




THE RAVENSWING



CHAPTER I. WHICH IS ENTIRELY INTRODUCTORY--CONTAINS AN ACCOUNT OF MISS
CRUMP, HER SUITORS, AND HER FAMILY CIRCLE.

In a certain quiet and sequestered nook of the retired village of
London--perhaps in the neighbourhood of Berkeley Square, or at any
rate somewhere near Burlington Gardens--there was once a house of
entertainment called the "Bootjack Hotel." Mr. Crump, the landlord, had,
in the outset of life, performed the duties of Boots in some inn even
more frequented than his own, and, far from being ashamed of his origin,
as many persons are in the days of their prosperity, had thus solemnly
recorded it over the hospitable gate of his hotel.

Crump married Miss Budge, so well known to the admirers of the festive
dance on the other side of the water as Miss Delancy; and they had
one daughter, named Morgiana, after that celebrated part in the "Forty
Thieves" which Miss Budge performed with unbounded applause both at
the "Surrey" and "The Wells." Mrs. Crump sat in a little bar, profusely
ornamented with pictures of the dancers of all ages, from Hillisberg,
Rose, Parisot, who plied the light fantastic toe in 1805, down to the
Sylphides of our day. There was in the collection a charming portrait of
herself, done by De Wilde; she was in the dress of Morgiana, and in the
act of pouring, to very slow music, a quantity of boiling oil into one
of the forty jars. In this sanctuary she sat, with black eyes, black
hair, a purple face and a turban, and morning, noon, or night, as you
went into the parlour of the hotel, there was Mrs. Crump taking tea
(with a little something in it), looking at the fashions, or reading
Cumberland's "British Theatre." The Sunday Times was her paper, for she
voted the Dispatch, that journal which is taken in by most ladies of her
profession, to be vulgar and Radical, and loved the theatrical gossip in
which the other mentioned journal abounds.

The fact is, that the "Royal Bootjack," though a humble, was a very
genteel house; and a very little persuasion would induce Mr. Crump, as
he looked at his own door in the sun, to tell you that he had himself
once drawn off with that very bootjack the top-boots of His Royal
Highness the Prince of Wales and the first gentleman in Europe. While,
then, the houses of entertainment in the neighbourhood were loud in
their pretended Liberal politics, the "Bootjack" stuck to the good old
Conservative line, and was only frequented by such persons as were of
that way of thinking. There were two parlours, much accustomed, one for
the gentlemen of the shoulder-knot, who came from the houses of their
employers hard by; another for some "gents who used the 'ouse," as Mrs.
Crump would say (Heaven bless her!) in her simple Cockniac dialect, and
who formed a little club there.

I forgot to say that while Mrs. C. was sipping her eternal tea or
washing up her endless blue china, you might often hear Miss Morgiana
employed at the little red-silk cottage piano, singing, "Come where the
haspens quiver," or "Bonny lad, march over hill and furrow," or "My art
and lute," or any other popular piece of the day. And the dear girl sang
with very considerable skill, too, for she had a fine loud voice, which,
if not always in tune, made up for that defect by its great energy and
activity; and Morgiana was not content with singing the mere tune, but
gave every one of the roulades, flourishes, and ornaments as she heard
them at the theatres by Mrs. Humby, Mrs. Waylett, or Madame Vestris.
The girl had a fine black eye like her mamma, a grand enthusiasm for
the stage, as every actor's child will have, and, if the truth must be
known, had appeared many and many a time at the theatre in Catherine
Street, in minor parts first, and then in Little Pickle, in Desdemona,
in Rosina, and in Miss Foote's part where she used to dance: I have not
the name to my hand, but think it is Davidson. Four times in the week,
at least, her mother and she used to sail off at night to some place of
public amusement, for Mrs. Crump had a mysterious acquaintance with
all sorts of theatrical personages; and the gates of her old haunt "The
Wells," of the "Cobourg" (by the kind permission of Mrs. Davidge), nay,
of the "Lane" and the "Market" themselves, flew open before her
"Open sesame," as the robbers' door did to her colleague, Ali Baba
(Hornbuckle), in the operatic piece in which she was so famous.

Beer was Mr. Crump's beverage, diversified by a little gin, in the
evenings; and little need be said of this gentleman, except that he
discharged his duties honourably, and filled the president's chair at
the club as completely as it could possibly be filled; for he could not
even sit in it in his greatcoat, so accurately was the seat adapted to
him. His wife and daughter, perhaps, thought somewhat slightingly of
him, for he had no literary tastes, and had never been at a theatre
since he took his bride from one. He was valet to Lord Slapper at the
time, and certain it is that his lordship set him up in the "Bootjack,"
and that stories HAD been told. But what are such to you or me? Let
bygones be bygones; Mrs. Crump was quite as honest as her neighbours,
and Miss had five hundred pounds to be paid down on the day of her
wedding.

Those who know the habits of the British tradesman are aware that he has
gregarious propensities like any lord in the land; that he loves a joke,
that he is not averse to a glass; that after the day's toil he is happy
to consort with men of his degree; and that as society is not so far
advanced among us as to allow him to enjoy the comforts of splendid
club-houses, which are open to many persons with not a tenth part of his
pecuniary means, he meets his friends in the cosy tavern parlour, where
a neat sanded floor, a large Windsor chair, and a glass of hot something
and water, make him as happy as any of the clubmen in their magnificent
saloons.

At the "Bootjack" was, as we have said, a very genteel and select
society, called the "Kidney Club," from the fact that on Saturday
evenings a little graceful supper of broiled kidneys was usually
discussed by the members of the club. Saturday was their grand night;
not but that they met on all other nights in the week when inclined for
festivity: and indeed some of them could not come on Saturdays in the
summer having elegant villas in the suburbs, where they passed the
six-and-thirty hours of recreation that are happily to be found at the
end of every week.

There was Mr. Balls, the great grocer of South Audley Street, a warm
man, who, they say, had his twenty thousand pounds; Jack Snaffle, of the
mews hard by, a capital fellow for a song; Clinker, the ironmonger:
all married gentlemen, and in the best line of business; Tressle, the
undertaker, etc. No liveries were admitted into the room, as may be
imagined, but one or two select butlers and major-domos joined the
circle; for the persons composing it knew very well how important it
was to be on good terms with these gentlemen and many a time my lord's
account would never have been paid, and my lady's large order never have
been given, but for the conversation which took place at the "Bootjack,"
and the friendly intercourse subsisting between all the members of the
society.

The tiptop men of the society were two bachelors, and two as fashionable
tradesmen as any in the town: Mr. Woolsey, from Stultz's, of the famous
house of Linsey, Woolsey and Co. of Conduit Street, Tailors; and Mr.
Eglantine, the celebrated perruquier and perfumer of Bond Street, whose
soaps, razors, and patent ventilating scalps are know throughout Europe.
Linsey, the senior partner of the tailors' firm had his handsome mansion
in Regent's Park, drove his buggy, and did little more than lend his
name to the house. Woolsey lived in it, was the working man of the firm,
and it was said that his cut was as magnificent as that of any man in
the profession. Woolsey and Eglantine were rivals in many ways--rivals
in fashion, rivals in wit, and, above all, rivals for the hand of
an amiable young lady whom we have already mentioned, the dark-eyed
songstress Morgiana Crump. They were both desperately in love with her,
that was the truth; and each, in the absence of the other, abused his
rival heartily. Of the hairdresser Woolsey said, that as for Eglantine
being his real name, it was all his (Mr. Woolsey's) eye; that he was in
the hands of the Jews, and his stock and grand shop eaten up by usury.
And with regard to Woolsey, Eglantine remarked, that his pretence
of being descended from the Cardinal was all nonsense; that he was a
partner, certainly, in the firm, but had only a sixteenth share; and
that the firm could never get their moneys in, and had an immense number
of bad debts in their books. As is usual, there was a great deal of
truth and a great deal of malice in these tales; however, the gentlemen
were, take them all in all, in a very fashionable way of business, and
had their claims to Miss Morgiana's hand backed by the parents. Mr.
Crump was a partisan of the tailor; while Mrs. C. was a strong advocate
for the claims of the enticing perfumer.

Now, it was a curious fact, that these two gentlemen were each in
need of the other's services--Woolsey being afflicted with premature
baldness, or some other necessity for a wig still more fatal--Eglantine
being a very fat man, who required much art to make his figure at all
decent. He wore a brown frock-coat and frogs, and attempted by all sorts
of contrivances to hide his obesity; but Woolsey's remark, that, dress
as he would, he would always look like a snob, and that there was
only one man in England who could make a gentleman of him, went to the
perfumer's soul; and if there was one thing on earth he longed for (not
including the hand of Miss Crump) it was to have a coat from Linsey's,
in which costume he was sure that Morgiana would not resist him.

If Eglantine was uneasy about the coat, on the other hand he attacked
Woolsey atrociously on the score of his wig; for though the latter went
to the best makers, he never could get a peruke to sit naturally upon
him and the unhappy epithet of Mr. Wiggins, applied to him on one
occasion by the barber, stuck to him ever after in the club, and
made him writhe when it was uttered. Each man would have quitted the
"Kidneys" in disgust long since, but for the other--for each had an
attraction in the place, and dared not leave the field in possession of
his rival.

To do Miss Morgiana justice, it must be said, that she did not encourage
one more than another; but as far as accepting eau-de-Cologne and
hair-combs from the perfumer--some opera tickets, a treat to Greenwich,
and a piece of real Genoa velvet for a bonnet (it had originally been
intended for a waistcoat), from the admiring tailor, she had been
equally kind to each, and in return had made each a present of a lock
of her beautiful glossy hair. It was all she had to give, poor girl!
and what could she do but gratify her admirers by this cheap and artless
testimony of her regard? A pretty scene and quarrel took place between
the rivals on the day when they discovered that each was in possession
of one of Morgiana's ringlets.

Such, then, were the owners and inmates of the little "Bootjack,"
from whom and which, as this chapter is exceedingly discursive and
descriptive, we must separate the reader for a while, and carry him--it
is only into Bond Street, so no gentleman need be afraid--carry him into
Bond Street, where some other personages are awaiting his consideration.

Not far from Mr. Eglantine's shop in Bond Street, stand, as is very well
known, the Windsor Chambers. The West Diddlesex Association (Western
Branch), the British and Foreign Soap Company, the celebrated attorneys
Kite and Levison, have their respective offices here; and as the names
of the other inhabitants of the chambers are not only painted on the
walls, but also registered in Mr. Boyle's "Court Guide," it is quite
unnecessary that they should be repeated here. Among them, on the
entresol (between the splendid saloons of the Soap Company on the first
floor, with their statue of Britannia presenting a packet of the soap to
Europe, Asia, Africa, and America, and the West Diddlesex Western Branch
on the basement)--lives a gentleman by the name of Mr. Howard Walker.
The brass plate on the door of that gentleman's chambers had the word
"Agency" inscribed beneath his name; and we are therefore at liberty
to imagine that he followed that mysterious occupation. In person Mr.
Walker was very genteel; he had large whiskers, dark eyes (with a slight
cast in them), a cane, and a velvet waistcoat. He was a member of a
club; had an admission to the opera, and knew every face behind the
scenes; and was in the habit of using a number of French phrases in his
conversation, having picked up a smattering of that language during a
residence "on the Continent;" in fact, he had found it very convenient
at various times of his life to dwell in the city of Boulogne, where
he acquired a knowledge of smoking, ecarte, and billiards, which was
afterwards of great service to him. He knew all the best tables in
town, and the marker at Hunt's could only give him ten. He had some
fashionable acquaintances too, and you might see him walking arm-in-arm
with such gentlemen as my Lord Vauxhall, the Marquess of Billingsgate,
or Captain Buff; and at the same time nodding to young Moses, the
dandy bailiff; or Loder, the gambling-house keeper; or Aminadab, the
cigar-seller in the Quadrant. Sometimes he wore a pair of moustaches,
and was called Captain Walker; grounding his claim to that title upon
the fact of having once held a commission in the service of Her Majesty
the Queen of Portugal. It scarcely need be said that he had been through
the Insolvent Court many times. But to those who did not know his
history intimately there was some difficulty in identifying him with the
individual who had so taken the benefit of the law, inasmuch as in
his schedule his name appeared as Hooker Walker, wine-merchant,
commission-agent, music-seller, or what not. The fact is, that though he
preferred to call himself Howard, Hooker was his Christian name, and it
had been bestowed on him by his worthy old father, who was a clergyman,
and had intended his son for that profession. But as the old gentleman
died in York gaol, where he was a prisoner for debt, he was never able
to put his pious intentions with regard to his son into execution; and
the young fellow (as he was wont with many oaths to assert) was thrown
on his own resources, and became a man of the world at a very early age.

What Mr. Howard Walker's age was at the time of the commencement of this
history, and, indeed, for an indefinite period before or afterwards, it
is impossible to determine. If he were eight-and-twenty, as he asserted
himself, Time had dealt hardly with him: his hair was thin, there were
many crows'-feet about his eyes, and other signs in his countenance
of the progress of decay. If, on the contrary, he were forty, as Sam
Snaffle declared, who himself had misfortunes in early life, and vowed
he knew Mr. Walker in Whitecross Street Prison in 1820, he was a very
young-looking person considering his age. His figure was active and
slim, his leg neat, and he had not in his whiskers a single white hair.

It must, however, be owned that he used Mr. Eglantine's Regenerative
Unction (which will make your whiskers as black as your boot), and, in
fact, he was a pretty constant visitor at that gentleman's emporium;
dealing with him largely for soaps and articles of perfumery, which he
had at an exceedingly low rate. Indeed, he was never known to pay Mr.
Eglantine one single shilling for those objects of luxury, and, having
them on such moderate terms, was enabled to indulge in them pretty
copiously. Thus Mr. Walker was almost as great a nosegay as Mr.
Eglantine himself: his handkerchief was scented with verbena, his hair
with jessamine, and his coat had usually a fine perfume of cigars, which
rendered his presence in a small room almost instantaneously remarkable.
I have described Mr. Walker thus accurately, because, in truth, it
is more with characters than with astounding events that this little
history deals, and Mr. Walker is one of the principal of our dramatis
personae.

And so, having introduced Mr. W., we will walk over with him to Mr.
Eglantine's emporium, where that gentleman is in waiting, too, to have
his likeness taken.

There is about an acre of plate glass under the Royal arms on Mr.
Eglantine's shop-window; and at night, when the gas is lighted, and the
washballs are illuminated, and the lambent flame plays fitfully over
numberless bottles of vari-coloured perfumes--now flashes on a case
of razors, and now lightens up a crystal vase, containing a hundred
thousand of his patent tooth-brushes--the effect of the sight may be
imagined. You don't suppose that he is a creature who has those odious,
simpering wax figures in his window, that are called by the vulgar
dummies? He is above such a wretched artifice; and it is my belief
that he would as soon have his own head chopped off, and placed as a
trunkless decoration to his shop-window, as allow a dummy to figure
there. On one pane you read in elegant gold letters "Eglantinia"--'tis
his essence for the handkerchief; on the other is written "Regenerative
Unction"--'tis his invaluable pomatum for the hair.

There is no doubt about it: Eglantine's knowledge of his profession
amounts to genius. He sells a cake of soap for seven shillings, for
which another man would not get a shilling, and his tooth-brushes go off
like wildfire at half-a-guinea apiece. If he has to administer rouge or
pearl-powder to ladies, he does it with a mystery and fascination which
there is no resisting, and the ladies believe there are no cosmetics
like his. He gives his wares unheard-of names, and obtains for them sums
equally prodigious. He CAN dress hair--that is a fact--as few men in
this age can; and has been known to take twenty pounds in a single
night from as many of the first ladies of England when ringlets were in
fashion. The introduction of bands, he says, made a difference of two
thousand pounds a year in his income; and if there is one thing in the
world he hates and despises, it is a Madonna. "I'm not," says he, "a
tradesman--I'm a HARTIST" (Mr. Eglantine was born in London)--"I'm a
hartist; and show me a fine 'ead of air, and I'll dress it for nothink."
He vows that it was his way of dressing Mademoiselle Sontag's hair, that
caused the count her husband to fall in love with her; and he has a lock
of it in a brooch, and says it was the finest head he ever saw, except
one, and that was Morgiana Crump's.

With his genius and his position in the profession, how comes it, then,
that Mr. Eglantine was not a man of fortune, as many a less clever has
been? If the truth must be told, he loved pleasure, and was in the hands
of the Jews. He had been in business twenty years: he had borrowed a
thousand pounds to purchase his stock and shop; and he calculated that
he had paid upwards of twenty thousand pounds for the use of the one
thousand, which was still as much due as on the first day when he
entered business. He could show that he had received a thousand dozen
of champagne from the disinterested money-dealers with whom he usually
negotiated his paper. He had pictures all over his "studios," which had
been purchased in the same bargains. If he sold his goods at an enormous
price, he paid for them at a rate almost equally exorbitant. There
was not an article in his shop but came to him through his Israelite
providers; and in the very front shop itself sat a gentleman who was the
nominee of one of them, and who was called Mr. Mossrose. He was there to
superintend the cash account, and to see that certain instalments were
paid to his principals, according to certain agreements entered into
between Mr. Eglantine and them.

Having that sort of opinion of Mr. Mossrose which Damocles may have had
of the sword which hung over his head, of course Mr. Eglantine hated his
foreman profoundly. "HE an artist," would the former gentleman exclaim;
"why, he's only a disguised bailiff! Mossrose indeed! The chap's name's
Amos, and he sold oranges before he came here." Mr. Mossrose, on his
side, utterly despised Mr. Eglantine, and looked forward to the day when
he would become the proprietor of the shop, and take Eglantine for a
foreman; and then it would HIS turn to sneer and bully, and ride the
high horse.

Thus it will be seen that there was a skeleton in the great perfumer's
house, as the saying is: a worm in his heart's core, and though to all
appearance prosperous, he was really in an awkward position.

What Mr. Eglantine's relations were with Mr. Walker may be imagined from
the following dialogue which took place between the two gentlemen at
five o'clock one summer's afternoon, when Mr. Walker, issuing from his
chambers, came across to the perfumer's shop:--

"Is Eglantine at home, Mr. Mossrose?" said Walker to the foreman, who
sat in the front shop.

"Don't know--go and look" (meaning go and be hanged); for Mossrose also
hated Mr. Walker.

"If you're uncivil I'll break your bones, Mr. AMOS," says Mr. Walker,
sternly.

"I should like to see you try, Mr. HOOKER Walker," replies the undaunted
shopman; on which the Captain, looking several tremendous canings at
him, walked into the back room or "studio."

"How are you, Tiny my buck?" says the Captain. "Much doing?"

"Not a soul in town. I 'aven't touched the hirons all day," replied Mr.
Eglantine, in rather a desponding way.

"Well, just get them ready now, and give my whiskers a turn. I'm going
to dine with Billingsgate and some out-and-out fellows at the 'Regent,'
and so, my lad, just do your best."

"I can't," says Mr. Eglantine. "I expect ladies, Captain, every minute."

"Very good; I don't want to trouble such a great man, I'm sure.
Good-bye, and let me hear from you THIS DAY WEEK, Mr. Eglantine."
"This day week" meant that at seven days from that time a certain bill
accepted by Mr. Eglantine would be due, and presented for payment.

"Don't be in such a hurry, Captain--do sit down. I'll curl you in one
minute. And, I say, won't the party renew?"

"Impossible--it's the third renewal."

"But I'll make the thing handsome to you;--indeed I will."

"How much?"

"Will ten pounds do the business?"

"What! offer my principal ten pounds? Are you mad, Eglantine?--A little
more of the iron to the left whisker."

"No, I meant for commission."

"Well, I'll see if that will do. The party I deal with, Eglantine, has
power, I know, and can defer the matter no doubt. As for me, you know,
I'VE nothing to do in the affair, and only act as a friend between you
and him. I give you my honour and soul, I do."

"I know you do, my dear sir." The last two speeches were lies. The
perfumer knew perfectly well that Mr. Walker would pocket the ten
pounds; but he was too easy to care for paying it, and too timid to
quarrel with such a powerful friend. And he had on three different
occasions already paid ten pounds' fine for the renewal of the bill in
question, all of which bonuses he knew went to his friend Mr. Walker.

Here, too, the reader will perceive what was, in part, the meaning of
the word "Agency" on Mr. Walker's door. He was a go-between between
money-lenders and borrowers in this world, and certain small sums always
remained with him in the course of the transaction. He was an agent for
wine, too; an agent for places to be had through the influence of
great men; he was an agent for half-a-dozen theatrical people, male and
female, and had the interests of the latter especially, it was said,
at heart. Such were a few of the means by which this worthy gentleman
contrived to support himself, and if, as he was fond of high living,
gambling, and pleasures of all kinds, his revenue was not large enough
for his expenditure--why, he got into debt, and settled his bills that
way. He was as much at home in the Fleet as in Pall Mall, and quite as
happy in the one place as in the other. "That's the way I take things,"
would this philosopher say. "If I've money, I spend; if I've credit,
I borrow; if I'm dunned, I whitewash; and so you can't beat me down."
Happy elasticity of temperament! I do believe that, in spite of his
misfortunes and precarious position, there was no man in England whose
conscience was more calm, and whose slumbers were more tranquil, than
those of Captain Howard Walker.

As he was sitting under the hands of Mr. Eglantine, he reverted to "the
ladies," whom the latter gentleman professed to expect; said he was a
sly dog, a lucky ditto, and asked him if the ladies were handsome.

Eglantine thought there could be no harm in telling a bouncer to a
gentleman with whom he was engaged in money transactions; and so, to
give the Captain an idea of his solvency and the brilliancy of his
future prospects, "Captain," said he, "I've got a hundred and eighty
pounds out with you, which you were obliging enough to negotiate for me.
Have I, or have I not, two bills out to that amount?"

"Well, my good fellow, you certainly have; and what then?"

"What then? Why, I bet you five pounds to one, that in three months
those bills are paid."

"Done! five pounds to one. I take it."

This sudden closing with him made the perfumer rather uneasy; but he was
not to pay for three months, and so he said, "Done!" too, and went on:
"What would you say if your bills were paid?"

"Not mine; Pike's."

"Well, if Pike's were paid; and the Minories' man paid, and every single
liability I have cleared off; and that Mossrose flung out of winder, and
me and my emporium as free as hair?"

"You don't say so? Is Queen Anne dead? and has she left you a fortune?
or what's the luck in the wind now?"

"It's better than Queen Anne, or anybody dying. What should you say to
seeing in that very place where Mossrose now sits (hang him!)--seeing
the FINEST HEAD OF 'AIR NOW IN EUROPE? A woman, I tell you--a
slap-up lovely woman, who, I'm proud to say, will soon be called Mrs.
Heglantine, and will bring me five thousand pounds to her fortune."

"Well, Tiny, this IS good luck indeed. I say, you'll be able to do a
bill or two for ME then, hay? You won't forget an old friend?"

"That I won't. I shall have a place at my board for you, Capting; and
many's the time I shall 'ope to see you under that ma'ogany."

"What will the French milliner say? She'll hang herself for despair,
Eglantine."

"Hush! not a word about 'ER. I've sown all my wild oats, I tell you.
Eglantine is no longer the gay young bachelor, but the sober married
man. I want a heart to share the feelings of mine. I want repose. I'm
not so young as I was: I feel it."

"Pooh! pooh! you are--you are--"

"Well, but I sigh for an 'appy fireside; and I'll have it."

"And give up that club which you belong to, hay?"

"'The Kidneys?' Oh! of course, no married man should belong to such
places: at least, I'LL not; and I'll have my kidneys broiled at home.
But be quiet, Captain, if you please; the ladies appointed to--"

"And is it THE lady you expect? eh, you rogue!"

"Well, get along. It's her and her Ma."

But Mr. Walker determined he wouldn't get along, and would see these
lovely ladies before he stirred.

The operation on Mr. Walker's whiskers being concluded, he was arranging
his toilet before the glass in an agreeable attitude: his neck out,
his enormous pin settled in his stock to his satisfaction, his eyes
complacently directed towards the reflection of his left and favourite
whisker. Eglantine was laid on a settee, in an easy, though melancholy
posture; he was twiddling the tongs with which he had just operated on
Walker with one hand, and his right-hand ringlet with the other, and he
was thinking--thinking of Morgiana; and then of the bill which was to
become due on the 16th; and then of a light-blue velvet waistcoat with
gold sprigs, in which he looked very killing, and so was trudging round
in his little circle of loves, fears, and vanities. "Hang it!" Mr.
Walker was thinking, "I AM a handsome man. A pair of whiskers like mine
are not met with every day. If anybody can see that my tuft is dyed, may
I be--" When the door was flung open, and a large lady with a curl
on her forehead, yellow shawl, a green-velvet bonnet with feathers,
half-boots, and a drab gown with tulips and other large exotics painted
on it--when, in a word, Mrs. Crump and her daughter bounced into the
room.

"Here we are, Mr. E," cries Mrs. Crump, in a gay folatre confidential
air. "But law! there's a gent in the room!"

"Don't mind me, ladies," said the gent alluded to, in his fascinating
way. "I'm a friend of Eglantine's; ain't I, Egg? a chip of the old
block, hay?"

"THAT you are," said the perfumer, starting up.

"An 'air-dresser?" asked Mrs. Crump. "Well, I thought he was; there's
something, Mr. E., in gentlemen of your profession so exceeding, so
uncommon distangy."

"Madam, you do me proud," replied the gentleman so complimented, with
great presence of mind. "Will you allow me to try my skill upon you, or
upon Miss, your lovely daughter? I'm not so clever as Eglantine, but no
bad hand, I assure you."

"Nonsense, Captain," interrupted the perfumer, who was uncomfortable
somehow at the rencontre between the Captain and the object of his
affection. "HE'S not in the profession, Mrs. C. This is my friend
Captain Walker, and proud I am to call him my friend." And then aside to
Mrs. C., "One of the first swells on town, ma'am--a regular tiptopper."

Humouring the mistake which Mrs. Crump had just made, Mr. Walker thrust
the curling-irons into the fire in a minute, and looked round at the
ladies with such a fascinating grace, that both, now made acquainted
with his quality, blushed and giggled, and were quite pleased. Mamma
looked at 'Gina, and 'Gina looked at mamma; and then mamma gave 'Gina a
little blow in the region of her little waist, and then both burst out
laughing, as ladies will laugh, and as, let us trust, they may laugh
for ever and ever. Why need there be a reason for laughing? Let us laugh
when we are laughy, as we sleep when we are sleepy. And so Mrs. Crump
and her demoiselle laughed to their hearts' content; and both fixed
their large shining black eyes repeatedly on Mr. Walker.

"I won't leave the room," said he, coming forward with the heated iron
in his hand, and smoothing it on the brown paper with all the dexterity
of a professor (for the fact is, Mr. W. every morning curled his own
immense whiskers with the greatest skill and care)--"I won't leave the
room, Eglantine my boy. My lady here took me for a hairdresser, and so,
you know, I've a right to stay."

"He can't stay," said Mrs. Crump, all of a sudden, blushing as red as a
peony.

"I shall have on my peignoir, Mamma," said Miss, looking at the
gentleman, and then dropping down her eyes and blushing too.

"But he can't stay, 'Gina, I tell you: do you think that I would, before
a gentleman, take off my--"

"Mamma means her FRONT!" said Miss, jumping up, and beginning to laugh
with all her might; at which the honest landlady of the "Bootjack," who
loved a joke, although at her own expense, laughed too, and said that no
one, except Mr. Crump and Mr. Eglantine, had ever seen her without the
ornament in question.

"DO go now, you provoking thing, you!" continued Miss C. to Mr. Walker;
"I wish to hear the hoverture, and it's six o'clock now, and we shall
never be done against then:" but the way in which Morgiana said "DO go,"
clearly indicated "don't" to the perspicacious mind of Mr. Walker.

"Perhaps you 'ad better go," continued Mr. Eglantine, joining in this
sentiment, and being, in truth, somewhat uneasy at the admiration which
his "swell friend" excited.

"I'll see you hanged first, Eggy my boy! Go I won't, until these ladies
have had their hair dressed: didn't you yourself tell me that Miss
Crump's was the most beautiful hair in Europe? And do you think that
I'll go away without seeing it? No, here I stay."

"You naughty wicked odious provoking man!" said Miss Crump. But, at the
same time, she took off her bonnet, and placed it on one of the side
candlesticks of Mr. Eglantine's glass (it was a black-velvet bonnet,
trimmed with sham lace, and with a wreath of nasturtiums, convolvuluses,
and wallflowers within), and then said, "Give me the peignoir, Mr.
Archibald, if you please;" and Eglantine, who would do anything for her
when she called him Archibald, immediately produced that garment, and
wrapped round the delicate shoulders of the lady, who, removing a sham
gold chain which she wore on her forehead, two brass hair-combs set with
glass rubies, and the comb which kept her back hair together--removing
them, I say, and turning her great eyes towards the stranger, and giving
her head a shake, down let tumble such a flood of shining waving heavy
glossy jetty hair, as would have done Mr. Rowland's heart good to see.
It tumbled down Miss Morgiana's back, and it tumbled over her shoulders,
it tumbled over the chair on which she sat, and from the midst of it her
jolly bright-eyed rosy face beamed out with a triumphant smile, which
said, "A'n't I now the most angelic being you ever saw?"

"By Heaven! it's the most beautiful thing I ever saw!" cried Mr. Walker,
with undisguised admiration.

"ISN'T it?" said Mrs. Crump, who made her daughter's triumph her own.
"Heigho! when I acted at 'The Wells' in 1820, before that dear girl was
born, _I_ had such a head of hair as that, to a shade, sir, to a shade.
They called me Ravenswing on account of it. I lost my head of hair when
that dear child was born, and I often say to her, 'Morgiana, you came
into the world to rob your mother of her 'air.' Were you ever at 'The
Wells,' sir, in 1820? Perhaps you recollect Miss Delancy? I am that Miss
Delancy. Perhaps you recollect,--

     "'Tink-a-tink, tink-a-tink,
         By the light of the star,
       On the blue river's brink,
         I heard a guitar.

     "'I heard a guitar,
         On the blue waters clear,
       And knew by its mu-u-sic,
         That Selim was near!'

You remember that in the 'Bagdad Bells'? Fatima, Delancy; Selim,
Benlomond (his real name was Bunnion: and he failed, poor fellow, in
the public line afterwards). It was done to the tambourine, and dancing
between each verse,--

     "'Tink-a-tink, tink-a-tink,
         How the soft music swells,
       And I hear the soft clink
         Of the minaret bells!

     "'Tink-a--'"

"Oh!" here cried Miss Crump, as if in exceeding pain (and whether Mr.
Eglantine had twitched, pulled, or hurt any one individual hair of that
lovely head I don't know)--"Oh, you are killing me, Mr. Eglantine!"

And with this mamma, who was in her attitude, holding up the end of her
boa as a visionary tambourine, and Mr. Walker, who was looking at her,
and in his amusement at the mother's performances had almost forgotten
the charms of the daughter--both turned round at once, and looked at
her with many expressions of sympathy, while Eglantine, in a voice of
reproach, said, "KILLED you, Morgiana! I kill YOU?"

"I'm better now," said the young lady, with a smile--"I'm better, Mr.
Archibald, now." And if the truth must be told, no greater coquette than
Miss Morgiana existed in all Mayfair--no, not among the most fashionable
mistresses of the fashionable valets who frequented the "Bootjack." She
believed herself to be the most fascinating creature that the world ever
produced; she never saw a stranger but she tried these fascinations upon
him; and her charms of manner and person were of that showy sort which
is most popular in this world, where people are wont to admire most that
which gives them the least trouble to see; and so you will find a tulip
of a woman to be in fashion when a little humble violet or daisy of
creation is passed over without remark. Morgiana was a tulip among
women, and the tulip fanciers all came flocking round her.

Well, the said "Oh" and "I'm better now, Mr. Archibald," thereby
succeeded in drawing everybody's attention to her lovely self. By the
latter words Mr. Eglantine was specially inflamed; he glanced at Mr.
Walker, and said, "Capting! didn't I tell you she was a CREECHER? See
her hair, sir: it's as black and as glossy as satting. It weighs fifteen
pound, that hair, sir; and I wouldn't let my apprentice--that blundering
Mossrose, for instance (hang him!)--I wouldn't let anyone but myself
dress that hair for five hundred guineas! Ah, Miss Morgiana, remember
that you MAY ALWAYS have Eglantine to dress your hair!--remember that,
that's all." And with this the worthy gentleman began rubbing delicately
a little of the Eglantinia into those ambrosial locks, which he loved
with all the love of a man and an artist.

And as for Morgiana showing her hair, I hope none of my readers will
entertain a bad opinion of the poor girl for doing so. Her locks were
her pride; she acted at the private theatre "hair parts," where she
could appear on purpose to show them in a dishevelled state; and that
her modesty was real, and not affected may be proved by the fact that
when Mr. Walker, stepping up in the midst of Eglantine's last speech,
took hold of a lock of her hair very gently with his hand, she cried
"Oh!" and started with all her might. And Mr. Eglantine observed
very gravely, "Capting! Miss Crump's hair is to be seen and not to be
touched, if you please."

"No more it is, Mr. Eglantine!" said her mamma. "And now, as it's come
to my turn, I beg the gentleman will be so obliging as to go."

"MUST I?" cried Mr. Walker; and as it was half-past six, and he was
engaged to dinner at the "Regent Club," and as he did not wish to make
Eglantine jealous, who evidently was annoyed by his staying, he took his
hat just as Miss Crump's coiffure was completed, and saluting her and
her mamma, left the room.

"A tip-top swell, I can assure you," said Eglantine, nodding after him:
"a regular bang-up chap, and no MISTAKE. Intimate with the Marquess of
Billingsgate, and Lord Vauxhall, and that set."

"He's very genteel," said Mrs. Crump.

"Law! I'm sure I think nothing of him," said Morgiana.

And Captain Walker walked towards his club, meditating on the beauties
of Morgiana. "What hair," said he, "what eyes the girl has! they're as
big as billiard-balls; and five thousand pounds. Eglantine's in luck!
five thousand pounds--she can't have it, it's impossible!"

No sooner was Mrs. Crump's front arranged, during the time of which
operation Morgiana sat in perfect contentment looking at the last French
fashions in the Courrier des Dames, and thinking how her pink satin
slip would dye, and make just such a mantilla as that represented in the
engraving--no sooner was Mrs. Crump's front arranged, than both ladies,
taking leave of Mr. Eglantine, tripped back to the "Bootjack Hotel" in
the neighbourhood, where a very neat green fly was already in waiting,
the gentleman on the box of which (from a livery-stable in the
neighbourhood) gave a knowing touch to his hat, and a salute with his
whip, to the two ladies, as they entered the tavern.

"Mr. W.'s inside," said the man--a driver from Mr. Snaffle's
establishment; "he's been in and out this score of times, and looking
down the street for you." And in the house, in fact, was Mr. Woolsey,
the tailor, who had hired the fly, and was engaged to conduct the ladies
that evening to the play.

It was really rather too bad to think that Miss Morgiana, after going to
one lover to have her hair dressed, should go with another to the play;
but such is the way with lovely woman! Let her have a dozen admirers,
and the dear coquette will exercise her power upon them all: and as a
lady, when she has a large wardrobe, and a taste for variety in dress,
will appear every day in a different costume, so will the young and
giddy beauty wear her lovers, encouraging now the black whiskers, now
smiling on the brown, now thinking that the gay smiling rattle of an
admirer becomes her very well, and now adopting the sad sentimental
melancholy one, according as her changeful fancy prompts her. Let us not
be too angry with these uncertainties and caprices of beauty; and depend
on it that, for the most part, those females who cry out loudest against
the flightiness of their sisters, and rebuke their undue encouragement
of this man or that, would do as much themselves if they had the chance,
and are constant, as I am to my coat just now, because I have no other.

"Did you see Doubleyou, 'Gina dear?" said her mamma, addressing that
young lady. "He's in the bar with your Pa, and has his military coat
with the king's buttons, and looks like an officer."

This was Mr. Woolsey's style, his great aim being to look like an army
gent, for many of whom he in his capacity of tailor made those splendid
red and blue coats which characterise our military. As for the royal
button, had not he made a set of coats for his late Majesty, George
IV.? and he would add, when he narrated this circumstance, "Sir, Prince
Blucher and Prince Swartzenberg's measure's in the house now; and what's
more, I've cut for Wellington." I believe he would have gone to St.
Helena to make a coat for Napoleon, so great was his ardour. He wore a
blue-black wig, and his whiskers were of the same hue. He was brief and
stern in conversations; and he always went to masquerades and balls in a
field-marshal's uniform.

"He looks really quite the thing to-night," continued Mrs. Crump.

"Yes," said 'Gina; "but he's such an odious wig, and the dye of his
whiskers always comes off on his white gloves."

"Everybody has not their own hair, love," continued Mrs. Crump with a
sigh; "but Eglantine's is beautiful."

"Every hairdresser's is," answered Morgiana, rather contemptuously;
"but what I can't bear is that their fingers is always so very fat and
pudgy."

In fact, something had gone wrong with the fair Morgiana. Was it that
she had but little liking for the one pretender or the other? Was it
that young Glauber, who acted Romeo in the private theatricals, was far
younger and more agreeable than either? Or was it, that seeing a
REAL GENTLEMAN, such as Mr. Walker, with whom she had had her first
interview, she felt more and more the want of refinement in her other
declared admirers? Certain, however, it is, that she was very reserved
all the evening, in spite of the attentions of Mr. Woolsey; that she
repeatedly looked round at the box-door, as if she expected someone to
enter; and that she partook of only a very few oysters, indeed, out of
the barrel which the gallant tailor had sent down to the "Bootjack," and
off which the party supped.

"What is it?" said Mr. Woolsey to his ally, Crump, as they sat together
after the retirement of the ladies. "She was dumb all night. She never
once laughed at the farce, nor cried at the tragedy, and you know she
laughs and cries uncommon. She only took half her negus, and not above a
quarter of her beer."

"No more she did!" replied Mr. Crump, very calmly. "I think it must
be the barber as has been captivating her: he dressed her hair for the
play."

"Hang him, I'll shoot him!" said Mr. Woolsey. "A fat foolish effeminate
beast like that marry Miss Morgiana? Never! I WILL shoot him. I'll
provoke him next Saturday--I'll tread on his toe--I'll pull his nose."

"No quarrelling at the 'Kidneys!'" answered Crump sternly; "there shall
be no quarrelling in that room as long as I'm in the chair!"


"Well, at any rate you'll stand my friend?"

"You know I will," answered the other. "You are honourable, and I like
you better than Eglantine. I trust you more than Eglantine, sir. You're
more of a man than Eglantine, though you ARE a tailor; and I wish with
all my heart you may get Morgiana. Mrs. C. goes the other way, I know:
but I tell you what, women will go their own ways, sir, and Morgy's
like her mother in this point, and depend upon it, Morgy will decide for
herself."

Mr. Woolsey presently went home, still persisting in his plan for the
assassination of Eglantine. Mr. Crump went to bed very quietly, and
snored through the night in his usual tone. Mr. Eglantine passed some
feverish moments of jealousy, for he had come down to the club in the
evening, and had heard that Morgiana was gone to the play with his
rival. And Miss Morgiana dreamed, of a man who was--must we say
it?--exceedingly like Captain Howard Walker. "Mrs. Captain So-and-so!"
thought she. "Oh, I do love a gentleman dearly!"

And about this time, too, Mr. Walker himself came rolling home from
the "Regent," hiccupping. "Such hair!--such eyebrows!--such eyes! like
b-b-billiard-balls, by Jove!"



CHAPTER II. IN WHICH MR. WALKER MAKES THREE ATTEMPTS TO ASCERTAIN THE
DWELLING OF MORGIANA.

The day after the dinner at the "Regent Club," Mr. Walker stepped over
to the shop of his friend the perfumer, where, as usual, the young man,
Mr. Mossrose, was established in the front premises.

For some reason or other, the Captain was particularly good-humoured;
and, quite forgetful of the words which had passed between him and Mr.
Eglantine's lieutenant the day before, began addressing the latter with
extreme cordiality.

"A good morning to you, Mr. Mossrose," said Captain Walker. "Why, sir,
you look as fresh as your namesake--you do, indeed, now, Mossrose."

"You look ash yellow ash a guinea," responded Mr. Mossrose, sulkily. He
thought the Captain was hoaxing him.

"My good sir," replies the other, nothing cast down, "I drank rather too
freely last night."

"The more beast you!" said Mr. Mossrose.

"Thank you, Mossrose; the same to you," answered the Captain.

"If you call me a beast, I'll punch your head off!" answered the young
man, who had much skill in the art which many of his brethren practise.

"I didn't, my fine fellow," replied Walker. "On the contrary, you--"

"Do you mean to give me the lie?" broke out the indignant Mossrose, who
hated the agent fiercely, and did not in the least care to conceal his
hate.

In fact, it was his fixed purpose to pick a quarrel with Walker, and to
drive him, if possible, from Mr. Eglantine's shop. "Do you mean to give
me the lie, I say, Mr. Hooker Walker?"

"For Heaven's sake, Amos, hold your tongue!" exclaimed the Captain, to
whom the name of Hooker was as poison; but at this moment a customer
stepping in, Mr. Amos exchanged his ferocious aspect for a bland grin,
and Mr. Walker walked into the studio.

When in Mr. Eglantine's presence, Walker, too, was all smiles in a
minute, sank down on a settee, held out his hand to the perfumer, and
began confidentially discoursing with him.

"SUCH a dinner, Tiny my boy," said he; "such prime fellows to eat
it, too! Billingsgate, Vauxhall, Cinqbars, Buff of the Blues, and
half-a-dozen more of the best fellows in town. And what do you think the
dinner cost a head? I'll wager you'll never guess."

"Was it two guineas a head?--In course I mean without wine," said the
genteel perfumer.

"Guess again!"

"Well, was it ten guineas a head? I'll guess any sum you please,"
replied Mr. Eglantine: "for I know that when you NOBS are together, you
don't spare your money. I myself, at the "Star and Garter" at Richmond,
once paid--"

"Eighteenpence?"

"Heighteenpence, sir!--I paid five-and-thirty shillings per 'ead. I'd
have you to know that I can act as a gentleman as well as any other
gentleman, sir," answered the perfumer with much dignity.

"Well, eighteenpence was what WE paid, and not a rap more, upon my
honour."

"Nonsense, you're joking. The Marquess of Billinsgate dine for
eighteenpence! Why, hang it, if I was a marquess, I'd pay a five-pound
note for my lunch."

"You little know the person, Master Eglantine," replied the Captain,
with a smile of contemptuous superiority; "you little know the real
man of fashion, my good fellow. Simplicity, sir--simplicity's the
characteristic of the real gentleman, and so I'll tell you what we had
for dinner."

"Turtle and venison, of course:--no nob dines without THEM."

"Psha! we're sick of 'em! We had pea soup and boiled tripe! What do you
think of THAT? We had sprats and herrings, a bullock's heart, a baked
shoulder of mutton and potatoes, pig's-fry and Irish stew. _I_ ordered
the dinner, sir, and got more credit for inventing it than they ever
gave to Ude or Soyer. The Marquess was in ecstasies, the Earl devoured
half a bushel of sprats, and if the Viscount is not laid up with a
surfeit of bullock's heart, my name's not Howard Walker. Billy, as I
call him, was in the chair, and gave my health; and what do you think
the rascal proposed?"

"What DID his Lordship propose?"

"That every man present should subscribe twopence, and pay for my share
of the dinner. By Jove! it is true, and the money was handed to me in
a pewter-pot, of which they also begged to make me a present. We
afterwards went to Tom Spring's, from Tom's to the 'Finish,' from the
'Finish' to the watch-house--that is, THEY did--and sent for me, just as
I was getting into bed, to bail them all out."

"They're happy dogs, those young noblemen," said Mr Eglantine; "nothing
but pleasure from morning till night; no affectation neither--no HOTURE;
but manly downright straightforward good fellows."

"Should you like to meet them, Tiny my boy?" said the Captain.

"If I did sir, I hope I should show myself to be gentleman," answered
Mr. Eglantine.

"Well, you SHALL meet them, and Lady Billingsgate shall order her
perfumes at your shop. We are going to dine, next week, all our set,
at Mealy-faced Bob's, and you shall be my guest," cried the Captain,
slapping the delighted artist on the back. "And now, my boy, tell me how
YOU spent the evening."

"At my club, sir," answered Mr. Eglantine, blushing rather.

"What! not at the play with the lovely black-eyed Miss--What is her
name, Eglantine?

"Never mind her name, Captain," replied Eglantine, partly from prudence
and partly from shame. He had not the heart to own it was Crump, and he
did not care that the Captain should know more of his destined bride.

"You wish to keep the five thousand to yourself--eh, you rogue?"
responded the Captain, with a good-humoured air, although exceedingly
mortified; for, to say the truth, he had put himself to the trouble
of telling the above long story of the dinner, and of promising to
introduce Eglantine to the lords, solely that he might elicit from that
gentleman's good-humour some further particulars regarding the young
lady with the billiard-ball eyes. It was for the very same reason, too,
that he had made the attempt at reconciliation with Mr. Mossrose which
had just so signally failed. Nor would the reader, did he know Mr. W.
better, at all require to have the above explanation; but as yet we are
only at the first chapter of his history, and who is to know what the
hero's motives can be unless we take the trouble to explain?

Well, the little dignified answer of the worthy dealer in bergamot,
"NEVER MIND HER NAME, CAPTAIN!" threw the gallant Captain quite aback;
and though he sat for a quarter of an hour longer, and was exceedingly
kind; and though he threw out some skilful hints, yet the perfumer was
quite unconquerable; or, rather, he was too frightened to tell: the
poor fat timid easy good-natured gentleman was always the prey of
rogues,--panting and floundering in one rascal's snare or another's. He
had the dissimulation, too, which timid men have; and felt the presence
of a victimiser as a hare does of a greyhound. Now he would be quite
still, now he would double, and now he would run, and then came the end.
He knew, by his sure instinct of fear, that the Captain had, in asking
these questions, a scheme against him, and so he was cautious, and
trembled, and doubted. And oh! how he thanked his stars when Lady
Grogmore's chariot drove up, with the Misses Grogmore, who wanted their
hair dressed, and were going to a breakfast at three o'clock!

"I'll look in again, Tiny," said the Captain, on hearing the summons.

"DO, Captain," said the other: "THANK YOU;" and went into the lady's
studio with a heavy heart.

"Get out of the way, you infernal villain!" roared the Captain, with
many oaths, to Lady Grogmore's large footman, with ruby-coloured tights,
who was standing inhaling the ten thousand perfumes of the shop; and the
latter, moving away in great terror, the gallant agent passed out, quite
heedless of the grin of Mr. Mossrose.

Walker was in a fury at his want of success, and walked down Bond Street
in a fury. "I WILL know where the girl lives!" swore he. "I'll spend a
five-pound note, by Jove! rather than not know where she lives!"

"THAT YOU WOULD--I KNOW YOU WOULD!" said a little grave low voice, all
of a sudden, by his side. "Pooh! what's money to you?"

Walker looked down: it was Tom Dale.

Who in London did not know little Tom Dale? He had cheeks like an apple,
and his hair curled every morning, and a little blue stock, and always
two new magazines under his arm, and an umbrella and a little brown
frock-coat, and big square-toed shoes with which he went PAPPING down
the street. He was everywhere at once. Everybody met him every day, and
he knew everything that everybody ever did; though nobody ever knew what
HE did. He was, they say, a hundred years old, and had never dined at
his own charge once in those hundred years. He looked like a figure out
of a waxwork, with glassy clear meaningless eyes: he always spoke with
a grin; he knew what you had for dinner the day before he met you, and
what everybody had had for dinner for a century back almost. He was
the receptacle of all the scandal of all the world, from Bond Street
to Bread Street; he knew all the authors, all the actors, all the
"notorieties" of the town, and the private histories of each. That is,
he never knew anything really, but supplied deficiencies of truth and
memory with ready-coined, never-failing lies. He was the most benevolent
man in the universe, and never saw you without telling you everything
most cruel of your neighbour, and when he left you he went to do the
same kind turn by yourself.

"Pooh! what's money to you, my dear boy?" said little Tom Dale, who had
just come out of Ebers's, where he had been filching an opera-ticket.
"You make it in bushels in the City, you know you do---in thousands.
I saw you go into Eglantine's. Fine business that; finest in London.
Five-shilling cakes of soap, my dear boy. I can't wash with such.
Thousands a year that man has made--hasn't he?"

"Upon my word, Tom, I don't know," says the Captain.

"YOU not know? Don't tell me. You know everything--you agents. You KNOW
he makes five thousand a year--ay, and might make ten, but you know why
he don't."

"Indeed I don't."

"Nonsense. Don't humbug a poor old fellow like me. Jews--Amos--fifty per
cent., ay? Why can't he get his money from a good Christian?"

"I HAVE heard something of that sort," said Walker, laughing. "Why, by
Jove, Tom, you know everything!"

"YOU know everything, my dear boy. You know what a rascally trick that
opera creature served him, poor fellow. Cashmere shawls--Storr and
Mortimer's--'Star and Garter.' Much better dine quiet off pea-soup and
sprats--ay? His betters have, as you know very well."

"Pea-soup and sprats! What! have you heard of that already?"

"Who bailed Lord Billingsgate, hey, you rogue?" and here Tom gave a
knowing and almost demoniacal grin. "Who wouldn't go to the 'Finish'?
Who had the piece of plate presented to him filled with sovereigns? And
you deserved it, my dear boy--you deserved it. They said it was only
halfpence, but I know better!" and here Tom went off in a cough.

"I say, Tom," cried Walker, inspired with a sudden thought, "you, who
know everything, and are a theatrical man, did you ever know a Miss
Delancy, an actress?"

"At 'Sadler's Wells' in '16? Of course I did. Real name was Budge. Lord
Slapper admired her very much, my dear boy. She married a man by the
name of Crump, his Lordship's black footman, and brought him five
thousand pounds; and they keep the 'Bootjack' public-house in Bunker's
Buildings, and they've got fourteen children. Is one of them handsome,
eh, you sly rogue--and is it that which you will give five pounds to
know? God bless you, my dear dear boy. Jones, my dear friend, how are
you?"

And now, seizing on Jones, Tom Dale left Mr. Walker alone, and proceeded
to pour into Mr. Jones's ear an account of the individual whom he had
just quitted; how he was the best fellow in the world, and Jones KNEW
it; how he was in a fine way of making his fortune; how he had been in
the Fleet many times, and how he was at this moment employed in looking
out for a young lady of whom a certain great marquess (whom Jones knew
very well, too) had expressed an admiration.

But for these observations, which he did not hear, Captain Walker, it
may be pronounced, did not care. His eyes brightened up, he marched
quickly and gaily away; and turning into his own chambers opposite
Eglantine's, shop, saluted that establishment with a grin of triumph.
"You wouldn't tell me her name, wouldn't you?" said Mr. Walker. "Well,
the luck's with me now, and here goes."

Two days after, as Mr. Eglantine, with white gloves and a case of
eau-de-Cologne as a present in his pocket, arrived at the "Bootjack
Hotel," Little Bunker's Buildings, Berkeley Square (for it must
out--that was the place in which Mr. Crump's inn was situated),
he paused for a moment at the threshold of the little house of
entertainment, and listened, with beating heart, to the sound of
delicious music that a well-known voice was uttering within.

The moon was playing in silvery brightness down the gutter of the humble
street. A "helper," rubbing down one of Lady Smigsmag's carriage-horses,
even paused in his whistle to listen to the strain. Mr. Tressle's man,
who had been professionally occupied, ceased his tap-tap upon the coffin
which he was getting in readiness. The greengrocer (there is always a
greengrocer in those narrow streets, and he goes out in white Berlin
gloves as a supernumerary footman) was standing charmed at his little
green gate; the cobbler (there is always a cobbler too) was drunk, as
usual, of evenings, but, with unusual subordination, never sang except
when the refrain of the ditty arrived, when he hiccupped it forth with
tipsy loyalty; and Eglantine leaned against the chequers painted on
the door-side under the name of Crump, and looked at the red illumined
curtain of the bar, and the vast well-known shadow of Mrs. Crump's
turban within. Now and again the shadow of that worthy matron's hand
would be seen to grasp the shadow of a bottle; then the shadow of a
cup would rise towards the turban, and still the strain proceeded.
Eglantine, I say, took out his yellow bandanna, and brushed the beady
drops from his brow, and laid the contents of his white kids on his
heart, and sighed with ecstatic sympathy. The song began,--

         "Come to the greenwood tree, [1]
          Come where the dark woods be,
          Dearest, O come with me!
     Let us rove--O my love--O my love!
                             O my-y love!

(Drunken Cobbler without)
                             O my-y love!"

"Beast!" says Eglantine.

         "Come--'tis the moonlight hour,
          Dew is on leaf and flower,
          Come to the linden bower,
     Let us rove--O my love--O my love!
   Let us ro-o-ove, lurlurliety; yes, we'll rove, lurlurliety,
   Through the gro-o-ove, lurlurliety--lurlurli-e-i-e-i-e-i!

(Cobbler, as usual)--
                             Let us ro-o-ove," etc.

"YOU here?" says another individual, coming clinking up the street, in
a military-cut dress-coat, the buttons whereof shone very bright in the
moonlight. "YOU here, Eglantine?--You're always here."

"Hush, Woolsey," said Mr. Eglantine to his rival the tailor (for he
was the individual in question); and Woolsey, accordingly, put his
back against the opposite door-post and chequers, so that (with poor
Eglantine's bulk) nothing much thicker than a sheet of paper could pass
out or in. And thus these two amorous caryatides kept guard as the song
continued:--

          "Dark is the wood, and wide,
           Dangers, they say, betide;
           But, at my Albert's side,
     Nought, I fear, O my love--O my love!

          "Welcome the greenwood tree,
           Welcome the forest tree,
           Dearest, with thee, with thee,
     Nought I fear, O my love--O ma-a-y love!"

Eglantine's fine eyes were filled with tears as Morgiana passionately
uttered the above beautiful words. Little Woolsey's eyes glistened, as
he clenched his fist with an oath, and said, "Show me any singing that
can beat THAT. Cobbler, shut your mouth, or I'll break your head!"

But the cobbler, regardless of the threat, continued to perform the
"Lurlurliety" with great accuracy; and when that was ended, both on his
part and Morgiana's, a rapturous knocking of glasses was heard in the
little bar, then a great clapping of hands, and finally somebody shouted
"Brava!"

"Brava!"

At that word Eglantine turned deadly pale, then gave a start, then a
rush forward, which pinned, or rather cushioned, the tailor against the
wall; then twisting himself abruptly round, he sprang to the door of the
bar, and bounced into that apartment.

"HOW ARE YOU, MY NOSEGAY?" exclaimed the same voice which had shouted
"Brava!" It was that of Captain Walker.

At ten o'clock the next morning, a gentleman, with the King's button
on his military coat, walked abruptly into Mr. Eglantine's shop, and,
turning on Mr. Mossrose, said, "Tell your master I want to see him."

"He's in his studio," said Mr. Mossrose.

"Well, then, fellow, go and fetch him!"

And Mossrose, thinking it must be the Lord Chamberlain, or Doctor
Praetorius at least, walked into the studio, where the perfumer was
seated in a very glossy old silk dressing-gown, his fair hair hanging
over his white face, his double chin over his flaccid whity-brown
shirt-collar, his pea-green slippers on the hob, and on the fire the pot
of chocolate which was simmering for his breakfast. A lazier fellow
than poor Eglantine it would be hard to find; whereas, on the contrary,
Woolsey was always up and brushed, spick-and-span, at seven o'clock; and
had gone through his books, and given out the work for the journeymen,
and eaten a hearty breakfast of rashers of bacon, before Eglantine had
put the usual pound of grease to his hair (his fingers were always as
damp and shiny as if he had them in a pomatum-pot), and arranged his
figure for the day.

"Here's a gent wants you in the shop," says Mr. Mossrose, leaving the
door of communication wide open.

"Say I'm in bed, Mr. Mossrose; I'm out of sperrets, and really can see
nobody."

"It's someone from Vindsor, I think; he's got the royal button," says
Mossrose.

"It's me--Woolsey," shouted the little man from the shop.

Mr. Eglantine at this jumped up, made a rush to the door leading to his
private apartment, and disappeared in a twinkling. But it must not be
imagined that he fled in order to avoid Mr. Woolsey. He only went away
for one minute just to put on his belt, for he was ashamed to be seen
without it by his rival.

This being assumed, and his toilet somewhat arranged, Mr. Woolsey was
admitted into his private room. And Mossrose would have heard every
word of the conversation between those two gentlemen, had not Woolsey,
opening the door, suddenly pounced on the assistant, taken him by
the collar, and told him to disappear altogether into the shop: which
Mossrose did; vowing he would have his revenge.

The subject on which Woolsey had come to treat was an important one.
"Mr. Eglantine," says he, "there's no use disguising from one another
that we are both of us in love with Miss Morgiana, and that our chances
up to this time have been pretty equal. But that Captain whom you
introduced, like an ass as you were--"

"An ass, Mr. Woolsey! I'd have you to know, sir, that I'm no more a hass
than you are, sir; and as for introducing the Captain, I did no such
thing."

"Well, well, he's got a-poaching into our preserves somehow. He's
evidently sweet upon the young woman, and is a more fashionable chap
than either of us two. We must get him out of the house, sir--we must
circumwent him; and THEN, Mr. Eglantine, will be time enough for you and
me to try which is the best man."

"HE the best man?" thought Eglantine; "the little bald unsightly
tailor-creature! A man with no more soul than his smoothing-hiron!" The
perfumer, as may be imagined, did not utter this sentiment aloud, but
expressed himself quite willing to enter into any HAMICABLE arrangement
by which the new candidate for Miss Crump's favour must be thrown over.
It was accordingly agreed between the two gentlemen that they should
coalesce against the common enemy; that they should, by reciting many
perfectly well-founded stories in the Captain's disfavour, influence the
minds of Miss Crump's parents, and of herself, if possible, against this
wolf in sheep's clothing; and that, when they were once fairly rid of
him, each should be at liberty, as before, to prefer his own claim.

"I have thought of a subject," said the little tailor, turning very red,
and hemming and hawing a great deal. "I've thought, I say, of a pint,
which may be resorted to with advantage at the present juncture, and in
which each of us may be useful to the other. An exchange, Mr. Eglantine:
do you take?"

"Do you mean an accommodation-bill?" said Eglantine, whose mind ran a
good deal on that species of exchange.

"Pooh, nonsense, sir! The name of OUR firm is, I flatter myself, a
little more up in the market than some other people's names."

"Do you mean to insult the name of Archibald Eglantine, sir? I'd have
you to know that at three months--"

"Nonsense!" says Mr. Woolsey, mastering his emotion. "There's no use
a-quarrelling, Mr. E.: we're not in love with each other, I know that.
You wish me hanged, or as good, I know that!"

"Indeed I don't, sir!"

"You do, sir; I tell you, you do! and what's more, I wish the same
to you--transported, at any rate! But as two sailors, when a boat's
a-sinking, though they hate each other ever so much, will help and bale
the boat out; so, sir, let US act: let us be the two sailors."

"Bail, sir?" said Eglantine, as usual mistaking the drift of the
argument. "I'll bail no man! If you're in difficulties, I think you had
better go to your senior partner, Mr Woolsey." And Eglantine's cowardly
little soul was filled with a savage satisfaction to think that his
enemy was in distress, and actually obliged to come to HIM for succour.

"You're enough to make Job swear, you great fat stupid lazy old barber!"
roared Mr. Woolsey, in a fury.

Eglantine jumped up and made for the bell-rope. The gallant little
tailor laughed.

"There's no need to call in Betsy," said he. "I'm not a-going to eat
you, Eglantine; you're a bigger man than me: if you were just to fall on
me, you'd smother me! Just sit still on the sofa and listen to reason."

"Well, sir, pro-ceed," said the barber with a gasp.

"Now, listen! What's the darling wish of your heart? I know it, sir!
you've told it to Mr. Tressle, sir, and other gents at the club. The
darling wish of your heart, sir, is to have a slap-up coat turned out of
the ateliers of Messrs. Linsey, Woolsey and Company. You said you'd give
twenty guineas for one of our coats, you know you did! Lord Bolsterton's
a fatter man than you, and look what a figure we turn HIM out. Can any
firm in England dress Lord Bolsterton but us, so as to make his Lordship
look decent? I defy 'em, sir! We could have given Daniel Lambert a
figure!"

"If I want a coat, sir," said Mr. Eglantine, "and I don't deny it,
there's some people want a HEAD OF HAIR!"

"That's the very point I was coming to," said the tailor, resuming the
violent blush which was mentioned as having suffused his countenance
at the beginning of the conversation. "Let us have terms of mutual
accommodation. Make me a wig, Mr. Eglantine, and though I never yet cut
a yard of cloth except for a gentleman, I'll pledge you my word I'll
make you a coat."

"WILL you, honour bright?" says Eglantine.

"Honour bright," says the tailor. "Look!" and in an instant he drew
from his pocket one of those slips of parchment which gentlemen of his
profession carry, and putting Eglantine into the proper position, began
to take the preliminary observations. He felt Eglantine's heart
thump with happiness as his measure passed over that soft part of the
perfumer's person.

Then pulling down the window-blind, and looking that the door was
locked, and blushing still more deeply than ever, the tailor seated
himself in an arm-chair towards which Mr. Eglantine beckoned him, and,
taking off his black wig, exposed his head to the great perruquier's
gaze. Mr. Eglantine looked at it, measured it, manipulated it, sat
for three minutes with his head in his hand and his elbow on his knee,
gazing at the tailor's cranium with all his might, walked round it twice
or thrice, and then said, "It's enough, Mr. Woolsey. Consider the job
as done. And now, sir," said he, with a greatly relieved air--"and now,
Woolsey, let us 'ave a glass of curacoa to celebrate this hauspicious
meeting."

The tailor, however, stiffly replied that he never drank in a morning,
and left the room without offering to shake Mr. Eglantine by the hand:
for he despised that gentleman very heartily, and himself, too, for
coming to any compromise with him, and for so far demeaning himself as
to make a coat for a barber.

Looking from his chambers on the other side of the street, that
inevitable Mr. Walker saw the tailor issuing from the perfumer's shop,
and was at no loss to guess that something extraordinary must be in
progress when two such bitter enemies met together.



CHAPTER III. WHAT CAME OF MR WALKER'S DISCOVERY OF THE "BOOTJACK."

It is very easy to state how the Captain came to take up that proud
position at the "Bootjack" which we have seen him occupy on the evening
when the sound of the fatal "Brava!" so astonished Mr. Eglantine.

The mere entry into the establishment was, of course, not difficult. Any
person by simply uttering the words "A pint of beer," was free of the
"Bootjack;" and it was some such watchword that Howard Walker employed
when he made his first appearance. He requested to be shown into a
parlour, where he might repose himself for a while, and was ushered into
that very sanctum where the "Kidney Club" met. Then he stated that the
beer was the best he had ever tasted, except in Bavaria, and in some
parts of Spain, he added; and professing to be extremely "peckish,"
requested to know if there were any cold meat in the house whereof he
could make a dinner.

"I don't usually dine at this hour, landlord," said he, flinging down
a half-sovereign for payment of the beer; "but your parlour looks so
comfortable, and the Windsor chairs are so snug, that I'm sure I could
not dine better at the first club in London."

"ONE of the first clubs in London is held in this very room," said Mr.
Crump, very well pleased; "and attended by some of the best gents in
town, too. We call it the 'Kidney Club'."

"Why, bless my soul! it is the very club my friend Eglantine has so
often talked to me about, and attended by some of the tip-top tradesmen
of the metropolis!"

"There's better men here than Mr. Eglantine," replied Mr. Crump, "though
he's a good man--I don't say he's not a good man--but there's better.
Mr. Clinker, sir; Mr. Woolsey, of the house of Linsey, Woolsey and Co--"

"The great army-clothiers!" cried Walker; "the first house in town!"
and so continued, with exceeding urbanity, holding conversation with Mr.
Crump, until the honest landlord retired delighted, and told Mrs. Crump
in the bar that there was a tip-top swell in the "Kidney" parlour, who
was a-going to have his dinner there.

Fortune favoured the brave Captain in every way. It was just Mr. Crump's
own dinner-hour; and on Mrs. Crump stepping into the parlour to ask the
guest whether he would like a slice of the joint to which the family
were about to sit down, fancy that lady's start of astonishment at
recognising Mr. Eglantine's facetious friend of the day before. The
Captain at once demanded permission to partake of the joint at the
family table; the lady could not with any great reason deny this
request; the Captain was inducted into the bar; and Miss Crump, who
always came down late for dinner, was even more astonished than her
mamma, on beholding the occupier of the fourth place at the table. Had
she expected to see the fascinating stranger so soon again? I think she
had. Her big eyes said as much, as, furtively looking up at Mr. Walker's
face, they caught his looks; and then bouncing down again towards her
plate, pretended to be very busy in looking at the boiled beef and
carrots there displayed. She blushed far redder than those carrots, but
her shining ringlets hid her confusion together with her lovely face.

Sweet Morgiana! the billiard-ball eyes had a tremendous effect on the
Captain. They fell plump, as it were, into the pocket of his heart; and
he gallantly proposed to treat the company to a bottle of champagne,
which was accepted without much difficulty.

Mr. Crump, under pretence of going to the cellar (where he said he had
some cases of the finest champagne in Europe), called Dick, the boy,
to him, and despatched him with all speed to a wine merchant's, where a
couple of bottles of the liquor were procured.

"Bring up two bottles, Mr. C.," Captain Walker gallantly said when Crump
made his move, as it were, to the cellar and it may be imagined after
the two bottles were drunk (of which Mrs. Crump took at least nine
glasses to her share), how happy, merry, and confidential the whole
party had become. Crump told his story of the "Bootjack," and whose boot
it had drawn; the former Miss Delancy expatiated on her past theatrical
life, and the pictures hanging round the room. Miss was equally
communicative; and, in short, the Captain had all the secrets of the
little family in his possession ere sunset. He knew that Miss cared
little for either of her suitors, about whom mamma and papa had a little
quarrel. He heard Mrs. Crump talk of Morgiana's property, and fell more
in love with her than ever. Then came tea, the luscious crumpet, the
quiet game at cribbage, and the song--the song which poor Eglantine
heard, and which caused Woolsey's rage and his despair.

At the close of the evening the tailor was in a greater rage, and the
perfumer in greater despair than ever. He had made his little present
of eau-de-Cologne. "Oh fie!" says the Captain, with a horse-laugh, "it
SMELLS OF THE SHOP!" He taunted the tailor about his wig, and the honest
fellow had only an oath to give by way of repartee. He told his stories
about his club and his lordly friends. What chance had either against
the all-accomplished Howard Walker?

Old Crump, with a good innate sense of right and wrong, hated the man;
Mrs. Crump did not feel quite at her ease regarding him; but Morgiana
thought him the most delightful person the world ever produced.

Eglantine's usual morning costume was a blue satin neck-cloth
embroidered with butterflies and ornamented with a brandy-ball brooch, a
light shawl waistcoat, and a rhubarb-coloured coat of the sort which, I
believe, are called Taglionis, and which have no waist-buttons, and made
a pretence, as it were, to have no waists, but are in reality adopted by
the fat in order to give them a waist. Nothing easier for an obese man
than to have a waist; he has but to pinch his middle part a little, and
the very fat on either side pushed violently forward MAKES a waist,
as it were, and our worthy perfumer's figure was that of a bolster cut
almost in two with a string.

Walker presently saw him at his shop-door grinning in this costume,
twiddling his ringlets with his dumpy greasy fingers, glittering with
oil and rings, and looking so exceedingly contented and happy that the
estate-agent felt assured some very satisfactory conspiracy had been
planned between the tailor and him. How was Mr. Walker to learn what the
scheme was? Alas! the poor fellow's vanity and delight were such, that
he could not keep silent as to the cause of his satisfaction; and rather
than not mention it at all, in the fulness of his heart he would have
told his secret to Mr. Mossrose himself.

"When I get my coat," thought the Bond Street Alnaschar, "I'll hire
of Snaffle that easy-going cream-coloured 'oss that he bought from
Astley's, and I'll canter through the Park, and WON'T I pass through
Little Bunker's Buildings, that's all? I'll wear my grey trousers with
the velvet stripe down the side, and get my spurs lacquered up, and a
French polish to my boot; and if I don't DO for the Captain, and the
tailor too, my name's not Archibald. And I know what I'll do: I'll hire
the small clarence, and invite the Crumps to dinner at the 'Gar and
Starter'" (this was his facetious way of calling the "Star and Garter"),
"and I'll ride by them all the way to Richmond. It's rather a long ride,
but with Snaffle's soft saddle I can do it pretty easy, I dare say." And
so the honest fellow built castles upon castles in the air; and the last
most beautiful vision of all was Miss Crump "in white satting, with a
horange flower in her 'air," putting him in possession of "her lovely
'and before the haltar of St. George's, 'Anover Square." As for Woolsey,
Eglantine determined that he should have the best wig his art could
produce; for he had not the least fear of his rival.

These points then being arranged to the poor fellow's satisfaction, what
does he do but send out for half a quire of pink note-paper, and in a
filagree envelope despatch a note of invitation to the ladies at the
"Bootjack":--


"BOWER OF BLOOM, BOND STREET:

"Thursday.

"MR. ARCHIBALD EGLANTINE presents his compliments to Mrs. and Miss
Crump, and requests the HONOUR AND PLEASURE of their company at the
'Star and Garter' at Richmond to an early dinner on Sunday next.

"IF AGREEABLE, Mr. Eglantine's carriage will be at your door at three
o'clock, and I propose to accompany them on horseback, if agreeable
likewise."


This note was sealed with yellow wax, and sent to its destination; and
of course Mr. Eglantine went himself for the answer in the evening: and
of course he told the ladies to look out for a certain new coat he was
going to sport on Sunday; and of course Mr. Walker happens to call the
next day with spare tickets for Mrs. Crump and her daughter, when the
whole secret was laid bare to him--how the ladies were going to Richmond
on Sunday in Mr. Snaffle's clarence, and how Mr. Eglantine was to ride
by their side.

Mr. Walker did not keep horses of his own; his magnificent friends at
the "Regent" had plenty in their stables, and some of these were at
livery at the establishment of the Captain's old "college" companion,
Mr. Snaffle. It was easy, therefore, for the Captain to renew his
acquaintance with that individual. So, hanging on the arm of my Lord
Vauxhall, Captain Walker next day made his appearance at Snaffle's
livery-stables, and looked at the various horses there for sale or
at bait, and soon managed, by putting some facetious questions to Mr.
Snaffle regarding the "Kidney Club," etc. to place himself on a friendly
footing with that gentleman, and to learn from him what horse Mr.
Eglantine was to ride on Sunday.

The monster Walker had fully determined in his mind that Eglantine
should FALL off that horse in the course of his Sunday's ride.

"That sing'lar hanimal," said Mr. Snaffle, pointing to the old horse,
"is the celebrated Hemperor that was the wonder of Hastley's some years
back, and was parted with by Mr. Ducrow honly because his feelin's
wouldn't allow him to keep him no longer after the death of the first
Mrs. D., who invariably rode him. I bought him, thinking that p'raps
ladies and Cockney bucks might like to ride him (for his haction is
wonderful, and he canters like a harm-chair); but he's not safe on any
day except Sundays."

"And why's that?" asked Captain Walker. "Why is he safer on Sundays than
other days?"

"BECAUSE THERE'S NO MUSIC in the streets on Sundays. The first gent that
rode him found himself dancing a quadrille in Hupper Brook Street to
an 'urdy-gurdy that was playing 'Cherry Ripe,' such is the natur of the
hanimal. And if you reklect the play of the 'Battle of Hoysterlitz,' in
which Mrs. D. hacted 'the female hussar,' you may remember how she
and the horse died in the third act to the toon of 'God preserve the
Emperor,' from which this horse took his name. Only play that toon to
him, and he rears hisself up, beats the hair in time with his forelegs,
and then sinks gently to the ground as though he were carried off by a
cannon-ball. He served a lady hopposite Hapsley 'Ouse so one day, and
since then I've never let him out to a friend except on Sunday, when, in
course, there's no danger. Heglantine IS a friend of mine, and of course
I wouldn't put the poor fellow on a hanimal I couldn't trust."

After a little more conversation, my lord and his friend quitted Mr.
Snaffle's, and as they walked away towards the "Regent," his Lordship
might be heard shrieking with laughter, crying, "Capital, by jingo!
exthlent! Dwive down in the dwag! Take Lungly. Worth a thousand pound,
by Jove!" and similar ejaculations, indicative of exceeding delight.

On Saturday morning, at ten o'clock to a moment, Mr. Woolsey called at
Mr. Eglantine's with a yellow handkerchief under his arm. It contained
the best and handsomest body-coat that ever gentleman put on. It fitted
Eglantine to a nicety--it did not pinch him in the least, and yet it was
of so exquisite a cut that the perfumer found, as he gazed delighted
in the glass, that he looked like a manly portly high-bred gentleman--a
lieutenant-colonel in the army, at the very least.

"You're a full man, Eglantine," said the tailor, delighted, too, with
his own work; "but that can't be helped. You look more like Hercules
than Falstaff now, sir, and if a coat can make a gentleman, a gentleman
you are. Let me recommend you to sink the blue cravat, and take the
stripes off your trousers. Dress quiet, sir; draw it mild. Plain
waistcoat, dark trousers, black neckcloth, black hat, and if there's a
better-dressed man in Europe to-morrow, I'm a Dutchman."

"Thank you, Woolsey--thank you, my dear sir," said the charmed perfumer.
"And now I'll just trouble you to try on this here."

The wig had been made with equal skill; it was not in the florid style
which Mr. Eglantine loved in his own person, but, as the perfumer said,
a simple straightforward head of hair. "It seems as if it had grown
there all your life, Mr. Woolsey; nobody would tell that it was not
your nat'ral colour" (Mr. Woolsey blushed)--"it makes you look ten year
younger; and as for that scarecrow yonder, you'll never, I think, want
to wear that again."

Woolsey looked in the glass, and was delighted too. The two rivals shook
hands and straightway became friends, and in the overflowing of his
heart the perfumer mentioned to the tailor the party which he had
arranged for the next day, and offered him a seat in the carriage and
at the dinner at the "Star and Garter." "Would you like to ride?" said
Eglantine, with rather a consequential air. "Snaffle will mount you, and
we can go one on each side of the ladies, if you like."

But Woolsey humbly said he was not a riding man, and gladly consented to
take a place in the clarence carriage, provided he was allowed to bear
half the expenses of the entertainment. This proposal was agreed to by
Mr. Eglantine, and the two gentlemen parted to meet once more at the
"Kidneys" that night, when everybody was edified by the friendly tone
adopted between them.

Mr. Snaffle, at the club meeting, made the very same proposal to Mr.
Woolsey that the perfumer had made; and stated that as Eglantine was
going to ride Hemperor, Woolsey, at least, ought to mount too. But he
was met by the same modest refusal on the tailor's part, who stated that
he had never mounted a horse yet, and preferred greatly the use of a
coach.

Eglantine's character as a "swell" rose greatly with the club that
evening.

Two o'clock on Sunday came: the two beaux arrived punctually at the door
to receive the two smiling ladies.

"Bless us, Mr. Eglantine!" said Miss Crump, quite struck by him, "I
never saw you look so handsome in your life." He could have flung his
arms around her neck at the compliment. "And law, Ma! what has happened
to Mr. Woolsey? doesn't he look ten years younger than yesterday?" Mamma
assented, and Woolsey bowed gallantly, and the two gentlemen exchanged a
nod of hearty friendship.

The day was delightful. Eglantine pranced along magnificently on his
cantering armchair, with his hat on one ear, his left hand on his side,
and his head flung over his shoulder, and throwing under-glances at
Morgiana whenever the "Emperor" was in advance of the clarence. The
"Emperor" pricked up his ears a little uneasily passing the Ebenezer
chapel in Richmond, where the congregation were singing a hymn, but
beyond this no accident occurred; nor was Mr. Eglantine in the least
stiff or fatigued by the time the party reached Richmond, where he
arrived time enough to give his steed into the charge of an ostler, and
to present his elbow to the ladies as they alighted from the clarence
carriage.

What this jovial party ate for dinner at the "Star and Garter" need
not here be set down. If they did not drink champagne I am very much
mistaken. They were as merry as any four people in Christendom; and
between the bewildering attentions of the perfumer, and the manly
courtesy of the tailor, Morgiana very likely forgot the gallant Captain,
or, at least, was very happy in his absence.

At eight o'clock they began to drive homewards. "WON'T you come into the
carriage?" said Morgiana to Eglantine, with one of her tenderest looks;
"Dick can ride the horse." But Archibald was too great a lover of
equestrian exercise. "I'm afraid to trust anybody on this horse," said
he with a knowing look; and so he pranced away by the side of the little
carriage. The moon was brilliant, and, with the aid of the gas-lamps,
illuminated the whole face of the country in a way inexpressibly lovely.

Presently, in the distance, the sweet and plaintive notes of a bugle
were heard, and the performer, with great delicacy, executed a religious
air. "Music, too! heavenly!" said Morgiana, throwing up her eyes to the
stars. The music came nearer and nearer, and the delight of the company
was only more intense. The fly was going at about four miles an hour,
and the "Emperor" began cantering to time at the same rapid pace.

"This must be some gallantry of yours, Mr. Woolsey," said the romantic
Morgiana, turning upon that gentleman. "Mr. Eglantine treated us to the
dinner, and you have provided us with the music."

Now Woolsey had been a little, a very little, dissatisfied during the
course of the evening's entertainment, by fancying that Eglantine, a
much more voluble person than himself, had obtained rather an undue
share of the ladies' favour; and as he himself paid half of the
expenses, he felt very much vexed to think that the perfumer should take
all the credit of the business to himself. So when Miss Crump asked if
he had provided the music, he foolishly made an evasive reply to her
query, and rather wished her to imagine that he HAD performed that
piece of gallantry. "If it pleases YOU, Miss Morgiana," said this artful
Schneider, "what more need any man ask? wouldn't I have all Drury Lane
orchestra to please you?"

The bugle had by this time arrived quite close to the clarence carriage,
and if Morgiana had looked round she might have seen whence the music
came. Behind her came slowly a drag, or private stage-coach, with
four horses. Two grooms with cockades and folded arms were behind;
and driving on the box, a little gentleman, with a blue bird's-eye
neckcloth, and a white coat. A bugleman was by his side, who performed
the melodies which so delighted Miss Crump. He played very gently and
sweetly, and "God save the King" trembled so softly out of the brazen
orifice of his bugle, that the Crumps, the tailor, and Eglantine
himself, who was riding close by the carriage, were quite charmed and
subdued.

"Thank you, DEAR Mr. Woolsey," said the grateful Morgiana; which made
Eglantine stare, and Woolsey was just saying, "Really, upon my word,
I've nothing to do with it," when the man on the drag-box said to the
bugleman, "Now!"

The bugleman began the tune of--

     "Heaven preserve our Emperor Fra-an-cis,
      Rum tum-ti-tum-ti-titty-ti."

At the sound, the "Emperor" reared himself (with a roar from Mr.
Eglantine)--reared and beat the air with his fore-paws. Eglantine flung
his arms round the beast's neck; still he kept beating time with
his fore-paws. Mrs. Crump screamed: Mr. Woolsey, Dick, the clarence
coachman, Lord Vauxhall (for it was he), and his Lordship's two grooms,
burst into a shout of laughter; Morgiana cries "Mercy! mercy!" Eglantine
yells "Stop!"--"Wo!"--"Oh!" and a thousand ejaculations of hideous
terror; until, at last, down drops the "Emperor" stone dead in the
middle of the road, as if carried off by a cannon-ball.

Fancy the situation, ye callous souls who laugh at the misery of
humanity, fancy the situation of poor Eglantine under the "Emperor"! He
had fallen very easy, the animal lay perfectly quiet, and the perfumer
was to all intents and purposes as dead as the animal. He had not
fainted, but he was immovable with terror; he lay in a puddle, and
thought it was his own blood gushing from him; and he would have lain
there until Monday morning, if my Lord's grooms, descending, had not
dragged him by the coat-collar from under the beast, who still lay
quiet.

"Play 'Charming Judy Callaghan,' will ye?" says Mr. Snaffle's man,
the fly-driver; on which the bugler performed that lively air, and up
started the horse, and the grooms, who were rubbing Mr. Eglantine down
against a lamp-post, invited him to remount.

But his heart was too broken for that. The ladies gladly made room for
him in the clarence. Dick mounted "Emperor" and rode homewards. The
drag, too, drove away, playing "Oh dear, what can the matter be?" and
with a scowl of furious hate, Mr. Eglantine sat and regarded his rival.
His pantaloons were split, and his coat torn up the back.

"Are you hurt much, dear Mr. Archibald?" said Morgiana, with unaffected
compassion.

"N-not much," said the poor fellow, ready to burst into tears.

"Oh, Mr. Woolsey," added the good-natured girl, "how could you play such
a trick?"

"Upon my word," Woolsey began, intending to plead innocence; but the
ludicrousness of the situation was once more too much for him, and he
burst out into a roar of laughter.

"You! you cowardly beast!" howled out Eglantine, now driven to
fury--"YOU laugh at me, you miserable cretur! Take THAT, sir!" and he
fell upon him with all his might, and well-nigh throttled the tailor,
and pummelling his eyes, his nose, his ears, with inconceivable
rapidity, wrenched, finally, his wig off his head, and flung it into the
road.

Morgiana saw that Woolsey had red hair. [2]



CHAPTER IV. IN WHICH THE HEROINE HAS A NUMBER MORE LOVERS, AND CUTS A
VERY DASHING FIGURE IN THE WORLD.

Two years have elapsed since the festival at Richmond, which, begun so
peaceably, ended in such general uproar. Morgiana never could be brought
to pardon Woolsey's red hair, nor to help laughing at Eglantine's
disasters, nor could the two gentlemen be reconciled to one another.
Woolsey, indeed, sent a challenge to the perfumer to meet him with
pistols, which the latter declined, saying, justly, that tradesmen had
no business with such weapons; on this the tailor proposed to meet
him with coats off, and have it out like men, in the presence of their
friends of the "Kidney Club". The perfumer said he would be party to no
such vulgar transaction; on which, Woolsey, exasperated, made an oath
that he would tweak the perfumer's nose so surely as he ever entered the
club-room; and thus ONE member of the "Kidneys" was compelled to vacate
his armchair.

Woolsey himself attended every meeting regularly, but he did not evince
that gaiety and good-humour which render men's company agreeable in
clubs. On arriving, he would order the boy to "tell him when that
scoundrel Eglantine came;" and, hanging up his hat on a peg, would scowl
round the room, and tuck up his sleeves very high, and stretch, and
shake his fingers and wrists, as if getting them ready for that pull
of the nose which he intended to bestow upon his rival. So prepared, he
would sit down and smoke his pipe quite silently, glaring at all, and
jumping up, and hitching up his coat-sleeves, when anyone entered the
room.

The "Kidneys" did not like this behaviour. Clinker ceased to come.
Bustard, the poulterer, ceased to come. As for Snaffle, he also
disappeared, for Woolsey wished to make him answerable for the
misbehaviour of Eglantine, and proposed to him the duel which the latter
had declined. So Snaffle went. Presently they all went, except the
tailor and Tressle, who lived down the street, and these two would
sit and pug their tobacco, one on each side of Crump, the landlord, as
silent as Indian chiefs in a wigwam. There grew to be more and more room
for poor old Crump in his chair and in his clothes; the "Kidneys" were
gone, and why should he remain? One Saturday he did not come down to
preside at the club (as he still fondly called it), and the Saturday
following Tressle had made a coffin for him; and Woolsey, with the
undertaker by his side, followed to the grave the father of the
"Kidneys."

Mrs. Crump was now alone in the world. "How alone?" says some innocent
and respected reader. Ah! my dear sir, do you know so little of human
nature as not to be aware that, one week after the Richmond affair,
Morgiana married Captain Walker? That did she privately, of course; and,
after the ceremony, came tripping back to her parents, as young people
do in plays, and said, "Forgive me, dear Pa and Ma, I'm married, and
here is my husband the Captain!" Papa and mamma did forgive her, as why
shouldn't they? and papa paid over her fortune to her, which she carried
home delighted to the Captain. This happened several months before the
demise of old Crump; and Mrs. Captain Walker was on the Continent with
her Howard when that melancholy event took place; hence Mrs. Crump's
loneliness and unprotected condition. Morgiana had not latterly seen
much of the old people; how could she, moving in her exalted sphere,
receive at her genteel new residence in the Edgware Road the old
publican and his wife?

Being, then, alone in the world, Mrs. Crump could not abear, she said,
to live in the house where she had been so respected and happy: so she
sold the goodwill of the "Bootjack," and, with the money arising from
this sale and her own private fortune, being able to muster some sixty
pounds per annum, retired to the neighbourhood of her dear old "Sadler's
Wells," where she boarded with one of Mrs. Serle's forty pupils. Her
heart was broken, she said; but, nevertheless, about nine months after
Mr. Crump's death, the wallflowers, nasturtiums, polyanthuses, and
convolvuluses began to blossom under her bonnet as usual; in a year she
was dressed quite as fine as ever, and now never missed "The Wells," or
some other place of entertainment, one single night, but was as regular
as the box-keeper. Nay, she was a buxom widow still, and an old flame of
hers, Fisk, so celebrated as pantaloon in Grimaldi's time, but now doing
the "heavy fathers" at "The Wells," proposed to her to exchange her name
for his.

But this proposal the worthy widow declined altogether. To say truth,
she was exceedingly proud of her daughter, Mrs. Captain Walker. They
did not see each other much at first; but every now and then Mrs. Crump
would pay a visit to the folks in Connaught Square; and on the days when
"the Captain's" lady called in the City Road, there was not a single
official at "The Wells," from the first tragedian down to the call-boy,
who was not made aware of the fact.

It has been said that Morgiana carried home her fortune in her own
reticule, and, smiling, placed the money in her husband's lap; and hence
the reader may imagine, who knows Mr. Walker to be an extremely selfish
fellow, that a great scene of anger must have taken place, and many
coarse oaths and epithets of abuse must have come from him, when he
found that five hundred pounds was all that his wife had, although he
had expected five thousand with her. But, to say the truth, Walker was
at this time almost in love with his handsome rosy good-humoured simple
wife. They had made a fortnight's tour, during which they had been
exceedingly happy; and there was something so frank and touching in the
way in which the kind creature flung her all into his lap, saluting
him with a hearty embrace at the same time, and wishing that it were a
thousand billion billion times more, so that her darling Howard might
enjoy it, that the man would have been a ruffian indeed could he have
found it in his heart to be angry with her; and so he kissed her in
return, and patted her on the shining ringlets, and then counted over
the notes with rather a disconsolate air, and ended by locking them up
in his portfolio. In fact, SHE had never deceived him; Eglantine
had, and he in return had out-tricked Eglantine and so warm were his
affections for Morgiana at this time that, upon my word and honour, I
don't think he repented of his bargain. Besides, five hundred pounds in
crisp bank-notes was a sum of money such as the Captain was not in the
habit of handling every day; a dashing sanguine fellow, he fancied there
was no end to it, and already thought of a dozen ways by which it should
increase and multiply into a plum. Woe is me! Has not many a simple soul
examined five new hundred-pound notes in this way, and calculated their
powers of duration and multiplication?

This subject, however, is too painful to be dwelt on. Let us hear what
Walker did with his money. Why, he furnished the house in the Edgware
Road before mentioned, he ordered a handsome service of plate, he
sported a phaeton and two ponies, he kept a couple of smart maids and
a groom foot-boy--in fact, he mounted just such a neat unpretending
gentleman-like establishment as becomes a respectable young couple on
their outset in life. "I've sown my wild oats," he would say to his
acquaintances; "a few years since, perhaps, I would have longed to cut
a dash, but now prudence is the word; and I've settled every farthing of
Mrs. Walker's fifteen thousand on herself." And the best proof that the
world had confidence in him is the fact, that for the articles of plate,
equipage, and furniture, which have been mentioned as being in his
possession, he did not pay one single shilling; and so prudent was he,
that but for turnpikes, postage-stamps, and king's taxes, he hardly had
occasion to change a five-pound note of his wife's fortune.

To tell the truth, Mr. Walker had determined to make his fortune. And
what is easier in London? Is not the share-market open to all? Do
not Spanish and Columbian bonds rise and fall? For what are companies
invented, but to place thousands in the pockets of shareholders and
directors? Into these commercial pursuits the gallant Captain now
plunged with great energy, and made some brilliant hits at first
starting, and bought and sold so opportunely, that his name began to
rise in the City as a capitalist, and might be seen in the printed list
of directors of many excellent and philanthropic schemes, of which there
is never any lack in London. Business to the amount of thousands was
done at his agency; shares of vast value were bought and sold under his
management. How poor Mr. Eglantine used to hate him and envy him, as
from the door of his emporium (the firm was Eglantine and Mossrose now)
he saw the Captain daily arrive in his pony-phaeton, and heard of the
start he had taken in life.

The only regret Mrs. Walker had was that she did not enjoy enough of her
husband's society. His business called him away all day; his business,
too, obliged him to leave her of evenings very frequently alone; whilst
he (always in pursuit of business) was dining with his great friends at
the club, and drinking claret and champagne to the same end.

She was a perfectly good-natured and simple soul, never made him a
single reproach; but when he could pass an evening at home with her
she was delighted, and when he could drive with her in the Park she was
happy for a week after. On these occasions, and in the fulness of her
heart, she would drive to her mother and tell her story. "Howard drove
with me in the Park yesterday, Mamma;" and "Howard has promised to
take me to the Opera," and so forth. And that evening the manager, Mr.
Gawler, the first tragedian, Mrs. Serle and her forty pupils, all the
box-keepers, bonnet-women--nay, the ginger-beer girls themselves at "The
Wells," knew that Captain and Mrs. Walker were at Kensington Gardens,
or were to have the Marchioness of Billingsgate's box at the Opera. One
night--O joy of joys!--Mrs. Captain Walker appeared in a private box
at "The Wells." That's she with the black ringlets and Cashmere shawl,
smelling-bottle, and black-velvet gown, and bird of paradise in her hat.
Goodness gracious! how they all acted at her, Gawler and all, and how
happy Mrs. Crump was! She kissed her daughter between all the acts, she
nodded to all her friends on the stage, in the slips, or in the
real water; she introduced her daughter, Mrs. Captain Walker, to the
box-opener; and Melvil Delamere (the first comic), Canterfield (the
tyrant), and Jonesini (the celebrated Fontarabian Statuesque), were all
on the steps, and shouted for Mrs. Captain Walker's carriage, and waved
their hats, and bowed as the little pony-phaeton drove away. Walker, in
his moustaches, had come in at the end of the play, and was not a little
gratified by the compliments paid to himself and lady.

Among the other articles of luxury with which the Captain furnished
his house we must not omit to mention an extremely grand piano, which
occupied four-fifths of Mrs. Walker's little back drawing-room, and at
which she was in the habit of practising continually. All day and all
night during Walker's absences (and these occurred all night and all
day), you might hear--the whole street might hear--the voice of the lady
at No. 23, gurgling, and shaking, and quavering, as ladies do when they
practise. The street did not approve of the continuance of the noise;
but neighbours are difficult to please, and what would Morgiana have had
to do if she had ceased to sing? It would be hard to lock a blackbird in
a cage and prevent him from singing too. And so Walker's blackbird, in
the snug little cage in the Edgware Road, sang and was not unhappy.

After the pair had been married for about a year, the omnibus that
passes both by Mrs. Crump's house near "The Wells," and by Mrs. Walker's
street off the Edgware Road, brought up the former-named lady almost
every day to her daughter. She came when the Captain had gone to his
business; she stayed to a two-o'clock dinner with Morgiana; she drove
with her in the pony-carriage round the Park; but she never stopped
later than six. Had she not to go to the play at seven? And, besides,
the Captain might come home with some of his great friends, and he
always swore and grumbled much if he found his mother-in-law on the
premises. As for Morgiana, she was one of those women who encourage
despotism in husbands. What the husband says must be right, because he
says it; what he orders must be obeyed tremblingly. Mrs. Walker gave up
her entire reason to her lord. Why was it? Before marriage she had been
an independent little person; she had far more brains than her Howard.
I think it must have been his moustaches that frightened her, and caused
in her this humility.

Selfish husbands have this advantage in maintaining with easy-minded
wives a rigid and inflexible behaviour, viz. that if they DO by any
chance grant a little favour, the ladies receive it with such transports
of gratitude as they would never think of showing to a lord and master
who was accustomed to give them everything they asked for; and hence,
when Captain Walker signified his assent to his wife's prayer that she
should take a singing-master, she thought his generosity almost divine,
and fell upon her mamma's neck, when that lady came the next day, and
said what a dear adorable angel her Howard was, and what ought she not
to do for a man who had taken her from her humble situation, and raised
her to be what she was! What she was, poor soul! She was the wife of a
swindling parvenu gentleman. She received visits from six ladies of her
husband's acquaintances--two attorneys' ladies, his bill-broker's lady,
and one or two more, of whose characters we had best, if you please,
say nothing; and she thought it an honour to be so distinguished: as
if Walker had been a Lord Exeter to marry a humble maiden, or a noble
prince to fall in love with a humble Cinderella, or a majestic Jove
to come down from heaven and woo a Semele. Look through the world,
respectable reader, and among your honourable acquaintances, and say if
this sort of faith in women is not very frequent? They WILL believe in
their husbands, whatever the latter do. Let John be dull, ugly, vulgar,
and a humbug, his Mary Ann never finds it out; let him tell his stories
ever so many times, there is she always ready with her kind smile; let
him be stingy, she says he is prudent; let him quarrel with his best
friend, she says he is always in the right; let him be prodigal, she
says he is generous, and that his health requires enjoyment; let him
be idle, he must have relaxation; and she will pinch herself and
her household that he may have a guinea for his club. Yes; and every
morning, as she wakes and looks at the face, snoring on the pillow by
her side--every morning, I say, she blesses that dull ugly countenance,
and the dull ugly soul reposing there, and thinks both are something
divine. I want to know how it is that women do not find out their
husbands to be humbugs? Nature has so provided it, and thanks to her.
When last year they were acting the "Midsummer Night's Dream," and all
the boxes began to roar with great coarse heehaws at Titania hugging
Bottom's long long ears--to me, considering these things, it seemed that
there were a hundred other male brutes squatted round about, and treated
just as reasonably as Bottom was. Their Titanias lulled them to sleep
in their laps, summoned a hundred smiling delicate household fairies to
tickle their gross intellects and minister to their vulgar pleasures;
and (as the above remarks are only supposed to apply to honest women
loving their own lawful spouses) a mercy it is that no wicked Puck is
in the way to open their eyes, and point out their folly. Cui bono? let
them live on in their deceit: I know two lovely ladies who will read
this, and will say it is just very likely, and not see in the least,
that it has been written regarding THEM.

Another point of sentiment, and one curious to speculate on. Have
you not remarked the immense works of art that women get through? The
worsted-work sofas, the counterpanes patched or knitted (but these are
among the old-fashioned in the country), the bushels of pincushions,
the albums they laboriously fill, the tremendous pieces of music they
practise, the thousand other fiddle-faddles which occupy the attention
of the dear souls--nay, have we not seen them seated of evenings in a
squad or company, Louisa employed at the worsted-work before mentioned,
Eliza at the pincushions, Amelia at card-racks or filagree matches, and,
in the midst, Theodosia with one of the candles, reading out a novel
aloud? Ah! my dear sir, mortal creatures must be very hard put to it for
amusement, be sure of that, when they are forced to gather together in
a company and hear novels read aloud! They only do it because they can't
help it, depend upon it: it is a sad life, a poor pastime. Mr. Dickens,
in his American book, tells of the prisoners at the silent prison,
how they had ornamented their rooms, some of them with a frightful
prettiness and elaboration. Women's fancy-work is of this
sort often--only prison work, done because there was no other
exercising-ground for their poor little thoughts and fingers; and hence
these wonderful pincushions are executed, these counterpanes woven,
these sonatas learned. By everything sentimental, when I see two kind
innocent fresh-cheeked young women go to a piano, and sit down opposite
to it upon two chairs piled with more or less music-books (according to
their convenience), and, so seated, go through a set of double-barrelled
variations upon this or that tune by Herz or Kalkbrenner--I say, far
from receiving any satisfaction at the noise made by the performance,
my too susceptible heart is given up entirely to bleeding for the
performers. What hours, and weeks, nay, preparatory years of study, has
that infernal jig cost them! What sums has papa paid, what scoldings has
mamma administered ("Lady Bullblock does not play herself;" Sir Thomas
says, "but she has naturally the finest ear for music ever known!");
what evidences of slavery, in a word, are there! It is the condition
of the young lady's existence. She breakfasts at eight, she does
"Mangnall's Questions" with the governess till ten, she practises till
one, she walks in the square with bars round her till two, then she
practises again, then she sews or hems, or reads French, or Hume's
"History," then she comes down to play to papa, because he likes music
whilst he is asleep after dinner, and then it is bed-time, and the
morrow is another day with what are called the same "duties" to be gone
through. A friend of mine went to call at a nobleman's house the other
day, and one of the young ladies of the house came into the room with a
tray on her head; this tray was to give Lady Maria a graceful carriage.
Mon Dieu! and who knows but at that moment Lady Bell was at work with
a pair of her dumb namesakes, and Lady Sophy lying flat on a
stretching-board? I could write whole articles on this theme but peace!
we are keeping Mrs. Walker waiting all the while.

Well, then, if the above disquisitions have anything to do with the
story, as no doubt they have, I wish it to be understood that, during
her husband's absence, and her own solitary confinement, Mrs. Howard
Walker bestowed a prodigious quantity of her time and energy on the
cultivation of her musical talent; and having, as before stated, a very
fine loud voice, speedily attained no ordinary skill in the use of it.
She first had for teacher little Podmore, the fat chorus-master at "The
Wells," and who had taught her mother the "Tink-a-tink" song which has
been such a favourite since it first appeared. He grounded her well, and
bade her eschew the singing of all those "Eagle Tavern" ballads in which
her heart formerly delighted; and when he had brought her to a certain
point of skill, the honest little chorus-master said she should have a
still better instructor, and wrote a note to Captain Walker (enclosing
his own little account), speaking in terms of the most flattering
encomium of his lady's progress, and recommending that she should take
lessons of the celebrated Baroski. Captain Walker dismissed Podmore
then, and engaged Signor Baroski, at a vast expense; as he did not fail
to tell his wife. In fact, he owed Baroski no less than two hundred and
twenty guineas when he was--But we are advancing matters.

Little Baroski is the author of the opera of "Eliogabalo," of the
oratorio of "Purgatorio," which made such an immense sensation, of songs
and ballet-musics innumerable. He is a German by birth, and shows such
an outrageous partiality for pork and sausages, and attends at church so
constantly, that I am sure there cannot be any foundation in the story
that he is a member of the ancient religion. He is a fat little man,
with a hooked nose and jetty whiskers, and coal-black shining eyes, and
plenty of rings and jewels on his fingers and about his person, and a
very considerable portion of his shirtsleeves turned over his coat to
take the air. His great hands (which can sprawl over half a piano, and
produce those effects on the instrument for which he is celebrated) are
encased in lemon-coloured kids, new, or cleaned daily. Parenthetically,
let us ask why so many men, with coarse red wrists and big hands,
persist in the white kid glove and wristband system? Baroski's gloves
alone must cost him a little fortune; only he says with a leer, when
asked the question, "Get along vid you; don't you know dere is a
gloveress that lets me have dem very sheap?" He rides in the Park; has
splendid lodgings in Dover Street; and is a member of the "Regent Club,"
where he is a great source of amusement to the members, to whom he tells
astonishing stories of his successes with the ladies, and for whom he
has always play and opera tickets in store. His eye glistens and his
little heart beats when a lord speaks to him; and he has been known to
spend large sums of money in giving treats to young sprigs of fashion at
Richmond and elsewhere. "In my bolyticks," he says, "I am consarevatiff
to de bag-bone." In fine, he is a puppy, and withal a man of
considerable genius in his profession.

This gentleman, then, undertook to complete the musical education
of Mrs. Walker. He expressed himself at once "enshanted vid her
gababilities," found that the extent of her voice was "brodigious," and
guaranteed that she should become a first-rate singer. The pupil was
apt, the master was exceedingly skilful; and, accordingly, Mrs. Walker's
progress was very remarkable: although, for her part, honest Mrs. Crump,
who used to attend her daughter's lessons, would grumble not a little at
the new system, and the endless exercises which she, Morgiana, was made
to go through. It was very different in HER time, she said. Incledon
knew no music, and who could sing so well now? Give her a good English
ballad: it was a thousand times sweeter than your "Figaros" and
"Semiramides."

In spite of these objections, however, and with amazing perseverance and
cheerfulness, Mrs. Walker pursued the method of study pointed out to her
by her master. As soon as her husband went to the City in the morning
her operations began; if he remained away at dinner, her labours still
continued: nor is it necessary for me to particularise her course of
study, nor, indeed, possible; for, between ourselves, none of the
male Fitz-Boodles ever could sing a note, and the jargon of scales and
solfeggios is quite unknown to me. But as no man can have seen persons
addicted to music without remarking the prodigious energies they display
in the pursuit, as there is no father of daughters, however ignorant,
but is aware of the piano-rattling and voice-exercising which go on in
his house from morning till night, so let all fancy, without further
inquiry, how the heroine of our story was at this stage of her existence
occupied.

Walker was delighted with her progress, and did everything but pay
Baroski, her instructor. We know why he didn't pay. It was his nature
not to pay bills, except on extreme compulsion; but why did not Baroski
employ that extreme compulsion? Because, if he had received his money,
he would have lost his pupil, and because he loved his pupil more than
money. Rather than lose her, he would have given her a guinea as well
as her cachet. He would sometimes disappoint a great personage, but he
never missed his attendance on HER; and the truth must out, that he was
in love with her, as Woolsey and Eglantine had been before.

"By the immortel Chofe!" he would say, "dat letell ding sents me mad vid
her big ice! But only vait avile: in six veeks I can bring any voman
in England on her knees to me and you shall see vat I vill do vid my
Morgiana." He attended her for six weeks punctually, and yet Morgiana
was never brought down on her knees; he exhausted his best stock of
"gomblimends," and she never seemed disposed to receive them with
anything but laughter. And, as a matter of course, he only grew more
infatuated with the lovely creature who was so provokingly good-humoured
and so laughingly cruel.

Benjamin Baroski was one of the chief ornaments of the musical
profession in London; he charged a guinea for a lesson of three-quarters
of an hour abroad, and he had, furthermore, a school at his own
residence, where pupils assembled in considerable numbers, and of that
curious mixed kind which those may see who frequent these places of
instruction. There were very innocent young ladies with their mammas,
who would hurry them off trembling to the farther corner of the room
when certain doubtful professional characters made their appearance.
There was Miss Grigg, who sang at the "Foundling," and Mr. Johnson,
who sang at the "Eagle Tavern," and Madame Fioravanti (a very doubtful
character), who sang nowhere, but was always coming out at the Italian
Opera. There was Lumley Limpiter (Lord Tweedledale's son), one of the
most accomplished tenors in town, and who, we have heard, sings with
the professionals at a hundred concerts; and with him, too, was Captain
Guzzard, of the Guards, with his tremendous bass voice, which all the
world declared to be as fine as Porto's, and who shared the applause of
Baroski's school with Mr. Bulger, the dentist of Sackville Street, who
neglected his ivory and gold plates for his voice, as every unfortunate
individual will do who is bitten by the music mania. Then among
the ladies there were a half-score of dubious pale governesses and
professionals with turned frocks and lank damp bandeaux of hair under
shabby little bonnets; luckless creatures these, who were parting with
their poor little store of half-guineas to be enabled to say they were
pupils of Signor Baroski, and so get pupils of their own among the
British youths, or employment in the choruses of the theatres.

The prima donna of the little company was Amelia Larkins, Baroski's own
articled pupil, on whose future reputation the eminent master staked his
own, whose profits he was to share, and whom he had farmed, to this end,
from her father, a most respectable sheriff's officer's assistant, and
now, by his daughter's exertions, a considerable capitalist. Amelia is
blonde and blue-eyed, her complexion is as bright as snow, her ringlets
of the colour of straw, her figure--but why describe her figure? Has not
all the world seen her at the Theatres Royal and in America under the
name of Miss Ligonier?

Until Mrs. Walker arrived, Miss Larkins was the undisputed princess of
the Baroski company--the Semiramide, the Rosina, the Tamina, the Donna
Anna. Baroski vaunted her everywhere as the great rising genius of the
day, bade Catalani look to her laurels, and questioned whether Miss
Stephens could sing a ballad like his pupil. Mrs. Howard Walker arrived,
and created, on the first occasion, no small sensation. She improved,
and the little society became speedily divided into Walkerites and
Larkinsians; and between these two ladies (as indeed between Guzzard and
Bulger before mentioned, between Miss Brunck and Miss Horsman, the two
contraltos, and between the chorus-singers, after their kind) a great
rivalry arose. Larkins was certainly the better singer; but could
her straw-coloured curls and dumpy high-shouldered figure bear any
comparison with the jetty ringlets and stately form of Morgiana? Did not
Mrs. Walker, too, come to the music-lesson in her carriage, and with a
black velvet gown and Cashmere shawl, while poor Larkins meekly stepped
from Bell Yard, Temple Bar, in an old print gown and clogs, which she
left in the hall? "Larkins sing!" said Mrs. Crump, sarcastically; "I'm
sure she ought; her mouth's big enough to sing a duet." Poor Larkins had
no one to make epigrams in her behoof; her mother was at home tending
the younger ones, her father abroad following the duties of his
profession; she had but one protector, as she thought, and that one
was Baroski. Mrs. Crump did not fail to tell Lumley Limpiter of her own
former triumphs, and to sing him "Tink-a-tink," which we have previously
heard, and to state how in former days she had been called the
Ravenswing. And Lumley, on this hint, made a poem, in which he compared
Morgiana's hair to the plumage of the Raven's wing, and Larkinissa's to
that of the canary; by which two names the ladies began soon to be known
in the school.

Ere long the flight of the Ravenswing became evidently stronger, whereas
that of the canary was seen evidently to droop. When Morgiana sang, all
the room would cry "Bravo!" when Amelia performed, scarce a hand
was raised for applause of her, except Morgiana's own, and that the
Larkinses thought was lifted in odious triumph, rather than in sympathy,
for Miss L. was of an envious turn, and little understood the generosity
of her rival.

At last, one day, the crowning victory of the Ravenswing came. In the
trio of Baroski's own opera of "Eliogabalo," "Rosy lips and rosy wine,"
Miss Larkins, who was evidently unwell, was taking the part of the
English captive, which she had sung in public concerts before royal
dukes, and with considerable applause, and, from some reason, performed
it so ill, that Baroski, slapping down the music on the piano in a fury,
cried, "Mrs. Howard Walker, as Miss Larkins cannot sing to-day, will
you favour us by taking the part of Boadicetta?" Mrs. Walker got up
smilingly to obey--the triumph was too great to be withstood; and, as
she advanced to the piano, Miss Larkins looked wildly at her, and stood
silent for a while, and, at last, shrieked out, "BENJAMIN!" in a tone of
extreme agony, and dropped fainting down on the ground. Benjamin looked
extremely red, it must be confessed, at being thus called by what
we shall denominate his Christian name, and Limpiter looked round at
Guzzard, and Miss Brunck nudged Miss Horsman, and the lesson concluded
rather abruptly that day; for Miss Larkins was carried off to the next
room, laid on a couch, and sprinkled with water.

Good-natured Morgiana insisted that her mother should take Miss Larkins
to Bell Yard in her carriage, and went herself home on foot; but I don't
know that this piece of kindness prevented Larkins from hating her. I
should doubt if it did.

Hearing so much of his wife's skill as a singer, the astute Captain
Walker determined to take advantage of it for the purpose of increasing
his "connection." He had Lumley Limpiter at his house before long, which
was, indeed, no great matter, for honest Lum would go anywhere for a
good dinner--and an opportunity to show off his voice afterwards,
and Lumley was begged to bring any more clerks in the Treasury of his
acquaintance; Captain Guzzard was invited, and any officers of the
Guards whom he might choose to bring; Bulger received occasional
cards:--in a word, and after a short time, Mrs. Howard Walker's
musical parties began to be considerably suivies. Her husband had the
satisfaction to see his rooms filled by many great personages; and once
or twice in return (indeed, whenever she was wanted, or when people
could not afford to hire the first singers) she was asked to parties
elsewhere, and treated with that killing civility which our English
aristocracy knows how to bestow on artists. Clever and wise aristocracy!
It is sweet to mark your ways, and study your commerce with inferior
men.

I was just going to commence a tirade regarding the aristocracy
here, and to rage against that cool assumption of superiority which
distinguishes their lordships' commerce with artists of all sorts: that
politeness which, if it condescends to receive artists at all, takes
care to have them altogether, so that there can be no mistake about
their rank--that august patronage of art which rewards it with a silly
flourish of knighthood, to be sure, but takes care to exclude it from
any contact with its betters in society--I was, I say, just going to
commence a tirade against the aristocracy for excluding artists from
their company, and to be extremely satirical upon them, for instance,
for not receiving my friend Morgiana, when it suddenly came into my head
to ask, was Mrs. Walker fit to move in the best society?--to which query
it must humbly be replied that she was not. Her education was not such
as to make her quite the equal of Baker Street. She was a kind honest
and clever creature; but, it must be confessed, not refined. Wherever
she went she had, if not the finest, at any rate the most showy gown
in the room; her ornaments were the biggest; her hats, toques, berets,
marabouts, and other fallals, always the most conspicuous. She drops
"h's" here and there. I have seen her eat peas with a knife (and Walker,
scowling on the opposite side of the table, striving in vain to catch
her eye); and I shall never forget Lady Smigsmag's horror when she
asked for porter at dinner at Richmond, and began to drink it out of the
pewter pot. It was a fine sight. She lifted up the tankard with one of
the finest arms, covered with the biggest bracelets ever seen; and had
a bird of paradise on her head, that curled round the pewter disc of the
pot as she raised it, like a halo. These peculiarities she had, and has
still. She is best away from the genteel world, that is the fact. When
she says that "The weather is so 'ot that it is quite debiliating;" when
she laughs, when she hits her neighbour at dinner on the side of the
waistcoat (as she will if he should say anything that amuses her), she
does what is perfectly natural and unaffected on her part, but what
is not customarily done among polite persons, who can sneer at her
odd manners and her vanity, but don't know the kindness, honesty, and
simplicity which distinguish her. This point being admitted, it follows,
of course, that the tirade against the aristocracy would, in the present
instance, be out of place--so it shall be reserved for some other
occasion.

The Ravenswing was a person admirably disposed by nature to be happy.
She had a disposition so kindly that any small attention would satisfy
it; was pleased when alone; was delighted in a crowd; was charmed with
a joke, however old; was always ready to laugh, to sing, to dance, or to
be merry; was so tender-hearted that the smallest ballad would make her
cry: and hence was supposed, by many persons, to be extremely affected,
and by almost all to be a downright coquette. Several competitors for
her favour presented themselves besides Baroski. Young dandies used to
canter round her phaeton in the park, and might be seen haunting her
doors in the mornings. The fashionable artist of the day made a drawing
of her, which was engraved and sold in the shops; a copy of it was
printed in a song, "Black-eyed Maiden of Araby," the words by Desmond
Mulligan, Esquire, the music composed and dedicated to MRS. HOWARD
WALKER, by her most faithful and obliged servant, Benjamin Baroski; and
at night her Opera-box was full. Her Opera-box? Yes, the heiress of the
"Bootjack" actually had an Opera-box, and some of the most fashionable
manhood of London attended it.

Now, in fact, was the time of her greatest prosperity; and her husband
gathering these fashionable characters about him, extended his "agency"
considerably, and began to thank his stars that he had married a woman
who was as good as a fortune to him.

In extending his agency, however, Mr. Walker increased his expenses
proportionably, and multiplied his debts accordingly. More furniture and
more plate, more wines and more dinner-parties, became necessary; the
little pony-phaeton was exchanged for a brougham of evenings; and we may
fancy our old friend Mr. Eglantine's rage and disgust, as he looked from
the pit of the Opera, to see Mrs. Walker surrounded by what he called
"the swell young nobs" about London, bowing to my Lord, and laughing
with his Grace, and led to carriage by Sir John.

The Ravenswing's position at this period was rather an exceptional
one. She was an honest woman, visited by that peculiar class of our
aristocracy who chiefly associate with ladies who are NOT honest. She
laughed with all, but she encouraged none. Old Crump was constantly at
her side now when she appeared in public, the most watchful of mammas,
always awake at the Opera, though she seemed to be always asleep; but no
dandy debauchee could deceive her vigilance, and for this reason Walker,
who disliked her (as every man naturally will, must, and should dislike
his mother-in-law), was contented to suffer her in his house to act as a
chaperon to Morgiana.

None of the young dandies ever got admission of mornings to the little
mansion in the Edgware Road; the blinds were always down; and though you
might hear Morgiana's voice half across the Park as she was practising,
yet the youthful hall-porter in the sugar-loaf buttons was instructed to
deny her, and always declared that his mistress was gone out, with the
most admirable assurance.

After some two years of her life of splendour, there were, to be sure, a
good number of morning visitors, who came with SINGLE knocks, and asked
for Captain Walker; but these were no more admitted than the dandies
aforesaid, and were referred, generally, to the Captain's office,
whither they went or not at their convenience. The only man who obtained
admission into the house was Baroski, whose cab transported him thrice
a week to the neighbourhood of Connaught Square, and who obtained ready
entrance in his professional capacity.

But even then, and much to the wicked little music-master's
disappointment, the dragon Crump was always at the piano, with her
endless worsted work, or else reading her unfailing Sunday Times; and
Baroski could only employ "de langvitch of de ice," as he called it,
with his fair pupil, who used to mimic his manner of rolling his eyes
about afterwards, and perform "Baroski in love" for the amusement of her
husband and her mamma. The former had his reasons for overlooking the
attentions of the little music-master; and as for the latter, had she
not been on the stage, and had not many hundreds of persons, in jest or
earnest, made love to her? What else can a pretty woman expect who is
much before the public? And so the worthy mother counselled her daughter
to bear these attentions with good humour, rather than to make them a
subject of perpetual alarm and quarrel.

Baroski, then, was allowed to go on being in love, and was never in the
least disturbed in his passion; and if he was not successful, at least
the little wretch could have the pleasure of HINTING that he was, and
looking particularly roguish when the Ravenswing was named, and assuring
his friends at the club, that "upon his vort dere vas no trut IN DAT
REBORT."

At last one day it happened that Mrs. Crump did not arrive in time for
her daughter's lesson (perhaps it rained and the omnibus was full--a
smaller circumstance than that has changed a whole life ere now)--Mrs.
Crump did not arrive, and Baroski did, and Morgiana, seeing no great
harm, sat down to her lesson as usual, and in the midst of it down
went the music-master on his knees, and made a declaration in the most
eloquent terms he could muster.

"Don't be a fool, Baroski!" said the lady--(I can't help it if her
language was not more choice, and if she did not rise with cold dignity,
exclaiming, "Unhand me, sir!")--"Don't be a fool!" said Mrs. Walker,
"but get up and let's finish the lesson."

"You hard-hearted adorable little greature, vill you not listen to me?"

"No, I vill not listen to you, Benjamin!" concluded the lady. "Get up
and take a chair, and don't go on in that ridiklous way, don't!"

But Baroski, having a speech by heart, determined to deliver himself
of it in that posture, and begged Morgiana not to turn avay her divine
hice, and to listen to de voice of his despair, and so forth; he seized
the lady's hand, and was going to press it to his lips, when she said,
with more spirit, perhaps, than grace,--

"Leave go my hand, sir; I'll box your ears if you don't!"

But Baroski wouldn't release her hand, and was proceeding to imprint
a kiss upon it; and Mrs. Crump, who had taken the omnibus at a
quarter-past twelve instead of that at twelve, had just opened the
drawing-room door and was walking in, when Morgiana, turning as red as
a peony, and unable to disengage her left hand, which the musician held,
raised up her right hand, and, with all her might and main, gave her
lover such a tremendous slap in the face as caused him abruptly to
release the hand which he held, and would have laid him prostrate on
the carpet but for Mrs. Crump, who rushed forward and prevented him from
falling by administering right and left a whole shower of slaps, such as
he had never endured since the day he was at school.

"What imperence!" said that worthy lady; "you'll lay hands on my
daughter, will you? (one, two). You'll insult a woman in distress, will
you, you little coward? (one, two). Take that, and mind your manners,
you filthy monster!"

Baroski bounced up in a fury. "By Chofe, you shall hear of dis!" shouted
he; "you shall pay me dis!"

"As many more as you please, little Benjamin," cried the widow.
"Augustus" (to the page), "was that the Captain's knock?" At this
Baroski made for his hat. "Augustus, show this imperence to the door;
and if he tries to come in again, call a policeman: do you hear?"

The music-master vanished very rapidly, and the two ladies, instead of
being frightened or falling into hysterics, as their betters would have
done, laughed at the odious monster's discomfiture, as they called him.
"Such a man as that set himself up against my Howard!" said Morgiana,
with becoming pride; but it was agreed between them that Howard should
know nothing of what had occurred, for fear of quarrels, or lest he
should be annoyed. So when he came home not a word was said; and only
that his wife met him with more warmth than usual, you could not have
guessed that anything extraordinary had occurred. It is not my fault
that my heroine's sensibilities were not more keen, that she had not the
least occasion for sal-volatile or symptom of a fainting fit; but so it
was, and Mr. Howard Walker knew nothing of the quarrel between his wife
and her instructor until--

Until he was arrested next day at the suit of Benjamin Baroski for two
hundred and twenty guineas, and, in default of payment, was conducted by
Mr. Tobias Larkins to his principal's lock-up house in Chancery Lane.



CHAPTER V. IN WHICH MR. WALKER FALLS INTO DIFFICULTIES, AND MRS. WALKER
MAKES MANY FOOLISH ATTEMPTS TO RESCUE HIM.

I hope the beloved reader is not silly enough to imagine that Mr.
Walker, on finding himself inspunged for debt in Chancery Lane, was
so foolish as to think of applying to any of his friends (those great
personages who have appeared every now and then in the course of this
little history, and have served to give it a fashionable air). No, no;
he knew the world too well; and that, though Billingsgate would give him
as many dozen of claret as he could carry away under his belt, as the
phrase is (I can't help it, madam, if the phrase is not more genteel),
and though Vauxhall would lend him his carriage, slap him on the back,
and dine at his house,--their lordships would have seen Mr. Walker
depending from a beam in front of the Old Bailey rather than have helped
him to a hundred pounds.

And why, forsooth, should we expect otherwise in the world? I observe
that men who complain of its selfishness are quite as selfish as the
world is, and no more liberal of money than their neighbours; and I am
quite sure with regard to Captain Walker that he would have treated a
friend in want exactly as he when in want was treated. There was only
his lady who was in the least afflicted by his captivity; and as for the
club, that went on, we are bound to say, exactly as it did on the day
previous to his disappearance.

By the way, about clubs--could we not, but for fear of detaining the
fair reader too long, enter into a wholesome dissertation here on the
manner of friendship established in those institutions, and the noble
feeling of selfishness which they are likely to encourage in the male
race? I put out of the question the stale topics of complaint, such as
leaving home, encouraging gormandising and luxurious habits, etc.; but
look also at the dealings of club-men with one another. Look at the rush
for the evening paper! See how Shiverton orders a fire in the dog-days,
and Swettenham opens the windows in February. See how Cramley takes
the whole breast of the turkey on his plate, and how many times Jenkins
sends away his beggarly half-pint of sherry! Clubbery is organised
egotism. Club intimacy is carefully and wonderfully removed from
friendship. You meet Smith for twenty years, exchange the day's news
with him, laugh with him over the last joke, grow as well acquainted as
two men may be together--and one day, at the end of the list of members
of the club, you read in a little paragraph by itself, with all the
honours,

     MEMBER DECEASED.
     Smith, John, Esq.;

or he, on the other hand, has the advantage of reading your own name
selected for a similar typographical distinction. There it is, that
abominable little exclusive list at the end of every club-catalogue--you
can't avoid it. I belong to eight clubs myself, and know that one year
Fitz-Boodle, George Savage, Esq. (unless it should please fate to remove
my brother and his six sons, when of course it would be Fitz-Boodle, Sir
George Savage, Bart.), will appear in the dismal category. There is that
list; down I must go in it:--the day will come, and I shan't be seen in
the bow-window, someone else will be sitting in the vacant armchair:
the rubber will begin as usual, and yet somehow Fitz will not be there.
"Where's Fitz?" says Trumpington, just arrived from the Rhine. "Don't
you know?" says Punter, turning down his thumb to the carpet. "You led
the club, I think?" says Ruff to his partner (the OTHER partner!), and
the waiter snuffs the candles.

                    *****

I hope in the course of the above little pause, every single member of
a club who reads this has profited by the perusal. He may belong, I
say, to eight clubs; he will die, and not be missed by any of the five
thousand members. Peace be to him; the waiters will forget him, and his
name will pass away, and another great-coat will hang on the hook whence
his own used to be dependent.

And this, I need not say, is the beauty of the club-institutions. If it
were otherwise--if, forsooth, we were to be sorry when our friends died,
or to draw out our purses when our friends were in want, we should be
insolvent, and life would be miserable. Be it ours to button up our
pockets and our hearts; and to make merry--it is enough to swim down
this life-stream for ourselves; if Poverty is clutching hold of our
heels, or Friendship would catch an arm, kick them both off. Every man
for himself, is the word, and plenty to do too.

My friend Captain Walker had practised the above maxims so long and
resolutely as to be quite aware when he came himself to be in distress,
that not a single soul in the whole universe would help him, and he took
his measures accordingly.

When carried to Mr. Bendigo's lock-up house, he summoned that gentleman
in a very haughty way, took a blank banker's cheque out of his
pocket-book, and filling it up for the exact sum of the writ, orders Mr.
Bendigo forthwith to open the door and let him go forth.

Mr. Bendigo, smiling with exceeding archness, and putting a finger
covered all over with diamond rings to his extremely aquiline nose,
inquired of Mr. Walker whether he saw anything green about his face?
intimating by this gay and good-humoured interrogatory his suspicion
of the unsatisfactory nature of the document handed over to him by Mr.
Walker.

"Hang it, sir!" says Mr. Walker, "go and get the cheque cashed, and be
quick about it. Send your man in a cab, and here's a half-crown to pay
for it." The confident air somewhat staggers the bailiff, who asked him
whether he would like any refreshment while his man was absent getting
the amount of the cheque, and treated his prisoner with great civility
during the time of the messenger's journey.

But as Captain Walker had but a balance of two pounds five and twopence
(this sum was afterwards divided among his creditors, the law expenses
being previously deducted from it), the bankers of course declined to
cash the Captain's draft for two hundred and odd pounds, simply writing
the words "No effects" on the paper; on receiving which reply Walker,
far from being cast down, burst out laughing very gaily, produced a real
five-pound note, and called upon his host for a bottle of champagne,
which the two worthies drank in perfect friendship and good-humour. The
bottle was scarcely finished, and the young Israelitish gentleman who
acts as waiter in Cursitor Street had only time to remove the flask and
the glasses, when poor Morgiana with a flood of tears rushed into her
husband's arms, and flung herself on his neck, and calling him her
"dearest, blessed Howard," would have fainted at his feet; but that he,
breaking out in a fury of oaths, asked her how, after getting him into
that scrape through her infernal extravagance, she dared to show her
face before him? This address speedily frightened the poor thing out
of her fainting fit--there is nothing so good for female hysterics as a
little conjugal sternness, nay, brutality, as many husbands can aver who
are in the habit of employing the remedy.

"My extravagance, Howard?" said she, in a faint way; and quite put off
her purpose of swooning by the sudden attack made upon her--"Surely, my
love, you have nothing to complain of--"

"To complain of, ma'am?" roared the excellent Walker. "Is two hundred
guineas to a music-master nothing to complain of? Did you bring me such
a fortune as to authorise your taking guinea lessons? Haven't I raised
you out of your sphere of life and introduced you to the best of the
land? Haven't I dressed you like a duchess? Haven't I been for you such
a husband as very few women in the world ever had, madam?--answer me
that."

"Indeed, Howard, you were always very kind," sobbed the lady.

"Haven't I toiled and slaved for you--been out all day working for you?
Haven't I allowed your vulgar old mother to come to your house--to my
house, I say? Haven't I done all this?"

She could not deny it, and Walker, who was in a rage (and when a man is
in a rage, for what on earth is a wife made but that he should vent his
rage on her?), continued for some time in this strain, and so abused,
frightened, and overcame poor Morgiana that she left her husband fully
convinced that she was the most guilty of beings, and bemoaning his
double bad fortune, that her Howard was ruined and she the cause of his
misfortunes.

When she was gone, Mr. Walker resumed his equanimity (for he was not
one of those men whom a few months of the King's Bench were likely to
terrify), and drank several glasses of punch in company with his host;
with whom in perfect calmness he talked over his affairs. That he
intended to pay his debt and quit the spunging-house next day is a
matter of course; no one ever was yet put in a spunging-house that did
not pledge his veracity he intended to quit it to-morrow. Mr. Bendigo
said he should be heartily glad to open the door to him, and in the
meantime sent out diligently to see among his friends if there were
any more detainers against the Captain, and to inform the Captain's
creditors to come forward against him.

Morgiana went home in profound grief, it may be imagined, and could
hardly refrain from bursting into tears when the sugar-loaf page asked
whether master was coming home early, or whether he had taken his key;
she lay awake tossing and wretched the whole night, and very early in
the morning rose up, and dressed, and went out.

Before nine o'clock she was in Cursitor Street, and once more joyfully
bounced into her husband's arms; who woke up yawning and swearing
somewhat, with a severe headache, occasioned by the jollification of the
previous night: for, strange though it may seem, there are perhaps no
places in Europe where jollity is more practised than in prisons for
debt; and I declare for my own part (I mean, of course, that I went
to visit a friend) I have dined at Mr. Aminadab's as sumptuously as at
Long's.

But it is necessary to account for Morgiana's joyfulness; which was
strange in her husband's perplexity, and after her sorrow of the
previous night. Well, then, when Mrs. Walker went out in the morning,
she did so with a very large basket under her arm. "Shall I carry the
basket, ma'am?" said the page, seizing it with much alacrity.

"No, thank you," cried his mistress, with equal eagerness: "it's only--"

"Of course, ma'am," replied the boy, sneering, "I knew it was that."

"Glass," continued Mrs. Walker, turning extremely red. "Have
the goodness to call a coach, sir, and not to speak till you are
questioned."

The young gentleman disappeared upon his errand: the coach was called
and came. Mrs. Walker slipped into it with her basket, and the page went
downstairs to his companions in the kitchen, and said, "It's a-comin'!
master's in quod, and missus has gone out to pawn the plate." When the
cook went out that day, she somehow had by mistake placed in her basket
a dozen of table-knives and a plated egg-stand. When the lady's-maid
took a walk in the course of the afternoon, she found she had occasion
for eight cambric pocket-handkerchiefs, (marked with her mistress's
cipher), half-a-dozen pair of shoes, gloves, long and short, some silk
stockings, and a gold-headed scent-bottle. "Both the new cashmeres is
gone," said she, "and there's nothing left in Mrs. Walker's trinket-box
but a paper of pins and an old coral bracelet." As for the page, he
rushed incontinently to his master's dressing-room and examined every
one of the pockets of his clothes; made a parcel of some of them, and
opened all the drawers which Walker had not locked before his departure.
He only found three-halfpence and a bill stamp, and about forty-five
tradesmen's accounts, neatly labelled and tied up with red tape.
These three worthies, a groom who was a great admirer of Trimmer the
lady's-maid, and a policeman a friend of the cook's, sat down to a
comfortable dinner at the usual hour, and it was agreed among them all
that Walker's ruin was certain. The cook made the policeman a present of
a china punch-bowl which Mrs. Walker had given her; and the lady's-maid
gave her friend the "Book of Beauty" for last year, and the third volume
of Byron's poems from the drawing-room table.

"I'm dash'd if she ain't taken the little French clock, too," said the
page, and so indeed Mrs. Walker had; it slipped in the basket where
it lay enveloped in one of her shawls, and then struck madly and
unnaturally a great number of times, as Morgiana was lifting her store
of treasures out of the hackney-coach. The coachman wagged his head
sadly as he saw her walking as quick as she could under her heavy load,
and disappearing round the corner of the street at which Mr. Balls's
celebrated jewellery establishment is situated. It is a grand shop, with
magnificent silver cups and salvers, rare gold-headed canes, flutes,
watches, diamond brooches, and a few fine specimens of the old masters
in the window, and under the words--

     BALLS, JEWELLER,

you read

       Money Lent.

in the very smallest type, on the door.

The interview with Mr. Balls need not be described; but it must have
been a satisfactory one, for at the end of half an hour Morgiana
returned and bounded into the coach with sparkling eyes, and told the
driver to GALLOP to Cursitor Street; which, smiling, he promised to do,
and accordingly set off in that direction at the rate of four miles an
hour. "I thought so," said the philosophic charioteer. "When a man's
in quod, a woman don't mind her silver spoons;" and he was so delighted
with her action, that he forgot to grumble when she came to settle
accounts with him, even though she gave him only double his fare.

"Take me to him," said she to the young Hebrew who opened the door.

"To whom?" says the sarcastic youth; "there's twenty HIM'S here. You're
precious early."

"To Captain Walker, young man," replied Morgiana haughtily; whereupon
the youth opening the second door, and seeing Mr. Bendigo in a flowered
dressing-gown descending the stairs, exclaimed, "Papa, here's a lady for
the Captain." "I'm come to free him," said she, trembling, and holding
out a bundle of bank-notes. "Here's the amount of your claim, sir--two
hundred and twenty guineas, as you told me last night." The Jew took the
notes, and grinned as he looked at her, and grinned double as he looked
at his son, and begged Mrs. Walker to step into his study and take a
receipt. When the door of that apartment closed upon the lady and his
father, Mr. Bendigo the younger fell back in an agony of laughter, which
it is impossible to describe in words, and presently ran out into a
court where some of the luckless inmates of the house were already
taking the air, and communicated something to them which made those
individuals also laugh as uproariously as he had previously done.

Well, after joyfully taking the receipt from Mr. Bendigo (how her cheeks
flushed and her heart fluttered as she dried it on the blotting-book!),
and after turning very pale again on hearing that the Captain had had a
very bad night: "And well he might, poor dear!" said she (at which Mr.
Bendigo, having no person to grin at, grinned at a marble bust of
Mr. Pitt, which ornamented his sideboard)--Morgiana, I say, these
preliminaries being concluded, was conducted to her husband's apartment,
and once more flinging her arms round her dearest Howard's neck, told
him with one of the sweetest smiles in the world, to make haste and
get up and come home, for breakfast was waiting and the carriage at the
door.

"What do you mean, love?" said the Captain, starting up and looking
exceedingly surprised.

"I mean that my dearest is free; that the odious little creature is
paid--at least the horrid bailiff is."

"Have you been to Baroski?" said Walker, turning very red.

"Howard!" said his wife, quite indignant.

"Did--did your mother give you the money?" asked the Captain.

"No; I had it by me" replies Mrs. Walker, with a very knowing look.

Walker was more surprised than ever. "Have you any more by you?" said
he.

Mrs. Walker showed him her purse with two guineas. "That is all, love,"
she said. "And I wish," continued she, "you would give me a draft to pay
a whole list of little bills that have somehow all come in within the
last few days."

"Well, well, you shall have the cheque," continued Mr. Walker, and began
forthwith to make his toilet, which completed, he rang for Mr. Bendigo,
and his bill, and intimated his wish to go home directly.

The honoured bailiff brought the bill, but with regard to his being
free, said it was impossible.

"How impossible?" said Mrs. Walker, turning very red: and then very
pale. "Did I not pay just now?"

"So you did, and you've got the reshipt; but there's another detainer
against the Captain for a hundred and fifty. Eglantine and Mossrose, of
Bond Street;--perfumery for five years, you know."

"You don't mean to say you were such a fool as to pay without asking if
there were any more detainers?" roared Walker to his wife.

"Yes, she was though," chuckled Mr. Bendigo; "but she'll know better the
next time: and, besides, Captain, what's a hundred and fifty pounds to
you?"

Though Walker desired nothing so much in the world at that moment as
the liberty to knock down his wife, his sense of prudence overcame his
desire for justice: if that feeling may be called prudence on his part,
which consisted in a strong wish to cheat the bailiff into the idea that
he (Walker) was an exceedingly respectable and wealthy man. Many worthy
persons indulge in this fond notion, that they are imposing upon the
world; strive to fancy, for instance, that their bankers consider
them men of property because they keep a tolerable balance, pay little
tradesmen's bills with ostentatious punctuality, and so forth--but the
world, let us be pretty sure, is as wise as need be, and guesses our
real condition with a marvellous instinct, or learns it with curious
skill. The London tradesman is one of the keenest judges of human nature
extant; and if a tradesman, how much more a bailiff? In reply to the
ironic question, "What's a hundred and fifty pounds to you?" Walker,
collecting himself, answers, "It is an infamous imposition, and I owe
the money no more than you do; but, nevertheless, I shall instruct
my lawyers to pay it in the course of the morning: under protest, of
course."

"Oh, of course," said Mr. Bendigo, bowing and quitting the room, and
leaving Mrs. Walker to the pleasure of a tete-a-tete with her husband.

And now being alone with the partner of his bosom, the worthy gentleman
began an address to her which cannot be put down on paper here; because
the world is exceedingly squeamish, and does not care to hear the whole
truth about rascals, and because the fact is that almost every other
word of the Captain's speech was a curse, such as would shock the
beloved reader were it put in print.

Fancy, then, in lieu of the conversation, a scoundrel, disappointed and
in a fury, wreaking his brutal revenge upon an amiable woman, who sits
trembling and pale, and wondering at this sudden exhibition of wrath.
Fancy how he clenches his fists and stands over her, and stamps and
screams out curses with a livid face, growing wilder and wilder in his
rage; wrenching her hand when she wants to turn away, and only stopping
at last when she has fallen off the chair in a fainting fit, with
a heart-breaking sob that made the Jew-boy who was listening at the
key-hole turn quite pale and walk away. Well, it is best, perhaps, that
such a conversation should not be told at length:--at the end of
it, when Mr. Walker had his wife lifeless on the floor, he seized a
water-jug and poured it over her; which operation pretty soon brought
her to herself, and shaking her black ringlets, she looked up once more
again timidly into his face, and took his hand, and began to cry.

He spoke now in a somewhat softer voice, and let her keep paddling on
with his hand as before; he COULDN'T speak very fiercely to the poor
girl in her attitude of defeat, and tenderness, and supplication.
"Morgiana," said he, "your extravagance and carelessness have brought me
to ruin, I'm afraid. If you had chosen to have gone to Baroski, a word
from you would have made him withdraw the writ, and my property wouldn't
have been sacrificed, as it has now been, for nothing. It mayn't be yet
too late, however, to retrieve ourselves. This bill of Eglantine's is
a regular conspiracy, I am sure, between Mossrose and Bendigo here: you
must go to Eglantine--he's an old--an old flame of yours, you know."

She dropped his hand: "I can't go to Eglantine after what has passed
between us," she said; but Walker's face instantly began to wear a
certain look, and she said with a shudder, "Well, well, dear, I WILL
go." "You will go to Eglantine, and ask him to take a bill for the
amount of this shameful demand--at any date, never mind what. Mind,
however, to see him alone, and I'm sure if you choose you can settle the
business. Make haste; set off directly, and come back, as there may be
more detainers in."

Trembling, and in a great flutter, Morgiana put on her bonnet and
gloves, and went towards the door. "It's a fine morning," said Mr.
Walker, looking out: "a walk will do you good; and--Morgiana--didn't you
say you had a couple of guineas in your pocket?"

"Here it is," said she, smiling all at once, and holding up her face to
be kissed. She paid the two guineas for the kiss. Was it not a mean act?
"Is it possible that people can love where they do not respect?" says
Miss Prim: "_I_ never would." Nobody asked you, Miss Prim: but recollect
Morgiana was not born with your advantages of education and breeding;
and was, in fact, a poor vulgar creature, who loved Mr. Walker, not
because her mamma told her, nor because he was an exceedingly eligible
and well-brought-up young man, but because she could not help it, and
knew no better. Nor is Mrs. Walker set up as a model of virtue: ah, no!
when I want a model of virtue I will call in Baker Street, and ask for a
sitting of my dear (if I may be permitted to say so) Miss Prim.

We have Mr. Howard Walker safely housed in Mr. Bendigo's establishment
in Cursitor Street, Chancery Lane; and it looks like mockery and want of
feeling towards the excellent hero of this story (or, as should rather
be said, towards the husband of the heroine) to say what he might have
been but for the unlucky little circumstance of Baroski's passion for
Morgiana.

If Baroski had not fallen in love with Morgiana, he would not have given
her two hundred guineas' worth of lessons; he would not have so far
presumed as to seize her hand, and attempt to kiss it; if he had not
attempted to kiss her, she would not have boxed his ears; he would not
have taken out the writ against Walker; Walker would have been free,
very possibly rich, and therefore certainly respected: he always said
that a month's more liberty would have set him beyond the reach of
misfortune.

The assertion is very likely a correct one; for Walker had a flashy
enterprising genius, which ends in wealth sometimes; in the King's Bench
not seldom; occasionally, alas! in Van Diemen's Land. He might have been
rich, could he have kept his credit, and had not his personal expenses
and extravagances pulled him down. He had gallantly availed himself of
his wife's fortune; nor could any man in London, as he proudly said,
have made five hundred pounds go so far. He had, as we have seen,
furnished a house, sideboard, and cellar with it: he had a carriage, and
horses in his stable, and with the remainder he had purchased shares
in four companies--of three of which he was founder and director, had
conducted innumerable bargains in the foreign stocks, had lived and
entertained sumptuously, and made himself a very considerable income. He
had set up THE CAPITOL Loan and Life Assurance Company, had discovered
the Chimborazo gold mines, and the Society for Recovering and Draining
the Pontine Marshes; capital ten millions; patron HIS HOLINESS THE POPE.
It certainly was stated in an evening paper that His Holiness had made
him a Knight of the Spur, and had offered to him the rank of Count; and
he was raising a loan for His Highness, the Cacique of Panama, who had
sent him (by way of dividend) the grand cordon of His Highness's order
of the Castle and Falcon, which might be seen any day at his office in
Bond Street, with the parchments signed and sealed by the Grand Master
and Falcon King-at-arms of His Highness. In a week more Walker would
have raised a hundred thousand pounds on His Highness's twenty per cent.
loan; he would have had fifteen thousand pounds commission for himself;
his companies would have risen to par, he would have realised his
shares; he would have gone into Parliament; he would have been made a
baronet, who knows? a peer, probably! "And I appeal to you, sir," Walker
would say to his friends, "could any man have shown better proof of his
affection for his wife than by laying out her little miserable money as
I did? They call me heartless, sir, because I didn't succeed; sir, my
life has been a series of sacrifices for that woman, such as no man ever
performed before."

A proof of Walker's dexterity and capability for business may be seen
in the fact that he had actually appeased and reconciled one of his
bitterest enemies--our honest friend Eglantine. After Walker's marriage
Eglantine, who had now no mercantile dealings with his former agent,
became so enraged with him, that, as the only means of revenge in his
power, he sent him in his bill for goods supplied to the amount of
one hundred and fifty guineas, and sued him for the amount. But Walker
stepped boldly over to his enemy, and in the course of half an hour they
were friends.

Eglantine promised to forego his claim; and accepted in lieu of it three
hundred-pound shares of the ex-Panama stock, bearing twenty-five per
cent., payable half-yearly at the house of Hocus Brothers, St. Swithin's
Lane; three hundred-pound shares, and the SECOND class of the order
of the Castle and Falcon, with the riband and badge. "In four years,
Eglantine, my boy, I hope to get you the Grand Cordon of the order,"
said Walker: "I hope to see you a KNIGHT GRAND CROSS, with a grant of a
hundred thousand acres reclaimed from the Isthmus."

To do my poor Eglantine justice, he did not care for the hundred
thousand acres--it was the star that delighted him--ah! how his fat
chest heaved with delight as he sewed on the cross and riband to his
dress-coat, and lighted up four wax candles and looked at himself in
the glass. He was known to wear a great-coat after that--it was that he
might wear the cross under it. That year he went on a trip to Boulogne.
He was dreadfully ill during the voyage, but as the vessel entered
the port he was seen to emerge from the cabin, his coat open, the star
blazing on his chest; the soldiers saluted him as he walked the streets,
he was called Monsieur le Chevalier, and when he went home he entered
into negotiations with Walker to purchase a commission in His Highness's
service. Walker said he would get him the nominal rank of Captain, the
fees at the Panama War Office were five-and-twenty pounds, which
sum honest Eglantine produced, and had his commission, and a pack of
visiting cards printed as Captain Archibald Eglantine, K.C.F. Many a
time he looked at them as they lay in his desk, and he kept the cross in
his dressing-table, and wore it as he shaved every morning.

His Highness the Cacique, it is well known, came to England, and had
lodgings in Regent Street, where he held a levee, at which Eglantine
appeared in the Panama uniform, and was most graciously received by
his Sovereign. His Highness proposed to make Captain Eglantine his
aide-de-camp with the rank of Colonel, but the Captain's exchequer
was rather low at that moment, and the fees at the "War Office" were
peremptory. Meanwhile His Highness left Regent Street, was said by some
to have returned to Panama, by others to be in his native city of Cork,
by others to be leading a life of retirement in the New Cut, Lambeth;
at any rate was not visible for some time, so that Captain Eglantine's
advancement did not take place. Eglantine was somehow ashamed to mention
his military and chivalric rank to Mr. Mossrose, when that gentleman
came into partnership with him; and kept these facts secret, until
they were detected by a very painful circumstance. On the very day when
Walker was arrested at the suit of Benjamin Baroski, there appeared in
the newspapers an account of the imprisonment of His Highness the Prince
of Panama for a bill owing to a licensed victualler in Ratcliff Highway.
The magistrate to whom the victualler subsequently came to complain
passed many pleasantries on the occasion. He asked whether His Highness
did not drink like a swan with two necks; whether he had brought any
Belles savages with him from Panama, and so forth; and the whole court,
said the report, "was convulsed with laughter when Boniface produced a
green and yellow riband with a large star of the order of the Castle
and Falcon, with which His Highness proposed to gratify him, in lieu of
paying his little bill."

It was as he was reading the above document with a bleeding heart that
Mr. Mossrose came in from his daily walk to the City. "Vell, Eglantine,"
says he, "have you heard the newsh?"

"About His Highness?"

"About your friend Valker; he's arrested for two hundred poundsh!"

Eglantine at this could contain no more; but told his story of how he
had been induced to accept three hundred pounds of Panama stock for
his account against Walker, and cursed his stars for his folly. "Vell,
you've only to bring in another bill," said the younger perfumer;
"swear he owes you a hundred and fifty pounds, and we'll have a writ out
against him this afternoon."

And so a second writ was taken out against Captain Walker.

"You'll have his wife here very likely in a day or two," said Mr.
Mossrose to his partner; "them chaps always sends their wives, and I
hope you know how to deal with her."

"I don't value her a fig's hend," said Eglantine. "I'll treat her like
the dust of the hearth. After that woman's conduct to me, I should like
to see her have the haudacity to come here; and if she does, you'll see
how I'll serve her."

The worthy perfumer was, in fact, resolved to be exceedingly
hard-hearted in his behaviour towards his old love, and acted over at
night in bed the scene which was to occur when the meeting should take
place. Oh, thought he, but it will be a grand thing to see the proud
Morgiana on her knees to me; and me a-pointing to the door, and saying,
"Madam, you've steeled this 'eart against you, you have;--bury the
recollection of old times, of those old times when I thought my 'eart
would have broke, but it didn't--no: 'earts are made of sterner stuff. I
didn't die, as I thought I should; I stood it, and live to see the woman
I despised at my feet--ha, ha, at my feet!"

In the midst of these thoughts Mr. Eglantine fell asleep; but it
was evident that the idea of seeing Morgiana once more agitated him
considerably, else why should he have been at the pains of preparing
so much heroism? His sleep was exceedingly fitful and troubled; he saw
Morgiana in a hundred shapes; he dreamed that he was dressing her hair;
that he was riding with her to Richmond; that the horse turned into a
dragon, and Morgiana into Woolsey, who took him by the throat and choked
him, while the dragon played the key-bugle. And in the morning when
Mossrose was gone to his business in the City, and he sat reading the
Morning Post in his study, ah! what a thump his heart gave as the lady
of his dreams actually stood before him!

Many a lady who purchased brushes at Eglantine's shop would have given
ten guineas for such a colour as his when he saw her. His heart beat
violently, he was almost choking in his stays: he had been prepared for
the visit, but his courage failed him now it had come. They were both
silent for some minutes.

"You know what I am come for," at last said Morgiana from under her
veil, but she put it aside as she spoke.

"I--that is--yes--it's a painful affair, mem," he said, giving one look
at her pale face, and then turning away in a flurry. "I beg to refer
you to Blunt, Hone, and Sharpus, my lawyers, mem," he added, collecting
himself.

"I didn't expect this from YOU, Mr. Eglantine," said the lady, and began
to sob.

"And after what's 'appened, I didn't expect a visit from YOU, mem.
I thought Mrs. Capting Walker was too great a dame to visit poor
Harchibald Eglantine (though some of the first men in the country DO
visit him). Is there anything in which I can oblige you, mem?"

"O heavens!" cried the poor woman; "have I no friend left? I never
thought that you, too, would have deserted me, Mr. Archibald."

The "Archibald," pronounced in the old way, had evidently an effect on
the perfumer; he winced and looked at her very eagerly for a moment.
"What can I do for you, mem?" at last said he.

"What is this bill against Mr. Walker, for which he is now in prison?"

"Perfumery supplied for five years; that man used more 'air-brushes than
any duke in the land, and as for eau-de-Cologne, he must have bathed
himself in it. He hordered me about like a lord. He never paid me one
shilling--he stabbed me in my most vital part--but ah! ah! never mind
THAT: and I said I would be revenged, and I AM."

The perfumer was quite in a rage again by this time, and wiped his fat
face with his pocket-handkerchief, and glared upon Mrs. Walker with a
most determined air.

"Revenged on whom? Archibald--Mr. Eglantine, revenged on me--on a poor
woman whom you made miserable! You would not have done so once."

"Ha! and a precious way you treated me ONCE," said Eglantine: "don't
talk to me, mem, of ONCE. Bury the recollection of once for hever!
I thought my 'eart would have broke once, but no: 'earts are made of
sterner stuff. I didn't die, as I thought I should; I stood it--and I
live to see the woman who despised me at my feet."

"Oh, Archibald!" was all the lady could say, and she fell to sobbing
again: it was perhaps her best argument with the perfumer.

"Oh, Harchibald, indeed!" continued he, beginning to swell; "don't call
me Harchibald, Morgiana. Think what a position you might have held if
you'd chose: when, when--you MIGHT have called me Harchibald. Now
it's no use," added he, with harrowing pathos; "but, though I've been
wronged, I can't bear to see women in tears--tell me what I can do."

"Dear good Mr. Eglantine, send to your lawyers and stop this horrid
prosecution--take Mr. Walker's acknowledgment for the debt. If he is
free, he is sure to have a very large sum of money in a few days, and
will pay you all. Do not ruin him--do not ruin me by persisting now. Be
the old kind Eglantine you were."

Eglantine took a hand, which Morgiana did not refuse; he thought about
old times. He had known her since childhood almost; as a girl he dandled
her on his knee at the "Kidneys;" as a woman he had adored her--his
heart was melted.

"He did pay me in a sort of way," reasoned the perfumer with
himself--"these bonds, though they are not worth much, I took 'em for
better or for worse, and I can't bear to see her crying, and to trample
on a woman in distress. Morgiana," he added, in a loud cheerful voice,
"cheer up; I'll give you a release for your husband: I WILL be the old
kind Eglantine I was."

"Be the old kind jackass you vash!" here roared a voice that made Mr.
Eglantine start. "Vy, vat an old fat fool you are, Eglantine, to give up
our just debts because a voman comes snivelling and crying to you--and
such a voman, too!" exclaimed Mr. Mossrose, for his was the voice.

"Such a woman, sir?" cried the senior partner.

"Yes; such a woman--vy, didn't she jilt you herself?--hasn't she been
trying the same game with Baroski; and are you so green as to give up
a hundred and fifty pounds because she takes a fancy to come vimpering
here? I won't, I can tell you. The money's as much mine as it is yours,
and I'll have it or keep Walker's body, that's what I will."

At the presence of his partner, the timid good genius of Eglantine,
which had prompted him to mercy and kindness, at once outspread its
frightened wings and flew away.

"You see how it is, Mrs. W.," said he, looking down; "it's an affair
of business--in all these here affairs of business Mr. Mossrose is the
managing man; ain't you, Mr. Mossrose?"

"A pretty business it would be if I wasn't," replied Mossrose, doggedly.
"Come, ma'am," says he, "I'll tell you vat I do: I take fifty per shent;
not a farthing less--give me that, and out your husband goes."

"Oh, sir, Howard will pay you in a week."

"Vell, den, let him stop at my uncle Bendigo's for a week, and come out
den--he's very comfortable there," said Shylock with a grin. "Hadn't
you better go to the shop, Mr. Eglantine," continued he, "and look after
your business? Mrs. Walker can't want you to listen to her all day."

Eglantine was glad of the excuse, and slunk out of the studio; not into
the shop, but into his parlour; where he drank off a great glass of
maraschino, and sat blushing and exceedingly agitated, until Mossrose
came to tell him that Mrs. W. was gone, and wouldn't trouble him any
more. But although he drank several more glasses of maraschino, and went
to the play that night, and to the Cider-cellars afterwards, neither
the liquor, nor the play, nor the delightful comic songs at the cellars,
could drive Mrs. Walker out of his head, and the memory of old times,
and the image of her pale weeping face.

Morgiana tottered out of the shop, scarcely heeding the voice of Mr.
Mossrose, who said, "I'll take forty per shent" (and went back to his
duty cursing himself for a soft-hearted fool for giving up so much of
his rights to a puling woman). Morgiana, I say, tottered out of the
shop, and went up Conduit Street, weeping, weeping with all her eyes.
She was quite faint, for she had taken nothing that morning but the
glass of water which the pastry-cook in the Strand had given her, and
was forced to take hold of the railings of a house for support just as
a little gentleman with a yellow handkerchief under his arm was issuing
from the door.

"Good heavens, Mrs. Walker!" said the gentleman. It was no other than
Mr. Woolsey, who was going forth to try a body-coat for a customer. "Are
you ill?--what's the matter?--for God's sake come in!" and he took her
arm under his, and led her into his back-parlour, and seated her, and
had some wine and water before her in one minute, before she had said
one single word regarding herself.

As soon as she was somewhat recovered, and with the interruption of
a thousand sobs, the poor thing told as well as she could her little
story. Mr. Eglantine had arrested Mr. Walker: she had been trying to
gain time for him; Eglantine had refused.

"The hard-hearted cowardly brute to refuse HER anything!" said loyal Mr.
Woolsey. "My dear," says he, "I've no reason to love your husband, and I
know too much about him to respect him; but I love and respect YOU, and
will spend my last shilling to serve you." At which Morgiana could only
take his hand and cry a great deal more than ever. She said Mr. Walker
would have a great deal of money in a week, that he was the best of
husbands, and she was sure Mr. Woolsey would think better of him when
he knew him; that Mr. Eglantine's bill was one hundred and fifty pounds,
but that Mr. Mossrose would take forty per cent. if Mr. Woolsey could
say how much that was.

"I'll pay a thousand pound to do you good," said Mr. Woolsey, bouncing
up; "stay here for ten minutes, my dear, until my return, and all shall
be right, as you will see." He was back in ten minutes, and had called
a cab from the stand opposite (all the coachmen there had seen and
commented on Mrs. Walker's woebegone looks), and they were off for
Cursitor Street in a moment. "They'll settle the whole debt for twenty
pounds," said he, and showed an order to that effect from Mr. Mossrose
to Mr. Bendigo, empowering the latter to release Walker on receiving Mr.
Woolsey's acknowledgment for the above sum.

"There's no use paying it," said Mr. Walker, doggedly; "it would only
be robbing you, Mr. Woolsey--seven more detainers have come in while my
wife has been away. I must go through the court now; but," he added in a
whisper to the tailor, "my good sir, my debts of HONOUR are sacred, and
if you will have the goodness to lend ME the twenty pounds, I pledge you
my word as a gentleman to return it when I come out of quod."

It is probable that Mr. Woolsey declined this; for, as soon as he was
gone, Walker, in a tremendous fury, began cursing his wife for dawdling
three hours on the road. "Why the deuce, ma'am, didn't you take a cab?"
roared he, when he heard she had walked to Bond Street. "Those writs
have only been in half an hour, and I might have been off but for you."

"Oh, Howard," said she, "didn't you take--didn't I give you my--my last
shilling?" and fell back and wept again more bitterly than ever.

"Well, love," said her amiable husband, turning rather red, "never mind,
it wasn't your fault. It is but going through the court. It is no great
odds. I forgive you."



CHAPTER VI. IN WHICH MR. WALKER STILL REMAINS IN DIFFICULTIES, BUT SHOWS
GREAT RESIGNATION UNDER HIS MISFORTUNES.

The exemplary Walker, seeing that escape from his enemies was hopeless,
and that it was his duty as a man to turn on them and face them, now
determined to quit the splendid though narrow lodgings which Mr.
Bendigo had provided for him, and undergo the martyrdom of the Fleet.
Accordingly, in company with that gentleman, he came over to Her
Majesty's prison, and gave himself into the custody of the officers
there; and did not apply for the accommodation of the Rules (by which
in those days the captivity of some debtors was considerably lightened),
because he knew perfectly well that there was no person in the wide
world who would give a security for the heavy sums for which Walker was
answerable. What these sums were is no matter, and on this head we do
not think it at all necessary to satisfy the curiosity of the reader. He
may have owed hundreds--thousands, his creditors only can tell; he paid
the dividend which has been formerly mentioned, and showed thereby his
desire to satisfy all claims upon him to the uttermost farthing.

As for the little house in Connaught Square, when, after quitting her
husband, Morgiana drove back thither, the door was opened by the page,
who instantly thanked her to pay his wages; and in the drawing-room, on
a yellow satin sofa, sat a seedy man (with a pot of porter beside him
placed on an album for fear of staining the rosewood table), and the
seedy man signified that he had taken possession of the furniture in
execution for a judgment debt. Another seedy man was in the dining-room,
reading a newspaper, and drinking gin; he informed Mrs. Walker that
he was the representative of another judgment debt and of another
execution:--"There's another on 'em in the kitchen," said the page,
"taking an inwentory of the furniture; and he swears he'll have you took
up for swindling, for pawning the plate."

"Sir," said Mr. Woolsey, for that worthy man had conducted Morgiana
home--"sir," said he, shaking his stick at the young page, "if you give
any more of your impudence, I'll beat every button off your jacket:" and
as there were some four hundred of these ornaments, the page was silent.
It was a great mercy for Morgiana that the honest and faithful tailor
had accompanied her. The good fellow had waited very patiently for her
for an hour in the parlour or coffee-room of the lock-up house, knowing
full well that she would want a protector on her way homewards; and his
kindness will be more appreciated when it is stated that, during
the time of his delay in the coffee-room, he had been subject to the
entreaties, nay, to the insults, of Cornet Fipkin of the Blues, who was
in prison at the suit of Linsey, Woolsey and Co., and who happened to be
taking his breakfast in the apartment when his obdurate creditor entered
it. The Cornet (a hero of eighteen, who stood at least five feet three
in his boots, and owed fifteen thousand pounds) was so enraged at the
obduracy of his creditor that he said he would have thrown him out of
the window but for the bars which guarded it; and entertained serious
thoughts of knocking the tailor's head off, but that the latter, putting
his right leg forward and his fists in a proper attitude, told the
young officer to "come on;" on which the Cornet cursed the tailor for a
"snob," and went back to his breakfast.

The execution people having taken charge of Mr. Walker's house, Mrs.
Walker was driven to take refuge with her mamma near "Sadler's Wells,"
and the Captain remained comfortably lodged in the Fleet. He had some
ready money, and with it managed to make his existence exceedingly
comfortable. He lived with the best society of the place, consisting of
several distinguished young noblemen and gentlemen. He spent the morning
playing at fives and smoking cigars; the evening smoking cigars and
dining comfortably. Cards came after dinner; and, as the Captain was
an experienced player, and near a score of years older than most of his
friends, he was generally pretty successful: indeed, if he had received
all the money that was owed to him, he might have come out of prison
and paid his creditors twenty shillings in the pound--that is, if he had
been minded to do so. But there is no use in examining into that point
too closely, for the fact is, young Fipkin only paid him forty pounds
out of seven hundred, for which he gave him I.O.U.'s; Algernon Deuceace
not only did not pay him three hundred and twenty which he lost at blind
hookey, but actually borrowed seven and sixpence in money from Walker,
which has never been repaid to this day; and Lord Doublequits actually
lost nineteen thousand pounds to him at heads and tails, which he never
paid, pleading drunkenness and his minority. The reader may recollect a
paragraph which went the round of the papers entitled--

"Affair of honour in the Fleet Prison.--Yesterday morning (behind the
pump in the second court) Lord D-bl-qu-ts and Captain H-w-rd W-lk-r (a
near relative, we understand, of his Grace the Duke of N-rf-lk) had
a hostile meeting and exchanged two shots. These two young sprigs of
nobility were attended to the ground by Major Flush, who, by the way,
is FLUSH no longer, and Captain Pam, late of the ---- Dragoons. Play is
said to have been the cause of the quarrel, and the gallant Captain is
reported to have handled the noble lord's nose rather roughly at one
stage of the transactions."

When Morgiana at "Sadler's Wells" heard these news, she was ready to
faint with terror; and rushed to the Fleet Prison, and embraced her lord
and master with her usual expansion and fits of tears: very much to that
gentleman's annoyance, who happened to be in company with Pain and Flush
at the time, and did not care that his handsome wife should be seen
too much in the dubious precincts of the Fleet. He had at least so much
shame about him, and had always rejected her entreaties to be allowed to
inhabit the prison with him.

"It is enough," would he say, casting his eyes heavenward, and with a
most lugubrious countenance--"it is enough, Morgiana, that _I_ should
suffer, even though your thoughtlessness has been the cause of my ruin.
But enough of THAT! I will not rebuke you for faults for which I know
you are now repentant; and I never could bear to see you in the midst
of the miseries of this horrible place. Remain at home with your mother,
and let me drag on the weary days here alone. If you can get me any more
of that pale sherry, my love, do. I require something to cheer me in
solitude, and have found my chest very much relieved by that wine. Put
more pepper and eggs, my dear, into the next veal-pie you make me. I
can't eat the horrible messes in the coffee-room here."

It was Walker's wish, I can't tell why, except that it is the wish of
a great number of other persons in this strange world, to make his
wife believe that he was wretched in mind and ill in health; and all
assertions to this effect the simple creature received with numberless
tears of credulity: she would go home to Mrs. Crump, and say how her
darling Howard was pining away, how he was ruined for HER, and with what
angelic sweetness he bore his captivity. The fact is, he bore it with so
much resignation that no other person in the world could see that he
was unhappy. His life was undisturbed by duns; his day was his own from
morning till night; his diet was good, his acquaintances jovial, his
purse tolerably well supplied, and he had not one single care to annoy
him.

Mrs. Crump and Woolsey, perhaps, received Morgiana's account of her
husband's miseries with some incredulity. The latter was now a daily
visitor to "Sadler's Wells." His love for Morgiana had become a warm
fatherly generous regard for her; it was out of the honest fellow's
cellar that the wine used to come which did so much good to Mr. Walker's
chest; and he tried a thousand ways to make Morgiana happy.

A very happy day, indeed, it was when, returning from her visit to the
Fleet, she found in her mother's sitting-room her dear grand rosewood
piano, and every one of her music-books, which the kind-hearted tailor
had purchased at the sale of Walker's effects. And I am not ashamed
to say that Morgiana herself was so charmed, that when, as usual, Mr.
Woolsey came to drink tea in the evening, she actually gave him a kiss;
which frightened Mr. Woolsey, and made him blush exceedingly. She
sat down, and played him that evening every one of the songs which
he liked--the OLD songs--none of your Italian stuff. Podmore, the old
music-master, was there too, and was delighted and astonished at the
progress in singing which Morgiana had made; and when the little party
separated, he took Mr. Woolsey by the hand, and said, "Give me leave to
tell you, sir, that you're a TRUMP."

"That he is," said Canterfield, the first tragic; "an honour to human
nature. A man whose hand is open as day to melting charity, and whose
heart ever melts at the tale of woman's distress."

"Pooh, pooh, stuff and nonsense, sir," said the tailor; but, upon my
word, Mr. Canterfield's words were perfectly correct. I wish as much
could be said in favour of Woolsey's old rival, Mr. Eglantine, who
attended the sale too, but it was with a horrid kind of satisfaction
at the thought that Walker was ruined. He bought the yellow satin
sofa before mentioned, and transferred it to what he calls his
"sitting-room," where it is to this day, bearing many marks of the best
bear's grease. Woolsey bid against Baroski for the piano, very nearly
up to the actual value of the instrument, when the artist withdrew from
competition; and when he was sneering at the ruin of Mr. Walker, the
tailor sternly interrupted him by saying, "What the deuce are YOU
sneering at? You did it, sir; and you're paid every shilling of your
claim, ain't you?" On which Baroski turned round to Miss Larkins,
and said, Mr. Woolsey was a "snop;" the very word, though pronounced
somewhat differently, which the gallant Cornet Fipkin had applied to
him.

Well; so he WAS a snob. But, vulgar as he was, I declare, for my part,
that I have a greater respect for Mr. Woolsey than for any single
nobleman or gentleman mentioned in this true history.

It will be seen from the names of Messrs. Canterfield and Podmore
that Morgiana was again in the midst of the widow Crump's favourite
theatrical society; and this, indeed, was the case. The widow's little
room was hung round with the pictures which were mentioned at the
commencement of the story as decorating the bar of the "Bootjack;" and
several times in a week she received her friends from "The Wells," and
entertained them with such humble refreshments of tea and crumpets as
her modest means permitted her to purchase. Among these persons Morgiana
lived and sang quite as contentedly as she had ever done among the
demireps of her husband's society; and, only she did not dare to own it
to herself, was a great deal happier than she had been for many a day.
Mrs. Captain Walker was still a great lady amongst them. Even in his
ruin, Walker, the director of three companies, and the owner of the
splendid pony-chaise, was to these simple persons an awful character;
and when mentioned they talked with a great deal of gravity of his being
in the country, and hoped Mrs. Captain W. had good news of him. They all
knew he was in the Fleet; but had he not in prison fought a duel with a
viscount? Montmorency (of the Norfolk Circuit) was in the Fleet too;
and when Canterfield went to see poor Montey, the latter had pointed out
Walker to his friend, who actually hit Lord George Tennison across the
shoulders in play with a racket-bat; which event was soon made known to
the whole green-room.

"They had me up one day," said Montmorency, "to sing a comic song, and
give my recitations; and we had champagne and lobster-salad: SUCH nobs!"
added the player. "Billingsgate and Vauxhall were there too, and left
college at eight o'clock."

When Morgiana was told of the circumstance by her mother, she hoped her
dear Howard had enjoyed the evening, and was thankful that for once he
could forget his sorrows. Nor, somehow, was she ashamed of herself for
being happy afterwards, but gave way to her natural good-humour without
repentance or self-rebuke. I believe, indeed (alas! why are we made
acquainted with the same fact regarding ourselves long after it is past
and gone?)--I believe these were the happiest days of Morgiana's whole
life. She had no cares except the pleasant one of attending on her
husband, an easy smiling temperament which made her regardless of
to-morrow; and, add to this, a delightful hope relative to a certain
interesting event which was about to occur, and which I shall not
particularise further than by saying, that she was cautioned against too
much singing by Mr. Squills, her medical attendant; and that widow Crump
was busy making up a vast number of little caps and diminutive cambric
shirts, such as delighted GRANDMOTHERS are in the habit of fashioning.
I hope this is as genteel a way of signifying the circumstance which
was about to take place in the Walker family as Miss Prim herself could
desire. Mrs. Walker's mother was about to become a grandmother. There's
a phrase! The Morning Post, which says this story is vulgar, I'm sure
cannot quarrel with that. I don't believe the whole Court Guide would
convey an intimation more delicately.

Well, Mrs. Crump's little grandchild was born, entirely to the
dissatisfaction, I must say, of his father; who, when the infant was
brought to him in the Fleet, had him abruptly covered up in his cloak
again, from which he had been removed by the jealous prison doorkeepers:
why, do you think? Walker had a quarrel with one of them, and the wretch
persisted in believing that the bundle Mrs. Crump was bringing to her
son-in-law was a bundle of disguised brandy!

"The brutes!" said the lady; "and the father's a brute, too," said she.
"He takes no more notice of me than if I was a kitchen-maid, and of
Woolsey than if he was a leg of mutton--the dear blessed little cherub!"

Mrs. Crump was a mother-in-law; let us pardon her hatred of her
daughter's husband.

The Woolsey compared in the above sentence both to a leg of mutton and
a cherub, was not the eminent member of the firm of Linsey, Woolsey, and
Co., but the little baby, who was christened Howard Woolsey Walker, with
the full consent of the father; who said the tailor was a deuced good
fellow, and felt really obliged to him for the sherry, for a frock-coat
which he let him have in prison, and for his kindness to Morgiana. The
tailor loved the little boy with all his soul; he attended his mother
to her churching, and the child to the font; and, as a present to his
little godson on his christening, he sent two yards of the finest white
kerseymere in his shop, to make him a cloak. The Duke had had a pair of
inexpressibles off that very piece.

House-furniture is bought and sold, music-lessons are given, children
are born and christened, ladies are confined and churched--time, in
other words, passes--and yet Captain Walker still remains in prison!
Does it not seem strange that he should still languish there between
palisaded walls near Fleet Market, and that he should not be restored to
that active and fashionable world of which he was an ornament? The fact
is, the Captain had been before the court for the examination of his
debts; and the Commissioner, with a cruelty quite shameful towards
a fallen man, had qualified his ways of getting money in most severe
language, and had sent him back to prison again for the space of nine
calendar months, an indefinite period, and until his accounts could
be made up. This delay Walker bore like a philosopher, and, far from
repining, was still the gayest fellow of the tennis-court, and the soul
of the midnight carouse.

There is no use in raking up old stories, and hunting through files
of dead newspapers, to know what were the specific acts which made the
Commissioner so angry with Captain Walker. Many a rogue has come before
the Court, and passed through it since then: and I would lay a wager
that Howard Walker was not a bit worse than his neighbours. But as he
was not a lord, and as he had no friends on coming out of prison, and
had settled no money on his wife, and had, as it must be confessed, an
exceedingly bad character, it is not likely that the latter would
be forgiven him when once more free in the world. For instance, when
Doublequits left the Fleet, he was received with open arms by his
family, and had two-and-thirty horses in his stables before a week
was over. Pam, of the Dragoons, came out, and instantly got a place as
government courier--a place found so good of late years (and no wonder,
it is better pay than that of a colonel), that our noblemen and gentry
eagerly press for it. Frank Hurricane was sent out as registrar of
Tobago, or Sago, or Ticonderago; in fact, for a younger son of good
family it is rather advantageous to get into debt twenty or thirty
thousand pounds: you are sure of a good place afterwards in the
colonies. Your friends are so anxious to get rid of you, that they will
move heaven and earth to serve you. And so all the above companions of
misfortune with Walker were speedily made comfortable; but HE had no
rich parents; his old father was dead in York jail. How was he to start
in the world again? What friendly hand was there to fill his pocket with
gold, and his cup with sparkling champagne? He was, in fact, an object
of the greatest pity--for I know of no greater than a gentleman of his
habits without the means of gratifying them. He must live well, and
he has not the means. Is there a more pathetic case? As for a mere low
beggar--some labourless labourer, or some weaver out of place--don't
let us throw away our compassion upon THEM. Psha! they're accustomed
to starve. They CAN sleep upon boards, or dine off a crust; whereas
a gentleman would die in the same situation. I think this was poor
Morgiana's way of reasoning. For Walker's cash in prison beginning
presently to run low, and knowing quite well that the dear fellow could
not exist there without the luxuries to which he had been accustomed,
she borrowed money from her mother, until the poor old lady was a sec.
She even confessed, with tears, to Woolsey, that she was in particular
want of twenty pounds, to pay a poor milliner, whose debt she could not
bear to put in her husband's schedule. And I need not say she carried
the money to her husband, who might have been greatly benefited by
it--only he had a bad run of luck at the cards; and how the deuce can a
man help THAT?

Woolsey had repurchased for her one of the Cashmere shawls. She left it
behind her one day at the Fleet prison, and some rascal stole it there;
having the grace, however, to send Woolsey the ticket, signifying the
place where it had been pawned. Who could the scoundrel have been?
Woolsey swore a great oath, and fancied he knew; but if it was Walker
himself (as Woolsey fancied, and probably as was the case) who made away
with the shawl, being pressed thereto by necessity, was it fair to call
him a scoundrel for so doing, and should we not rather laud the delicacy
of his proceeding? He was poor: who can command the cards? But he did
not wish his wife should know HOW poor: he could not bear that she
should suppose him arrived at the necessity of pawning a shawl.

She who had such beautiful ringlets, of a sudden pleaded cold in the
head, and took to wearing caps. One summer evening, as she and the baby
and Mrs. Crump and Woolsey (let us say all four babies together) were
laughing and playing in Mrs. Crump's drawing-room--playing the most
absurd gambols, fat Mrs. Crump, for instance, hiding behind the sofa,
Woolsey chuck-chucking, cock-a-doodle-dooing, and performing those
indescribable freaks which gentlemen with philoprogenitive organs will
execute in the company of children--in the midst of their play the baby
gave a tug at his mother's cap; off it came--her hair was cut close to
her head!

Morgiana turned as red as sealing-wax, and trembled very much; Mrs.
Crump screamed, "My child, where is your hair?" and Woolsey, bursting
out with a most tremendous oath against Walker that would send Miss Prim
into convulsions, put his handkerchief to his face, and actually wept.
"The infernal bubble-ubble-ackguard!" said he, roaring and clenching his
fists.

As he had passed the Bower of Bloom a few days before, he saw Mossrose,
who was combing out a jet-black ringlet, and held it up, as if for
Woolsey's examination, with a peculiar grin. The tailor did not
understand the joke, but he saw now what had happened. Morgiana had sold
her hair for five guineas; she would have sold her arm had her husband
bidden her. On looking in her drawers it was found she had sold almost
all her wearing apparel; the child's clothes were all there, however.
It was because her husband talked of disposing of a gilt coral that
the child had, that she had parted with the locks which had formed her
pride.

"I'll give you twenty guineas for that hair, you infamous fat coward,"
roared the little tailor to Eglantine that evening. "Give it up, or I'll
kill you-"

"Mr. Mossrose! Mr. Mossrose!" shouted the perfumer.

"Vell, vatsh de matter, vatsh de row, fight avay, my boys; two to one
on the tailor," said Mr. Mossrose, much enjoying the sport (for Woolsey,
striding through the shop without speaking to him, had rushed into the
studio, where he plumped upon Eglantine).

"Tell him about that hair, sir."

"That hair! Now keep yourself quiet, Mister Timble, and don't tink for
to bully ME. You mean Mrs. Valker's 'air? Vy, she sold it me."

"And the more blackguard you for buying it! Will you take twenty guineas
for it?"

"No," said Mossrose.

"Twenty-five?"

"Can't," said Mossrose.

"Hang it! will you take forty? There!"

"I vish I'd kep it," said the Hebrew gentleman, with unfeigned regret.
"Eglantine dressed it this very night."

"For Countess Baldenstiern, the Swedish Hambassador's lady," says
Eglantine (his Hebrew partner was by no means a favourite with the
ladies, and only superintended the accounts of the concern). "It's this
very night at Devonshire 'Ouse, with four hostrich plumes, lappets, and
trimmings. And now, Mr. Woolsey, I'll trouble you to apologise."

Mr. Woolsey did not answer, but walked up to Mr. Eglantine, and snapped
his fingers so close under the perfumer's nose that the latter started
back and seized the bell-rope. Mossrose burst out laughing, and the
tailor walked majestically from the shop, with both hands stuck between
the lappets of his coat.

"My dear," said he to Morgiana a short time afterwards, "you must
not encourage that husband of yours in his extravagance, and sell the
clothes off your poor back that he may feast and act the fine gentleman
in prison."

"It is his health, poor dear soul!" interposed Mrs. Walker: "his chest.
Every farthing of the money goes to the doctors, poor fellow!"

"Well, now listen: I am a rich man" (it was a great fib, for Woolsey's
income, as a junior partner of the firm, was but a small one); "I can
very well afford to make him an allowance while he is in the Fleet, and
have written to him to say so. But if you ever give him a penny, or sell
a trinket belonging to you, upon my word and honour I will withdraw
the allowance, and, though it would go to my heart, I'll never see you
again. You wouldn't make me unhappy, would you?"

"I'd go on my knees to serve you, and Heaven bless you," said the wife.

"Well, then, you must give me this promise." And she did. "And now,"
said he, "your mother, and Podmore, and I have been talking over
matters, and we've agreed that you may make a very good income for
yourself; though, to be sure, I wish it could have been managed any
other way; but needs must, you know. You're the finest singer in the
universe."

"La!" said Morgiana, highly delighted.

"_I_ never heard anything like you, though I'm no judge. Podmore says he
is sure you will do very well, and has no doubt you might get very good
engagements at concerts or on the stage; and as that husband will never
do any good, and you have a child to support, sing you must."

"Oh! how glad I should be to pay his debts and repay all he has done for
me," cried Mrs. Walker. "Think of his giving two hundred guineas to Mr.
Baroski to have me taught. Was not that kind of him? Do you REALLY think
I should succeed?

"There's Miss Larkins has succeeded."

"The little high-shouldered vulgar thing!" says Morgiana. "I'm sure I
ought to succeed if SHE did."

"She sing against Morgiana?" said Mrs. Crump. "I'd like to see her,
indeed! She ain't fit to snuff a candle to her."

"I dare say not," said the tailor, "though I don't understand the thing
myself: but if Morgiana can make a fortune, why shouldn't she?"

"Heaven knows we want it, Woolsey," cried Mrs. Crump. "And to see her on
the stage was always the wish of my heart:" and so it had formerly been
the wish of Morgiana; and now, with the hope of helping her husband and
child, the wish became a duty, and she fell to practising once more from
morning till night.

One of the most generous of men and tailors who ever lived now promised,
if further instruction should be considered necessary (though that he
could hardly believe possible), that he would lend Morgiana any sum
required for the payment of lessons; and accordingly she once more
betook herself, under Podmore's advice, to the singing school. Baroski's
academy was, after the passages between them, out of the question,
and she placed herself under the instruction of the excellent English
composer Sir George Thrum, whose large and awful wife, Lady Thrum,
dragon of virtue and propriety, kept watch over the master and the
pupils, and was the sternest guardian of female virtue on or off any
stage.

Morgiana came at a propitious moment. Baroski had launched Miss Larkins
under the name of Ligonier. The Ligonier was enjoying considerable
success, and was singing classical music to tolerable audiences; whereas
Miss Butts, Sir George's last pupil, had turned out a complete failure,
and the rival house was only able to make a faint opposition to the new
star with Miss M'Whirter, who, though an old favourite, had lost her
upper notes and her front teeth, and, the fact was, drew no longer.

Directly Sir George heard Mrs. Walker, he tapped Podmore, who
accompanied her, on the waistcoat, and said, "Poddy, thank you; we'll
cut the orange boy's throat with that voice." It was by the familiar
title of orange boy that the great Baroski was known among his
opponents.

"We'll crush him, Podmore," said Lady Thrum, in her deep hollow voice.
"You may stop and dine." And Podmore stayed to dinner, and ate cold
mutton, and drank Marsala with the greatest reverence for the great
English composer. The very next day Lady Thrum hired a pair of horses,
and paid a visit to Mrs. Crump and her daughter at "Sadler's Wells."

All these things were kept profoundly secret from Walker, who received
very magnanimously the allowance of two guineas a week which Woolsey
made him, and with the aid of the few shillings his wife could bring
him, managed to exist as best he might. He did not dislike gin when he
could get no claret, and the former liquor, under the name of "tape,"
used to be measured out pretty liberally in what was formerly Her
Majesty's prison of the Fleet.

Morgiana pursued her studies under Thrum, and we shall hear in the next
chapter how it was she changed her name to RAVENSWING.



CHAPTER VII. IN WHICH MORGIANA ADVANCES TOWARDS FAME AND HONOUR, AND IN
WHICH SEVERAL GREAT LITERARY CHARACTERS MAKE THEIR APPEARANCE.

"We must begin, my dear madam," said Sir George Thrum, "by unlearning
all that Mr. Baroski (of whom I do not wish to speak with the slightest
disrespect) has taught you!"

Morgiana knew that every professor says as much, and submitted to
undergo the study requisite for Sir George's system with perfect good
grace. Au fond, as I was given to understand, the methods of the two
artists were pretty similar; but as there was rivalry between them, and
continual desertion of scholars from one school to another, it was
fair for each to take all the credit he could get in the success of
any pupil. If a pupil failed, for instance, Thrum would say Baroski had
spoiled her irretrievably; while the German would regret "Dat dat yong
voman, who had a good organ, should have trown away her dime wid dat old
Drum." When one of these deserters succeeded, "Yes, yes," would either
professor cry, "I formed her; she owes her fortune to me." Both of them
thus, in future days, claimed the education of the famous Ravenswing;
and even Sir George Thrum, though he wished to ecraser the Ligonier,
pretended that her present success was his work because once she had
been brought by her mother, Mrs. Larkins, to sing for Sir George's
approval.

When the two professors met it was with the most delighted cordiality
on the part of both. "Mein lieber Herr," Thrum would say (with some
malice), "your sonata in x flat is divine." "Chevalier," Baroski would
reply, "dat andante movement in w is worthy of Beethoven. I gif you
my sacred honour," and so forth. In fact, they loved each other as
gentlemen in their profession always do.

The two famous professors conduct their academies on very opposite
principles. Baroski writes ballet music; Thrum, on the contrary, says
"he cannot but deplore the dangerous fascinations of the dance," and
writes more for Exeter Hall and Birmingham. While Baroski drives a cab
in the Park with a very suspicious Mademoiselle Leocadie, or Amenaide,
by his side, you may see Thrum walking to evening church with his lady,
and hymns are sung there of his own composition. He belongs to the
"Athenaeum Club," he goes to the Levee once a year, he does
everything that a respectable man should; and if, by the means of this
respectability, he manages to make his little trade far more profitable
than it otherwise would be, are we to quarrel with him for it?

Sir George, in fact, had every reason to be respectable. He had been a
choir-boy at Windsor, had played to the old King's violoncello, had
been intimate with him, and had received knighthood at the hand of his
revered sovereign. He had a snuff-box which His Majesty gave him, and
portraits of him and the young princes all over the house. He had also
a foreign order (no other, indeed, than the Elephant and Castle of
Kalbsbraten-Pumpernickel), conferred upon him by the Grand Duke when
here with the allied sovereigns in 1814. With this ribbon round his
neck, on gala days, and in a white waistcoat, the old gentleman looked
splendid as he moved along in a blue coat with the Windsor button, and
neat black small-clothes, and silk stockings. He lived in an old tall
dingy house, furnished in the reign of George III., his beloved master,
and not much more cheerful now than a family vault. They are awfully
funereal, those ornaments of the close of the last century--tall gloomy
horse-hair chairs, mouldy Turkey carpets with wretched druggets to guard
them, little cracked sticking-plaster miniatures of people in tours and
pigtails over high-shouldered mantelpieces, two dismal urns on each side
of a lanky sideboard, and in the midst a queer twisted receptacle
for worn-out knives with green handles. Under the sideboard stands a
cellaret that looks as if it held half a bottle of currant wine, and
a shivering plate-warmer that never could get any comfort out of the
wretched old cramped grate yonder. Don't you know in such houses the
grey gloom that hangs over the stairs, the dull-coloured old carpet that
winds its way up the same, growing thinner, duller, and more threadbare
as it mounts to the bedroom floors? There is something awful in the
bedroom of a respectable old couple of sixty-five. Think of the old
feathers, turbans, bugles, petticoats, pomatum-pots, spencers, white
satin shoes, false fronts, the old flaccid boneless stays tied up in
faded riband, the dusky fans, the old forty-years-old baby linen, the
letters of Sir George when he was young, the doll of poor Maria who died
in 1803, Frederick's first corduroy breeches, and the newspaper which
contains the account of his distinguishing himself at the siege of
Seringapatam. All these lie somewhere, damp and squeezed down into glum
old presses and wardrobes. At that glass the wife has sat many times
these fifty years; in that old morocco bed her children were born. Where
are they now? Fred the brave captain, and Charles the saucy colleger:
there hangs a drawing of him done by Mr. Beechey, and that sketch by
Cosway was the very likeness of Louisa before--

"Mr. Fitz-Boodle! for Heaven's sake come down. What are you doing in a
lady's bedroom?"

"The fact is, madam, I had no business there in life; but, having had
quite enough wine with Sir George, my thoughts had wandered upstairs
into the sanctuary of female excellence, where your Ladyship nightly
reposes. You do not sleep so well now as in old days, though there is no
patter of little steps to wake you overhead."

They call that room the nursery still, and the little wicket still hangs
at the upper stairs: it has been there for forty years--bon Dieu! Can't
you see the ghosts of little faces peering over it? I wonder whether
they get up in the night as the moonlight shines into the blank vacant
old room, and play there solemnly with little ghostly horses, and the
spirits of dolls, and tops that turn and turn but don't hum.

Once more, sir, come down to the lower storey--that is to the Morgiana
story--with which the above sentences have no more to do than this
morning's leading article in The Times; only it was at this house of
Sir George Thrum's that I met Morgiana. Sir George, in old days, had
instructed some of the female members of our family, and I recollect
cutting my fingers as a child with one of those attenuated green-handled
knives in the queer box yonder.

In those days Sir George Thrum was the first great musical teacher
of London, and the royal patronage brought him a great number of
fashionable pupils, of whom Lady Fitz-Boodle was one. It was a long long
time ago: in fact, Sir George Thrum was old enough to remember persons
who had been present at Mr. Braham's first appearance, and the old
gentleman's days of triumph had been those of Billington and Incledon,
Catalani and Madame Storace.

He was the author of several operas ("The Camel Driver," "Britons
Alarmed; or, the Siege of Bergen-op-Zoom," etc. etc.), and, of course,
of songs which had considerable success in their day, but are forgotten
now, and are as much faded and out of fashion as those old carpets which
we have described in the professor's house, and which were, doubtless,
very brilliant once. But such is the fate of carpets, of flowers, of
music, of men, and of the most admirable novels--even this story will
not be alive for many centuries. Well, well, why struggle against Fate?

But, though his heyday of fashion was gone, Sir George still held his
place among the musicians of the old school, conducted occasionally
at the Ancient Concerts and the Philharmonic, and his glees are
still favourites after public dinners, and are sung by those old
bacchanalians, in chestnut wigs, who attend for the purpose of amusing
the guests on such occasions of festivity. The great old people at
the gloomy old concerts before mentioned always pay Sir George marked
respect; and, indeed, from the old gentleman's peculiar behaviour to his
superiors, it is impossible they should not be delighted with him, so he
leads at almost every one of the concerts in the old-fashioned houses in
town.

Becomingly obsequious to his superiors, he is with the rest of the world
properly majestic, and has obtained no small success by his admirable
and undeviating respectability. Respectability has been his great card
through life; ladies can trust their daughters at Sir George Thrum's
academy. "A good musician, madam," says he to the mother of a new pupil,
"should not only have a fine ear, a good voice, and an indomitable
industry, but, above all, a faultless character--faultless, that is, as
far as our poor nature will permit. And you will remark that those young
persons with whom your lovely daughter, Miss Smith, will pursue her
musical studies, are all, in a moral point of view, as spotless as that
charming young lady. How should it be otherwise? I have been myself the
father of a family; I have been honoured with the intimacy of the wisest
and best of kings, my late sovereign George III., and I can proudly show
an example of decorum to my pupils in my Sophia. Mrs. Smith, I have the
honour of introducing to you my Lady Thrum."

The old lady would rise at this, and make a gigantic curtsey, such a
one as had begun the minuet at Ranelagh fifty years ago; and, the
introduction ended, Mrs. Smith would retire, after having seen the
portraits of the princes, his late Majesty's snuff-box, and a piece of
music which he used to play, noted by himself--Mrs. Smith, I say, would
drive back to Baker Street, delighted to think that her Frederica had
secured so eligible and respectable a master. I forgot to say that,
during the interview between Mrs. Smith and Sir George, the latter would
be called out of his study by his black servant, and my Lady Thrum would
take that opportunity of mentioning when he was knighted, and how he
got his foreign order, and deploring the sad condition of OTHER musical
professors, and the dreadful immorality which sometimes arose in
consequence of their laxness. Sir George was a good deal engaged to
dinners in the season, and if invited to dine with a nobleman, as he
might possibly be on the day when Mrs. Smith requested the honour of
his company, he would write back "that he should have had the sincerest
happiness in waiting upon Mrs. Smith in Baker Street, if, previously, my
Lord Tweedledale had not been so kind as to engage him." This letter,
of course, shown by Mrs. Smith to her friends, was received by them with
proper respect; and thus, in spite of age and new fashions, Sir George
still reigned pre-eminent for a mile round Cavendish Square. By the
young pupils of the academy he was called Sir Charles Grandison;
and, indeed, fully deserved this title on account of the indomitable
respectability of his whole actions.

It was under this gentleman that Morgiana made her debut in public life.
I do not know what arrangements may have been made between Sir George
Thrum and his pupil regarding the profits which were to accrue to the
former from engagements procured by him for the latter; but there was,
no doubt, an understanding between them. For Sir George, respectable as
he was, had the reputation of being extremely clever at a bargain; and
Lady Thrum herself, in her great high-tragedy way, could purchase a pair
of soles or select a leg of mutton with the best housekeeper in London.

When, however, Morgiana had been for some six months under his tuition,
he began, for some reason or other, to be exceedingly hospitable, and
invited his friends to numerous entertainments: at one of which, as I
have said, I had the pleasure of meeting Mrs. Walker.

Although the worthy musician's dinners were not good, the old knight
had some excellent wine in his cellar, and his arrangement of his party
deserves to be commended.

For instance, he meets me and Bob Fitz-Urse in Pall Mall, at whose
paternal house he was also a visitor. "My dear young gentlemen," says
he, "will you come and dine with a poor musical composer? I have some
Comet hock, and, what is more curious to you, perhaps, as men of wit,
one or two of the great literary characters of London whom you would
like to see--quite curiosities, my dear young friends." And we agreed to
go.

To the literary men he says: "I have a little quiet party at home: Lord
Roundtowers, the Honourable Mr. Fitz-Urse of the Life Guards, and a few
more. Can you tear yourself away from the war of wits, and take a quiet
dinner with a few mere men about town?"

The literary men instantly purchase new satin stocks and white gloves,
and are delighted to fancy themselves members of the world of fashion.
Instead of inviting twelve Royal Academicians, or a dozen authors, or
a dozen men of science to dinner, as his Grace the Duke of ---- and the
Right Honourable Sir Robert ---- are in the habit of doing once a
year, this plan of fusion is the one they should adopt. Not invite all
artists, as they would invite all farmers to a rent dinner; but they
should have a proper commingling of artists and men of the world. There
is one of the latter whose name is George Savage Fitz-Boodle, who-- But
let us return to Sir George Thrum.

Fitz-Urse and I arrive at the dismal old house, and are conducted up the
staircase by a black servant, who shouts out, "Missa Fiss-Boodle--the
HONOURABLE Missa Fiss-Urse!" It was evident that Lady Thrum had
instructed the swarthy groom of the chambers (for there is nothing
particularly honourable in my friend Fitz's face that I know of, unless
an abominable squint may be said to be so). Lady Thrum, whose figure is
something like that of the shot-tower opposite Waterloo Bridge, makes a
majestic inclination and a speech to signify her pleasure at receiving
under her roof two of the children of Sir George's best pupils. A
lady in black velvet is seated by the old fireplace, with whom a stout
gentleman in an exceedingly light coat and ornamental waistcoat is
talking very busily. "The great star of the night," whispers our host.
"Mrs. Walker, gentlemen--the RAVENSWING! She is talking to the famous
Mr. Slang, of the ---- Theatre."

"Is she a fine singer?" says Fitz-Urse. "She's a very fine woman."

"My dear young friends, you shall hear to-night! I, who have heard every
fine voice in Europe, confidently pledge my respectability that the
Ravenswing is equal to them all. She has the graces, sir, of a Venus
with the mind of a Muse. She is a siren, sir, without the dangerous
qualities of one. She is hallowed, sir, by her misfortunes as by her
genius; and I am proud to think that my instructions have been the means
of developing the wondrous qualities that were latent within her until
now."

"You don't say so!" says gobemouche Fitz-Urse.

Having thus indoctrinated Mr. Fitz-Urse, Sir George takes another of his
guests, and proceeds to work upon him. "My dear Mr. Bludyer, how do you
do? Mr. Fitz-Boodle, Mr. Bludyer, the brilliant and accomplished
wit, whose sallies in the Tomahawk delight us every Saturday. Nay, no
blushes, my dear sir; you are very wicked, but oh! SO pleasant. Well,
Mr. Bludyer, I am glad to see you, sir, and hope you will have
a favourable opinion of our genius, sir. As I was saying to Mr.
Fitz-Boodle, she has the graces of a Venus with the mind of a Muse. She
is a siren, without the dangerous qualities of one," etc. This
little speech was made to half-a-dozen persons in the course of the
evening--persons, for the most part, connected with the public journals
or the theatrical world. There was Mr. Squinny, the editor of the
Flowers of Fashion; Mr. Desmond Mulligan, the poet, and reporter for
a morning paper; and other worthies of their calling. For though
Sir George is a respectable man, and as high-minded and moral an old
gentleman as ever wore knee-buckles, he does not neglect the little arts
of popularity, and can condescend to receive very queer company if need
be.

For instance, at the dinner-party at which I had the honour of
assisting, and at which, on the right hand of Lady Thrum, sat the oblige
nobleman, whom the Thrums were a great deal too wise to omit (the sight
of a lord does good to us commoners, or why else should we be so anxious
to have one?). In the second place of honour, and on her ladyship's left
hand, sat Mr. Slang, the manager of one of the theatres; a gentleman
whom my Lady Thrum would scarcely, but for a great necessity's sake,
have been induced to invite to her table. He had the honour of leading
Mrs. Walker to dinner, who looked splendid in black velvet and turban,
full of health and smiles.

Lord Roundtowers is an old gentleman who has been at the theatres five
times a week for these fifty years, a living dictionary of the stage,
recollecting every actor and actress who has appeared upon it for half a
century. He perfectly well remembered Miss Delancy in Morgiana; he knew
what had become of Ali Baba, and how Cassim had left the stage, and was
now the keeper of a public-house. All this store of knowledge he
kept quietly to himself, or only delivered in confidence to his next
neighbour in the intervals of the banquet, which he enjoys prodigiously.
He lives at an hotel: if not invited to dine, eats a mutton-chop
very humbly at his club, and finishes his evening after the play at
Crockford's, whither he goes not for the sake of the play, but of the
supper there. He is described in the Court Guide as of "Simmer's Hotel,"
and of Roundtowers, county Cork. It is said that the round towers really
exist. But he has not been in Ireland since the rebellion; and his
property is so hampered with ancestral mortgages, and rent-charges, and
annuities, that his income is barely sufficient to provide the modest
mutton-chop before alluded to. He has, any time these fifty years, lived
in the wickedest company in London, and is, withal, as harmless, mild,
good-natured, innocent an old gentleman as can readily be seen.

"Roundy," shouts the elegant Mr. Slang, across the table, with a voice
which makes Lady Thrum shudder, "Tuff, a glass of wine."

My Lord replies meekly, "Mr. Slang, I shall have very much pleasure.
What shall it be?"

"There is Madeira near you, my Lord," says my Lady, pointing to a tall
thin decanter of the fashion of the year.

"Madeira! Marsala, by Jove, your Ladyship means!" shouts Mr. Slang. "No,
no, old birds are not caught with chaff. Thrum, old boy, let's have some
of your Comet hock."

"My Lady Thrum, I believe that IS Marsala," says the knight, blushing a
little, in reply to a question from his Sophia. "Ajax, the hock to Mr.
Slang."

"I'm in that," yells Bludyer from the end of the table. "My Lord, I'll
join you."

"Mr. ----, I beg your pardon--I shall be very happy to take wine with
you, sir."

"It is Mr. Bludyer, the celebrated newspaper writer," whispers Lady
Thrum.

"Bludyer, Bludyer? A very clever man, I dare say. He has a very loud
voice, and reminds me of Brett. Does your Ladyship remember Brett, who
played the 'Fathers' at the Haymarket in 1802?"

"What an old stupid Roundtowers is!" says Slang, archly, nudging Mrs.
Walker in the side. "How's Walker, eh?"

"My husband is in the country," replied Mrs. Walker, hesitatingly.

"Gammon! _I_ know where he is! Law bless you!--don't blush. I've been
there myself a dozen times. We were talking about quod, Lady Thrum. Were
you ever in college?"

"I was at the Commemoration at Oxford in 1814, when the sovereigns were
there, and at Cambridge when Sir George received his degree of Doctor of
Music."

"Laud, Laud, THAT'S not the college WE mean."

"There is also the college in Gower Street, where my grandson--"

"This is the college in QUEER STREET, ma'am, haw, haw! Mulligan, you
divvle (in an Irish accent), a glass of wine with you. Wine, here, you
waiter! What's your name, you black nigger? 'Possum up a gum-tree, eh?
Fill him up. Dere he go" (imitating the Mandingo manner of speaking
English)

In this agreeable way would Mr. Slang rattle on, speedily making himself
the centre of the conversation, and addressing graceful familiarities to
all the gentlemen and ladies round him.

It was good to see how the little knight, the most moral and calm of
men, was compelled to receive Mr. Slang's stories and the frightened air
with which, at the conclusion of one of them, he would venture upon
a commendatory grin. His lady, on her part too, had been laboriously
civil; and, on the occasion on which I had the honour of meeting this
gentleman and Mrs. Walker, it was the latter who gave the signal for
withdrawing to the lady of the house, by saying, "I think, Lady Thrum,
it is quite time for us to retire." Some exquisite joke of Mr. Slang's
was the cause of this abrupt disappearance. But, as they went upstairs
to the drawing-room, Lady Thrum took occasion to say, "My dear, in
the course of your profession you will have to submit to many such
familiarities on the part of persons of low breeding, such as I fear Mr.
Slang is. But let me caution you against giving way to your temper
as you did. Did you not perceive that _I_ never allowed him to see my
inward dissatisfaction? And I make it a particular point that you should
be very civil to him to-night. Your interests--our interests depend upon
it."

"And are my interests to make me civil to a wretch like that?"

"Mrs. Walker, would you wish to give lessons in morality and behaviour
to Lady Thrum?" said the old lady, drawing herself up with great
dignity. It was evident that she had a very strong desire indeed to
conciliate Mr. Slang; and hence I have no doubt that Sir George was to
have a considerable share of Morgiana's earnings.

Mr. Bludyer, the famous editor of the Tomahawk, whose jokes Sir George
pretended to admire so much (Sir George who never made a joke in his
life), was a press bravo of considerable talent and no principle, and
who, to use his own words, would "back himself for a slashing article
against any man in England!" He would not only write, but fight on a
pinch; was a good scholar, and as savage in his manner as with his
pen. Mr. Squinny is of exactly the opposite school, as delicate as
milk-and-water, harmless in his habits, fond of the flute when the state
of his chest will allow him, a great practiser of waltzing and dancing
in general, and in his journal mildly malicious. He never goes beyond
the bounds of politeness, but manages to insinuate a great deal that is
disagreeable to an author in the course of twenty lines of criticism.
Personally he is quite respectable, and lives with two maiden aunts at
Brompton. Nobody, on the contrary, knows where Mr. Bludyer lives. He has
houses of call, mysterious taverns, where he may be found at particular
hours by those who need him, and where panting publishers are in the
habit of hunting him up. For a bottle of wine and a guinea he will write
a page of praise or abuse of any man living, or on any subject, or on
any line of politics. "Hang it, sir!" says he, "pay me enough and I will
write down my own father!" According to the state of his credit, he
is dressed either almost in rags or else in the extremest flush of the
fashion. With the latter attire he puts on a haughty and aristocratic
air, and would slap a duke on the shoulder. If there is one thing more
dangerous than to refuse to lend him a sum of money when he asks for it,
it is to lend it to him; for he never pays, and never pardons a man to
whom he owes. "Walker refused to cash a bill for me," he had been heard
to say, "and I'll do for his wife when she comes out on the stage!" Mrs.
Walker and Sir George Thrum were in an agony about the Tomahawk; hence
the latter's invitation to Mr. Bludyer. Sir George was in a great tremor
about the Flowers of Fashion, hence his invitation to Mr. Squinny. Mr.
Squinny was introduced to Lord Roundtowers and Mr. Fitz-Urse as one of
the most delightful and talented of our young men of genius; and Fitz,
who believes everything anyone tells him, was quite pleased to have
the honour of sitting near the live editor of a paper. I have reason to
think that Mr. Squinny himself was no less delighted: I saw him giving
his card to Fitz-Urse at the end of the second course.

No particular attention was paid to Mr. Desmond Mulligan. Political
enthusiasm is his forte. He lives and writes in a rapture. He is,
of course, a member of an inn of court, and greatly addicted to
after-dinner speaking as a preparation for the bar, where as a young man
of genius he hopes one day to shine. He is almost the only man to whom
Bludyer is civil; for, if the latter will fight doggedly when there is
a necessity for so doing, the former fights like an Irishman, and has a
pleasure in it. He has been "on the ground" I don't know how many
times, and quitted his country on account of a quarrel with Government
regarding certain articles published by him in the Phoenix newspaper.
With the third bottle, he becomes overpoweringly great on the wrongs
of Ireland, and at that period generally volunteers a couple or more of
Irish melodies, selecting the most melancholy in the collection. At five
in the afternoon, you are sure to see him about the House of Commons,
and he knows the "Reform Club" (he calls it the Refawrum) as well as if
he were a member. It is curious for the contemplative mind to mark those
mysterious hangers-on of Irish members of Parliament--strange runners
and aides-de-camp which all the honourable gentlemen appear to possess.
Desmond, in his political capacity, is one of these, and besides his
calling as reporter to a newspaper, is "our well-informed correspondent"
of that famous Munster paper, the Green Flag of Skibbereen.

With Mr. Mulligan's qualities and history I only became subsequently
acquainted. On the present evening he made but a brief stay at the
dinner-table, being compelled by his professional duties to attend the
House of Commons.

The above formed the party with whom I had the honour to dine. What
other repasts Sir George Thrum may have given, what assemblies of men
of mere science he may have invited to give their opinion regarding his
prodigy, what other editors of papers he may have pacified or rendered
favourable, who knows? On the present occasion, we did not quit the
dinner-table until Mr. Slang the manager was considerably excited
by wine, and music had been heard for some time in the drawing-room
overhead during our absence. An addition had been made to the Thrum
party by the arrival of several persons to spend the evening,--a man to
play on the violin between the singing, a youth to play on the piano,
Miss Horsman to sing with Mrs. Walker, and other scientific characters.
In a corner sat a red-faced old lady, of whom the mistress of the
mansion took little notice; and a gentleman with a royal button, who
blushed and looked exceedingly modest.

"Hang me!" says Mr. Bludyer, who had perfectly good reasons for
recognising Mr Woolsey, and who on this day chose to assume his
aristocratic air; "there's a tailor in the room! What do they mean by
asking ME to meet tradesmen?"

"Delancy, my dear," cries Slang, entering the room with a reel, "how's
your precious health? Give us your hand! When ARE we to be married? Make
room for me on the sofa, that's a duck!"

"Get along, Slang," says Mrs. Crump, addressed by the manager by her
maiden name (artists generally drop the title of honour which people
adopt in the world, and call each other by their simple surnames)--"get
along, Slang, or I'll tell Mrs. S.!" The enterprising manager replies by
sportively striking Mrs. Crump on the side a blow which causes a great
giggle from the lady insulted, and a most good-humoured threat to box
Slang's ears. I fear very much that Morgiana's mother thought Mr. Slang
an exceedingly gentlemanlike and agreeable person; besides, she was
eager to have his good opinion of Mrs. Walker's singing.

The manager stretched himself out with much gracefulness on the sofa,
supporting two little dumpy legs encased in varnished boots on a chair.

"Ajax, some tea to Mr. Slang," said my Lady, looking towards that
gentleman with a countenance expressive of some alarm, I thought.

"That's right, Ajax, my black prince!" exclaimed Slang when the negro
brought the required refreshment; "and now I suppose you'll be wanted in
the orchestra yonder. Don't Ajax play the cymbals, Sir George?"

"Ha, ha, ha! very good--capital!" answered the knight, exceedingly
frightened; "but ours is not a MILITARY band. Miss Horsman, Mr. Craw,
my dear Mrs. Ravenswing, shall we begin the trio? Silence, gentlemen, if
you please; it is a little piece from my opera of the 'Brigand's Bride.'
Miss Horsman takes the Page's part, Mr. Craw is Stiletto the Brigand, my
accomplished pupil is the Bride;" and the music began.

          "THE BRIDE.

     "My heart with joy is beating,
        My eyes with tears are dim;

          "THE PAGE.

     "Her heart with joy is beating
        Her eyes are fixed on him;

          "THE BRIGAND.

     "My heart with rage is beating,
        In blood my eye-balls swim!"

What may have been the merits of the music or the singing, I, of course,
cannot guess. Lady Thrum sat opposite the tea-cups, nodding her head
and beating time very gravely. Lord Roundtowers, by her side, nodded his
head too, for awhile, and then fell asleep. I should have done the same
but for the manager, whose actions were worth of remark. He sang with
all the three singers, and a great deal louder than any of them; he
shouted bravo! or hissed as he thought proper; he criticised all the
points of Mrs. Walker's person. "She'll do, Crump, she'll do--a splendid
arm--you'll see her eyes in the shilling gallery! What sort of a
foot has she? She's five feet three, if she's an inch! Bravo--slap
up--capital--hurrah!" And he concluded by saying, with the aid of the
Ravenswing, he would put Ligonier's nose out of Joint!

The enthusiasm of Mr. Slang almost reconciled Lady Thrum to the
abruptness of his manners, and even caused Sir George to forget that
his chorus had been interrupted by the obstreperous familiarity of the
manager.

"And what do YOU think, Mr. Bludyer," said the tailor, delighted that
his protegee should be thus winning all hearts: "isn't Mrs. Walker a
tip-top singer, eh, sir?"

"I think she's a very bad one, Mr. Woolsey," said the illustrious
author, wishing to abbreviate all communications with a tailor to whom
he owed forty pounds.

"Then, sir," says Mr. Woolsey, fiercely, "I'll--I'll thank you to pay me
my little bill!"

It is true there was no connection between Mrs. Walker's singing and
Woolsey's little bill; that the "THEN, sir," was perfectly illogical on
Woolsey's part; but it was a very happy hit for the future fortunes of
Mrs. Walker. Who knows what would have come of her debut but for that
"Then, sir," and whether a "smashing article" from the Tomahawk might
not have ruined her for ever?

"Are you a relation of Mrs. Walker's?" said Mr. Bludyer, in reply to the
angry tailor.

"What's that to you, whether I am or not?" replied Woolsey, fiercely.
"But I'm the friend of Mrs. Walker, sir; proud am I to say so, sir; and,
as the poet says, sir, 'a little learning's a dangerous thing,' sir;
and I think a man who don't pay his bills may keep his tongue quiet at
least, sir, and not abuse a lady, sir, whom everybody else praises,
sir. You shan't humbug ME any more, sir; you shall hear from my attorney
to-morrow, so mark that!"

"Hush, my dear Mr. Woolsey," cried the literary man, "don't make a
noise; come into this window: is Mrs. Walker REALLY a friend of yours?"

"I've told you so, sir."

"Well, in that case, I shall do my utmost to serve her and, look you,
Woolsey, any article you choose to send about her to the Tomahawk I
promise you I'll put in."

"WILL you, though? then we'll say nothing about the little bill."

"You may do on that point," answered Bludyer, haughtily, "exactly as
you please. I am not to be frightened from my duty, mind that; and mind,
too, that I can write a slashing article better than any man in England:
I could crush her by ten lines."

The tables were now turned, and it was Woolsey's turn to be alarmed.

"Pooh! pooh! I WAS angry," said he, "because you abuse Mrs. Walker,
who's an angel on earth; but I'm very willing to apologise. I
say--come--let me take your measure for some new clothes, eh! Mr. B.?"

"I'll come to your shop," answered the literary man, quite appeased.
"Silence! they're beginning another song."

The songs, which I don't attempt to describe (and, upon my word and
honour, as far as I can understand matters, I believe to this day that
Mrs. Walker was only an ordinary singer)--the songs lasted a great deal
longer than I liked; but I was nailed, as it were, to the spot, having
agreed to sup at Knightsbridge barracks with Fitz-Urse, whose carriage
was ordered at eleven o'clock.

"My dear Mr. Fitz-Boodle," said our old host to me, "you can do me the
greatest service in the world."

"Speak, sir!" said I.

"Will you ask your honourable and gallant friend, the Captain, to drive
home Mr. Squinny to Brompton?"

"Can't Mr. Squinny get a cab?"

Sir George looked particularly arch. "Generalship, my dear young
friend--a little harmless generalship. Mr. Squinny will not give much
for MY opinion of my pupil, but he will value very highly the opinion of
the Honourable Mr. FitzUrse."

For a moral man, was not the little knight a clever fellow? He had
bought Mr. Squinny for a dinner worth ten shillings, and for a ride in
a carriage with a lord's son. Squinny was carried to Brompton, and set
down at his aunts' door, delighted with his new friends, and exceedingly
sick with a cigar they had made him smoke.



CHAPTER VIII. IN WHICH MR. WALKER SHOWS GREAT PRUDENCE AND FORBEARANCE.

The describing of all these persons does not advance Morgiana's story
much. But, perhaps, some country readers are not acquainted with the
class of persons by whose printed opinions they are guided, and are
simple enough to imagine that mere merit will make a reputation on the
stage or elsewhere. The making of a theatrical success is a much more
complicated and curious thing than such persons fancy it to be. Immense
are the pains taken to get a good word from Mr. This of the Star, or Mr.
That of the Courier, to propitiate the favour of the critic of the day,
and get the editors of the metropolis into a good humour,--above all, to
have the name of the person to be puffed perpetually before the public.
Artists cannot be advertised like Macassar oil or blacking, and they
want it to the full as much; hence endless ingenuity must be practised
in order to keep the popular attention awake. Suppose a great actor
moves from London to Windsor, the Brentford Champion must state that
"Yesterday Mr. Blazes and suite passed rapidly through our city; the
celebrated comedian is engaged, we hear, at Windsor, to give some of his
inimitable readings of our great national bard to the MOST ILLUSTRIOUS
AUDIENCE in the realm." This piece of intelligence the Hammersmith
Observer will question the next week, as thus:--"A contemporary, the
Brentford Champion, says that Blazes is engaged to give Shakspearian
readings at Windsor to "the most illustrious audience in the realm." We
question this fact very much. We would, indeed, that it were true; but
the MOST ILLUSTRIOUS AUDIENCE in the realm prefer FOREIGN melodies to
THE NATIVE WOOD-NOTES WILD of the sweet song-bird of Avon. Mr. Blazes
is simply gone to Eton, where his son, Master Massinger Blazes, is
suffering, we regret to hear, under a severe attack of the chicken-pox.
This complaint (incident to youth) has raged, we understand, with
frightful virulence in Eton School."

And if, after the above paragraphs, some London paper chooses to attack
the folly of the provincial press, which talks of Mr. Blazes, and
chronicles his movements, as if he were a crowned head, what harm is
done? Blazes can write in his own name to the London journal, and say
that it is not HIS fault if provincial journals choose to chronicle
his movements, and that he was far from wishing that the afflictions of
those who are dear to him should form the subject of public comment,
and be held up to public ridicule. "We had no intention of hurting the
feelings of an estimable public servant," writes the editor; "and our
remarks on the chicken-pox were general, not personal. We sincerely
trust that Master Massinger Blazes has recovered from that complaint,
and that he may pass through the measles, the whooping-cough, the fourth
form, and all other diseases to which youth is subject, with comfort to
himself, and credit to his parents and teachers." At his next appearance
on the stage after this controversy, a British public calls for Blazes
three times after the play; and somehow there is sure to be someone with
a laurel-wreath in a stage-box, who flings that chaplet at the inspired
artist's feet.

I don't know how it was, but before the debut of Morgiana, the English
press began to heave and throb in a convulsive manner, as if indicative
of the near birth of some great thing. For instance, you read in one
paper,--

"Anecdote of Karl Maria Von Weber.--When the author of 'Oberon' was in
England, he was invited by a noble duke to dinner, and some of the most
celebrated of our artists were assembled to meet him. The signal being
given to descend to the salle-a-manger, the German composer was invited
by his noble host (a bachelor) to lead the way. 'Is it not the fashion
in your country,' said he, simply, 'for the man of the first eminence to
take the first place? Here is one whose genius entitles him to be first
ANYWHERE.' And, so saying, he pointed to our admirable English composer,
Sir George Thrum. The two musicians were friends to the last, and Sir
George has still the identical piece of rosin which the author of the
'Freischutz' gave him."--The Moon (morning paper), June 2.

"George III. a composer.--Sir George Thrum has in his possession the
score of an air, the words from 'Samson Agonistes,' an autograph of the
late revered monarch. We hear that that excellent composer has in store
for us not only an opera, but a pupil, with whose transcendent merits
the elite of our aristocracy are already familiar."--Ibid., June 5.

"Music with a Vengeance.--The march to the sound of which the 49th and
75th regiments rushed up the breach of Badajoz was the celebrated air
from 'Britons Alarmed; or, The Siege of Bergen-op-Zoom,' by our famous
English composer, Sir George Thrum. Marshal Davoust said that the
French line never stood when that air was performed to the charge of the
bayonet. We hear the veteran musician has an opera now about to
appear, and have no doubt that Old England will now, as then, show its
superiority over ALL foreign opponents."--Albion.

"We have been accused of preferring the produit of the etranger to the
talent of our own native shores; but those who speak so, little know
us. We are fanatici per la musica wherever it be, and welcome merit dans
chaque pays du monde. What do we say? Le merite n'a point de pays, as
Napoleon said; and Sir George Thrum (Chevalier de l'Ordre de l'Elephant
et Chateau de Kalbsbraten-Pumpernickel,) is a maestro whose fame
appartient a l'Europe.

"We have just heard the lovely eleve, whose rare qualities the Cavaliere
has brought to perfection,--we have heard THE RAVENSWING (pourquoi
cacher un nom que demain un monde va saluer?), and a creature more
beautiful and gifted never bloomed before dans nos climats. She sang
the delicious duet of the 'Nabucodonosore,' with Count Pizzicato, with
a bellezza, a grandezza, a raggio, that excited in the bosom of the
audience a corresponding furore: her scherzando was exquisite, though we
confess we thought the concluding fioritura in the passage in Y flat a
leetle, a very leetle sforzata. Surely the words,

     'Giorno d'orrore,
      Delire, dolore,
      Nabucodonosore,'

should be given andante, and not con strepito: but this is a faute bien
legere in the midst of such unrivalled excellence, and only mentioned
here that we may have SOMETHING to criticise.

"We hear that the enterprising impresario of one of the royal theatres
has made an engagement with the Diva; and, if we have a regret, it is
that she should be compelled to sing in the unfortunate language of our
rude northern clime, which does not preter itself near so well to the
bocca of the cantatrice as do the mellifluous accents of the Lingua
Toscana, the langue par excellence of song.

"The Ravenswing's voice is a magnificent contra-basso of nine octaves,"
etc.--Flowers of Fashion, June 10.

"Old Thrum, the composer, is bringing out an opera and a pupil. The
opera is good, the pupil first-rate. The opera will do much more than
compete with the infernal twaddle and disgusting slip-slop of Donizetti,
and the milk-and-water fools who imitate him: it will (and we ask the
readers of the Tomahawk, were we EVER mistaken?) surpass all these; it
is GOOD, of downright English stuff. The airs are fresh and pleasing,
the choruses large and noble, the instrumentation solid and rich, the
music is carefully written. We wish old Thrum and his opera well.

"His pupil is a SURE CARD, a splendid woman, and a splendid singer. She
is so handsome that she might sing as much out of tune as Miss Ligonier,
and the public would forgive her; and sings so well, that were she as
ugly as the aforesaid Ligonier, the audience would listen to her. The
Ravenswing, that is her fantastical theatrical name (her real name is
the same with that of a notorious scoundrel in the Fleet, who invented
the Panama swindle, the Pontine Marshes' swindle, the Soap swindle--HOW
ARE YOU OFF FOR SOAP NOW, Mr. W-lk-r?)--the Ravenswing, we say, will do.
Slang has engaged her at thirty guineas per week, and she appears next
month in Thrum's opera, of which the words are written by a great ass
with some talent--we mean Mr. Mulligan.

"There is a foreign fool in the Flowers of Fashion who is doing his best
to disgust the public by his filthy flattery. It is enough to make
one sick. Why is the foreign beast not kicked out of the paper?"--The
Tomahawk, June 17.

The first three "anecdotes" were supplied by Mulligan to his paper,
with many others which need not here be repeated: he kept them up
with amazing energy and variety. Anecdotes of Sir George Thrum met you
unexpectedly in queer corners of country papers: puffs of the English
school of music appeared perpetually in "Notices to Correspondents" in
the Sunday prints, some of which Mr. Slang commanded, and in others over
which the indefatigable Mulligan had a control. This youth was the soul
of the little conspiracy for raising Morgiana into fame: and humble as
he is, and great and respectable as is Sir George Thrum, it is my belief
that the Ravenswing would never have been the Ravenswing she is but for
the ingenuity and energy of the honest Hibernian reporter.

It is only the business of the great man who writes the leading articles
which appear in the large type of the daily papers to compose those
astonishing pieces of eloquence; the other parts of the paper are
left to the ingenuity of the sub-editor, whose duty it is to select
paragraphs, reject or receive horrid accidents, police reports,
etc.; with which, occupied as he is in the exercise of his tremendous
functions, the editor himself cannot be expected to meddle. The fate
of Europe is his province; the rise and fall of empires, and the great
questions of State demand the editor's attention: the humble puff,
the paragraph about the last murder, or the state of the crops, or the
sewers in Chancery Lane, is confided to the care of the sub; and it
is curious to see what a prodigious number of Irishmen exist among the
sub-editors of London. When the Liberator enumerates the services of his
countrymen, how the battle of Fontenoy was won by the Irish Brigade, how
the battle of Waterloo would have been lost but for the Irish regiments,
and enumerates other acts for which we are indebted to Milesian heroism
and genius--he ought at least to mention the Irish brigade of the press,
and the amazing services they do to this country.

The truth is, the Irish reporters and soldiers appear to do their duty
right well; and my friend Mr. Mulligan is one of the former. Having the
interests of his opera and the Ravenswing strongly at heart, and being
amongst his brethren an exceedingly popular fellow, he managed matters
so that never a day passed but some paragraph appeared somewhere
regarding the new singer, in whom, for their countryman's sake, all his
brothers and sub-editors felt an interest.

These puffs, destined to make known to all the world the merits of
the Ravenswing, of course had an effect upon a gentleman very closely
connected with that lady, the respectable prisoner in the Fleet, Captain
Walker. As long as he received his weekly two guineas from Mr. Woolsey,
and the occasional half-crowns which his wife could spare in her almost
daily visits to him, he had never troubled himself to inquire what her
pursuits were, and had allowed her (though the worthy woman longed with
all her might to betray herself) to keep her secret. He was far from
thinking, indeed, that his wife would prove such a treasure to him.

But when the voice of fame and the columns of the public journals
brought him each day some new story regarding the merits, genius, and
beauty of the Ravenswing; when rumours reached him that she was the
favourite pupil of Sir George Thrum; when she brought him five guineas
after singing at the "Philharmonic" (other five the good soul had spent
in purchasing some smart new cockades, hats, cloaks, and laces, for her
little son); when, finally, it was said that Slang, the great manager,
offered her an engagement at thirty guineas per week, Mr. Walker became
exceedingly interested in his wife's proceedings, of which he demanded
from her the fullest explanation.

Using his marital authority, he absolutely forbade Mrs. Walker's
appearance on the public stage; he wrote to Sir George Thrum a letter
expressive of his highest indignation that negotiations so important
should ever have been commenced without his authorisation; and he wrote
to his dear Slang (for these gentlemen were very intimate, and in the
course of his transactions as an agent Mr. W. had had many dealings
with Mr. S.) asking his dear Slang whether the latter thought his friend
Walker would be so green as to allow his wife to appear on the stage,
and he remain in prison with all his debts on his head?

And it was a curious thing now to behold how eager those very creditors
who but yesterday (and with perfect correctness) had denounced Mr.
Walker as a swindler; who had refused to come to any composition with
him, and had sworn never to release him; how they on a sudden became
quite eager to come to an arrangement with him, and offered, nay, begged
and prayed him to go free,--only giving them his own and Mrs. Walker's
acknowledgment of their debt, with a promise that a part of the lady's
salary should be devoted to the payment of the claim.

"The lady's salary!" said Mr. Walker, indignantly, to these gentlemen
and their attorneys. "Do you suppose I will allow Mrs. Walker to go on
the stage?--do you suppose I am such a fool as to sign bills to the full
amount of these claims against me, when in a few months more I can walk
out of prison without paying a shilling? Gentlemen, you take Howard
Walker for an idiot. I like the Fleet, and rather than pay I'll stay
here for these ten years."

In other words, it was the Captain's determination to make some
advantageous bargain for himself with his creditors and the gentlemen
who were interested in bringing forward Mrs. Walker on the stage. And
who can say that in so determining he did not act with laudable prudence
and justice?

"You do not, surely, consider, my very dear sir, that half the amount of
Mrs. Walker's salaries is too much for my immense trouble and pains in
teaching her?" cried Sir George Thrum (who, in reply to Walker's note,
thought it most prudent to wait personally on that gentleman). "Remember
that I am the first master in England; that I have the best interest in
England; that I can bring her out at the Palace, and at every concert
and musical festival in England; that I am obliged to teach her every
single note that she utters; and that without me she could no more sing
a song than her little baby could walk without its nurse."

"I believe about half what you say," said Mr. Walker.

"My dear Captain Walker! would you question my integrity? Who was it
that made Mrs. Millington's fortune,--the celebrated Mrs. Millington,
who has now got a hundred thousand pounds? Who was it that brought out
the finest tenor in Europe, Poppleton? Ask the musical world, ask
those great artists themselves, and they will tell you they owe their
reputation, their fortune, to Sir George Thrum."

"It is very likely," replied the Captain, coolly. "You ARE a good
master, I dare say, Sir George; but I am not going to article Mrs.
Walker to you for three years, and sign her articles in the Fleet. Mrs.
Walker shan't sing till I'm a free man, that's flat: if I stay here till
you're dead she shan't."

"Gracious powers, sir!" exclaimed Sir George, "do you expect me to pay
your debts?"

"Yes, old boy," answered the Captain, "and to give me something handsome
in hand, too; and that's my ultimatum: and so I wish you good morning,
for I'm engaged to play a match at tennis below."

This little interview exceedingly frightened the worthy knight, who
went home to his lady in a delirious state of alarm occasioned by the
audacity of Captain Walker.

Mr. Slang's interview with him was scarcely more satisfactory. He
owed, he said, four thousand pounds. His creditors might be brought to
compound for five shillings in the pound. He would not consent to allow
his wife to make a single engagement until the creditors were satisfied,
and until he had a handsome sum in hand to begin the world with. "Unless
my wife comes out, you'll be in the Gazette yourself, you know you will.
So you may take her or leave her, as you think fit."

"Let her sing one night as a trial," said Mr. Slang.

"If she sings one night, the creditors will want their money in full,"
replied the Captain. "I shan't let her labour, poor thing, for the
profit of those scoundrels!" added the prisoner, with much feeling. And
Slang left him with a much greater respect for Walker than he had ever
before possessed. He was struck with the gallantry of the man who could
triumph over misfortunes, nay, make misfortune itself an engine of good
luck.

Mrs. Walker was instructed instantly to have a severe sore throat. The
journals in Mr. Slang's interest deplored this illness pathetically;
while the papers in the interest of the opposition theatre magnified it
with great malice. "The new singer," said one, "the great wonder which
Slang promised us, is as hoarse as a RAVEN!" "Doctor Thorax pronounces,"
wrote another paper, "that the quinsy, which has suddenly prostrated
Mrs. Ravenswing, whose singing at the Philharmonic, previous to her
appearance at the 'T.R----,' excited so much applause, has destroyed the
lady's voice for ever. We luckily need no other prima donna, when that
place, as nightly thousands acknowledge, is held by Miss Ligonier." The
Looker-on said, "That although some well-informed contemporaries had
declared Mrs. W. Ravenswing's complaint to be a quinsy, others, on
whose authority they could equally rely, had pronounced it to be a
consumption. At all events, she was in an exceedingly dangerous state;
from which, though we do not expect, we heartily trust she may recover.
Opinions differ as to the merits of this lady, some saying that she was
altogether inferior to Miss Ligonier, while other connoisseurs declare
the latter lady to be by no means so accomplished a person. This point,
we fear," continued the Looker-on, "can never now be settled; unless,
which we fear is improbable, Mrs. Ravenswing should ever so far recover
as to be able to make her debut; and even then, the new singer will
not have a fair chance unless her voice and strength shall be fully
restored. This information, which we have from exclusive resources, may
be relied on," concluded the Looker-on, "as authentic."

It was Mr. Walker himself, that artful and audacious Fleet prisoner, who
concocted those very paragraphs against his wife's health which appeared
in the journals of the Ligonier party. The partisans of that lady were
delighted, the creditors of Mr. Walker astounded, at reading them.
Even Sir George Thrum was taken in, and came to the Fleet prison in
considerable alarm.

"Mum's the word, my good sir!" said Mr. Walker. "Now is the time to make
arrangements with the creditors."

Well, these arrangements were finally made. It does not matter how many
shillings in the pound satisfied the rapacious creditors of Morgiana's
husband. But it is certain that her voice returned to her all of a
sudden upon the Captain's release. The papers of the Mulligan faction
again trumpeted her perfections; the agreement with Mr. Slang was
concluded; that with Sir George Thrum the great composer satisfactorily
arranged; and the new opera underlined in immense capitals in the
bills, and put in rehearsal with immense expenditure on the part of the
scene-painter and costumier.

Need we tell with what triumphant success the "Brigand's Bride" was
received? All the Irish sub-editors the next morning took care to have
such an account of it as made Miss Ligonier and Baroski die with envy.
All the reporters who could spare time were in the boxes to support
their friend's work. All the journeymen tailors of the establishment of
Linsey, Woolsey, and Co. had pit tickets given to them, and applauded
with all their might. All Mr. Walker's friends of the "Regent Club"
lined the side-boxes with white kid gloves; and in a little box by
themselves sat Mrs. Crump and Mr. Woolsey, a great deal too much
agitated to applaud--so agitated, that Woolsey even forgot to fling down
the bouquet he had brought for the Ravenswing.

But there was no lack of those horticultural ornaments. The theatre
servants wheeled away a wheelbarrow-full (which were flung on the stage
the next night over again); and Morgiana, blushing, panting, weeping,
was led off by Mr. Poppleton, the eminent tenor, who had crowned her
with one of the most conspicuous of the chaplets.

Here she flew to her husband, and flung her arms round his neck. He was
flirting behind the side-scenes with Mademoiselle Flicflac, who had
been dancing in the divertissement; and was probably the only man in
the theatre of those who witnessed the embrace that did not care for it.
Even Slang was affected, and said with perfect sincerity that he wished
he had been in Walker's place. The manager's fortune was made, at least
for the season. He acknowledged so much to Walker, who took a week's
salary for his wife in advance that very night.

There was, as usual, a grand supper in the green-room. The terrible Mr.
Bludyer appeared in a new coat of the well-known Woolsey cut, and the
little tailor himself and Mrs. Crump were not the least happy of the
party. But when the Ravenswing took Woolsey's hand, and said she never
would have been there but for him, Mr. Walker looked very grave,
and hinted to her that she must not, in her position, encourage the
attentions of persons in that rank of life. "I shall pay," said he,
proudly, "every farthing that is owing to Mr. Woolsey, and shall employ
him for the future. But you understand, my love, that one cannot at
one's own table receive one's own tailor."

Slang proposed Morgiana's health in a tremendous speech, which elicited
cheers, and laughter, and sobs, such as only managers have the art of
drawing from the theatrical gentlemen and ladies in their employ. It
was observed, especially among the chorus-singers at the bottom of the
table, that their emotion was intense. They had a meeting the next day
and voted a piece of plate to Adolphus Slang, Esquire, for his eminent
services in the cause of the drama.

Walker returned thanks for his lady. That was, he said, the proudest
moment of his life. He was proud to think that he had educated her for
the stage, happy to think that his sufferings had not been in vain, and
that his exertions in her behalf were crowned with full success. In her
name and his own he thanked the company, and sat down, and was once more
particularly attentive to Mademoiselle Flicflac.

Then came an oration from Sir George Thrum, in reply to Slang's toast
to HIM. It was very much to the same effect as the speech by Walker,
the two gentlemen attributing to themselves individually the merit of
bringing out Mrs. Walker. He concluded by stating that he should always
hold Mrs. Walker as the daughter of his heart, and to the last moment of
his life should love and cherish her. It is certain that Sir George was
exceedingly elated that night, and would have been scolded by his lady
on his return home, but for the triumph of the evening.

Mulligan's speech of thanks, as author of the "Brigand's Bride," was, it
must be confessed, extremely tedious. It seemed there would be no end
to it; when he got upon the subject of Ireland especially, which somehow
was found to be intimately connected with the interests of music and the
theatre. Even the choristers pooh-poohed this speech, coming though it
did from the successful author, whose songs of wine, love, and battle,
they had been repeating that night.

The "Brigand's Bride" ran for many nights. Its choruses were tuned on
the organs of the day. Morgiana's airs, "The Rose upon my Balcony"
and the "Lightning on the Cataract" (recitative and scena) were on
everybody's lips, and brought so many guineas to Sir George Thrum that
he was encouraged to have his portrait engraved, which still may be
seen in the music-shops. Not many persons, I believe, bought proof
impressions of the plate, price two guineas; whereas, on the contrary,
all the young clerks in banks, and all the FAST young men of the
universities, had pictures of the Ravenswing in their apartments--as
Biondetta (the brigand's bride), as Zelyma (in the "Nuptials of
Benares"), as Barbareska (in the "Mine of Tobolsk"), and in all her
famous characters. In the latter she disguises herself as a Uhlan, in
order to save her father, who is in prison; and the Ravenswing looked so
fascinating in this costume in pantaloons and yellow boots, that Slang
was for having her instantly in Captain Macheath, whence arose their
quarrel.

She was replaced at Slang's theatre by Snooks, the rhinoceros-tamer,
with his breed of wild buffaloes. Their success was immense. Slang gave
a supper, at which all the company burst into tears; and assembling
in the green-room next day, they, as usual, voted a piece of plate to
Adolphus Slang, Esquire, for his eminent services to the drama.

In the Captain Macheath dispute Mr. Walker would have had his wife
yield; but on this point, and for once, she disobeyed her husband and
left the theatre. And when Walker cursed her (according to his wont) for
her abominable selfishness and disregard of his property, she burst
into tears and said she had spent but twenty guineas on herself and baby
during the year, that her theatrical dressmaker's bills were yet unpaid,
and that she had never asked him how much he spent on that odious French
figurante.

All this was true, except about the French figurante. Walker, as the
lord and master, received all Morgiana's earnings, and spent them as
a gentleman should. He gave very neat dinners at a cottage in Regent's
Park (Mr. and Mrs. Walker lived at Green Street, Grosvenor Square), he
played a good deal at the "Regent;" but as to the French figurante, it
must be confessed, that Mrs. Walker was in a sad error: THAT lady and
the Captain had parted long ago; it was Madame Dolores de Tras-os-Montes
who inhabited the cottage in St. John's Wood now.

But if some little errors of this kind might be attributable to the
Captain, on the other hand, when his wife was in the provinces, he was
the most attentive of husbands; made all her bargains, and received
every shilling before he would permit her to sing a note. Thus he
prevented her from being cheated, as a person of her easy temper
doubtless would have been, by designing managers and needy
concert-givers. They always travelled with four horses; and Walker was
adored in every one of the principal hotels in England. The waiters flew
at his bell. The chambermaids were afraid he was a sad naughty man, and
thought his wife no such great beauty; the landlords preferred him to
any duke. HE never looked at their bills, not he! In fact his income was
at least four thousand a year for some years of his life.

Master Woolsey Walker was put to Doctor Wapshot's seminary, whence,
after many disputes on the Doctor's part as to getting his half-year's
accounts paid, and after much complaint of ill-treatment on the little
boy's side, he was withdrawn, and placed under the care of the Reverend
Mr. Swishtail, at Turnham Green; where all his bills are paid by his
godfather, now the head of the firm of Woolsey and Co.

As a gentleman, Mr. Walker still declines to see him; but he has not,
as far as I have heard, paid the sums of money which he threatened to
refund; and, as he is seldom at home the worthy tailor can come to Green
Street at his leisure. He and Mrs. Crump, and Mrs. Walker often take the
omnibus to Brentford, and a cake with them to little Woolsey at school;
to whom the tailor says he will leave every shilling of his property.

The Walkers have no other children; but when she takes her airing in the
Park she always turns away at the sight of a low phaeton, in which sits
a woman with rouged cheeks, and a great number of overdressed children
and a French bonne, whose name, I am given to understand, is Madame
Dolores de Tras-os-Montes. Madame de Tras-os-Montes always puts a great
gold glass to her eye as the Ravenswing's carriage passes, and looks
into it with a sneer. The two coachmen used always to exchange queer
winks at each other in the ring, until Madame de Tras-os-Montes lately
adopted a tremendous chasseur, with huge whiskers and a green and gold
livery; since which time the formerly named gentlemen do not recognise
each other.

The Ravenswing's life is one of perpetual triumph on the stage; and, as
every one of the fashionable men about town have been in love with her,
you may fancy what a pretty character she has. Lady Thrum would die
sooner than speak to that unhappy young woman; and, in fact, the Thrums
have a new pupil, who is a siren without the dangerous qualities of one,
who has the person of Venus, and the mind of a Muse, and who is coming
out at one of the theatres immediately. Baroski says, "De liddle
Rafenschwing is just as font of me as effer!" People are very shy about
receiving her in society; and when she goes to sing at a concert, Miss
Prim starts up and skurries off in a state of the greatest alarm, lest
"that person" should speak to her.

Walker is voted a good, easy, rattling, gentlemanly fellow, and nobody's
enemy but his own. His wife, they say, is dreadfully extravagant: and,
indeed, since his marriage, and in spite of his wife's large income,
he has been in the Bench several times; but she signs some bills and
he comes out again, and is as gay and genial as ever. All mercantile
speculations he has wisely long since given up; he likes to throw a
main of an evening, as I have said, and to take his couple of bottles at
dinner. On Friday he attends at the theatre for his wife's salary, and
transacts no other business during the week. He grows exceedingly stout,
dyes his hair, and has a bloated purple look about the nose and cheeks,
very different from that which first charmed the heart of Morgiana.

By the way, Eglantine has been turned out of the Bower of Bloom, and now
keeps a shop at Tunbridge Wells. Going down thither last year without a
razor, I asked a fat seedy man lolling in a faded nankeen jacket at the
door of a tawdry little shop in the Pantiles, to shave me. He said in
reply, "Sir, I do not practise in that branch of the profession!" and
turned back into the little shop. It was Archibald Eglantine. But in the
wreck of his fortunes he still has his captain's uniform, and his grand
cross of the order of the Castle and Falcon of Panama.

                    *****

POSTSCRIPT.

G. Fitz-Boodle, Esq., to O. Yorke, Esq.

ZUM TRIERISCHEN HOP, COBLENZ: July 10, 1843.

MY DEAR YORKE,--The story of the Ravenswing was written a long time
since, and I never could account for the bad taste of the publishers of
the metropolis who refused it an insertion in their various magazines.
This fact would never have been alluded to but for the following
circumstance:--

Only yesterday, as I was dining at this excellent hotel, I remarked a
bald-headed gentleman in a blue coat and brass buttons, who looked
like a colonel on half-pay, and by his side a lady and a little boy
of twelve, whom the gentleman was cramming with an amazing quantity of
cherries and cakes. A stout old dame in a wonderful cap and ribands was
seated by the lady's side, and it was easy to see they were English, and
I thought I had already made their acquaintance elsewhere.

The younger of the ladies at last made a bow with an accompanying blush.

"Surely," said I, "I have the honour of speaking to Mrs. Ravenswing?"

"Mrs. Woolsey, sir," said the gentleman; "my wife has long since left
the stage:" and at this the old lady in the wonderful cap trod on my
toes very severely, and nodded her head and all her ribands in a most
mysterious way. Presently the two ladies rose and left the table, the
elder declaring that she heard the baby crying.

"Woolsey, my dear, go with your mamma," said Mr. Woolsey, patting the
boy on the head. The young gentleman obeyed the command, carrying off a
plate of macaroons with him.

"Your son is a fine boy, sir," said I.

"My step-son, sir," answered Mr. Woolsey; and added, in a louder voice,
"I knew you, Mr. Fitz-Boodle, at once, but did not mention your name
for fear of agitating my wife. She don't like to have the memory of old
times renewed, sir; her former husband, whom you know, Captain Walker,
made her very unhappy. He died in America, sir, of this, I fear"
(pointing to the bottle), "and Mrs. W. quitted the stage a year before I
quitted business. Are you going on to Wiesbaden?"

They went off in their carriage that evening, the boy on the box making
great efforts to blow out of the postilion's tasselled horn.

I am glad that poor Morgiana is happy at last, and hasten to inform
you of the fact. I am going to visit the old haunts of my youth at
Pumpernickel. Adieu.

Yours,

G. F.-B.




MR. AND MRS. FRANK BERRY.



CHAPTER I. THE FIGHT AT SLAUGHTER HOUSE.

I am very fond of reading about battles, and have most of Marlborough's
and Wellington's at my fingers' ends; but the most tremendous combat I
ever saw, and one that interests me to think of more than Malplaquet or
Waterloo (which, by the way, has grown to be a downright nuisance, so
much do men talk of it after dinner, prating most disgustingly about
"the Prussians coming up," and what not)--I say the most tremendous
combat ever known was that between Berry and Biggs the gown-boy, which
commenced in a certain place called Middle Briars, situated in the midst
of the cloisters that run along the side of the playground of Slaughter
House School, near Smithfield, London. It was there, madam, that your
humble servant had the honour of acquiring, after six years' labour,
that immense fund of classical knowledge which in after life has been so
exceedingly useful to him.

The circumstances of the quarrel were these:--Biggs, the gown-boy (a
man who, in those days, I thought was at least seven feet high, and was
quite thunderstruck to find in after life that he measured no more than
five feet four), was what we called "second cock" of the school; the
first cock was a great big, good-humoured, lazy, fair-haired fellow,
Old Hawkins by name, who, because he was large and good-humoured, hurt
nobody. Biggs, on the contrary, was a sad bully; he had half-a-dozen
fags, and beat them all unmercifully. Moreover, he had a little brother,
a boarder in Potky's house, whom, as a matter of course, he hated and
maltreated worse than anyone else.

Well, one day, because young Biggs had not brought his brother his
hoops, or had not caught a ball at cricket, or for some other equally
good reason, Biggs the elder so belaboured the poor little fellow, that
Berry, who was sauntering by, and saw the dreadful blows which the
elder brother was dealing to the younger with his hockey-stick, felt
a compassion for the little fellow (perhaps he had a jealousy against
Biggs, and wanted to try a few rounds with him, but that I can't vouch
for); however, Berry passing by, stopped and said, "Don't you think
you have thrashed the boy enough, Biggs?" He spoke this in a very civil
tone, for he never would have thought of interfering rudely with the
sacred privilege that an upper boy at a public school always has of
beating a junior, especially when they happen to be brothers.

The reply of Biggs, as might be expected, was to hit young Biggs with
the hockey-stick twice as hard as before, until the little wretch howled
with pain. "I suppose it's no business of yours, Berry," said Biggs,
thumping away all the while, and laid on worse and worse.

Until Berry (and, indeed, little Biggs) could bear it no longer, and the
former, bouncing forward, wrenched the stick out of old Biggs's hands,
and sent it whirling out of the cloister window, to the great wonder of
a crowd of us small boys, who were looking on. Little boys always like
to see a little companion of their own soundly beaten.

"There!" said Berry, looking into Biggs's face, as much as to say, "I've
gone and done it;" and he added to the brother, "Scud away, you little
thief; I've saved you this time."

"Stop, young Biggs!" roared out his brother after a pause; "or I'll
break every bone in your infernal scoundrelly skin!"

Young Biggs looked at Berry, then at his brother, then came at his
brother's order, as if back to be beaten again; but lost heart, and ran
away as fast as his little legs could carry him.

"I'll do for him another time," said Biggs. "Here, under-boy, take my
coat;" and we all began to gather round and formed a ring.

"We had better wait till after school, Biggs," cried Berry, quite cool,
but looking a little pale. "There are only five minutes now, and it will
take you more than that to thrash me."

Biggs upon this committed a great error; for he struck Berry slightly
across the face with the back of his hand, saying, "You are in a funk."
But this was a feeling which Frank Berry did not in the least entertain;
for, in reply to Biggs's back-hander, and as quick as thought, and with
all his might and main--pong! he delivered a blow upon old Biggs's nose
that made the claret spirt, and sent the second cock down to the ground
as if he had been shot.

He was up again, however, in a minute, his face white and gashed with
blood, his eyes glaring, a ghastly spectacle; and Berry, meanwhile,
had taken his coat off, and by this time there were gathered in the
cloisters, on all the windows, and upon each other's shoulders, one
hundred and twenty young gentlemen at the very least, for the news had
gone out through the playground of "a fight between Berry and Biggs."

But Berry was quite right in his remark about the propriety of deferring
the business, for at this minute Mr. Chip, the second master, came down
the cloisters going into school, and grinned in his queer way as he saw
the state of Biggs's face. "Holloa, Mr. Biggs," said he, "I suppose you
have run against a finger-post." That was the regular joke with us at
school, and you may be sure we all laughed heartily: as we always did
when Mr. Chip made a joke, or anything like a joke. "You had better go
to the pump, sir, and get yourself washed, and not let Doctor Buckle see
you in that condition." So saying, Mr. Chip disappeared to his duties in
the under-school, whither all we little boys followed him.

It was Wednesday, a half-holiday, as everybody knows, and boiled-beef
day at Slaughter House. I was in the same boarding-house with Berry,
and we all looked to see whether he ate a good dinner, just as one would
examine a man who was going to be hanged. I recollected, in after-life,
in Germany, seeing a friend who was going to fight a duel eat five larks
for his breakfast, and thought I had seldom witnessed greater courage.
Berry ate moderately of the boiled beef--BOILED CHILD we used to call it
at school, in our elegant jocular way; he knew a great deal better than
to load his stomach upon the eve of such a contest as was going to take
place.

Dinner was very soon over, and Mr. Chip, who had been all the while
joking Berry, and pressing him to eat, called him up into his study,
to the great disappointment of us all, for we thought he was going to
prevent the fight; but no such thing. The Reverend Edward Chip took
Berry into his study, and poured him out two glasses of port-wine, which
he made him take with a biscuit, and patted him on the back, and went
off. I have no doubt he was longing, like all of us, to see the battle;
but etiquette, you know, forbade.

When we went out into the green, Old Hawkins was there--the great
Hawkins, the cock of the school. I have never seen the man since, but
still think of him as of something awful, gigantic, mysterious: he who
could thrash everybody, who could beat all the masters; how we longed
for him to put in his hand and lick Buckle! He was a dull boy, not very
high in the school, and had all his exercises written for him. Buckle
knew this, but respected him; never called him up to read Greek plays;
passed over all his blunders, which were many; let him go out of
half-holidays into the town as he pleased: how should any man dare to
stop him--the great calm magnanimous silent Strength! They say he licked
a Life-Guardsman: I wonder whether it was Shaw, who killed all those
Frenchmen? No, it could not be Shaw, for he was dead au champ d'honneur;
but he WOULD have licked Shaw if he had been alive. A bargeman I know he
licked, at Jack Randall's in Slaughter House Lane. Old Hawkins was too
lazy to play at cricket; he sauntered all day in the sunshine about the
green, accompanied by little Tippins, who was in the sixth form, laughed
and joked at Hawkins eternally, and was the person who wrote all his
exercises.

Instead of going into town this afternoon, Hawkins remained at Slaughter
House, to see the great fight between the second and third cocks.

The different masters of the school kept boarding-houses (such as
Potky's, Chip's, Wickens's, Pinney's, and so on), and the playground, or
"green" as it was called, although the only thing green about the place
was the broken glass on the walls that separate Slaughter House from
Wilderness Row and Goswell Street--(many a time have I seen Mr. Pickwick
look out of his window in that street, though we did not know him
then)--the playground, or green, was common to all. But if any stray
boy from Potky's was found, for instance, in, or entering into, Chip's
house, the most dreadful tortures were practised upon him: as I can
answer in my own case.

Fancy, then, our astonishment at seeing a little three-foot wretch, of
the name of Wills, one of Hawkins's fags (they were both in Potky's),
walk undismayed amongst us lions at Chip's house, as the "rich and rare"
young lady did in Ireland. We were going to set upon him and devour or
otherwise maltreat him, when he cried out in a little shrill impertinent
voice, "TELL BERRY I WANT HIM!"

We all roared with laughter. Berry was in the sixth form, and Wills or
any under-boy would as soon have thought of "wanting" him, as I should
of wanting the Duke of Wellington.

Little Wills looked round in an imperious kind of way. "Well," says he,
stamping his foot, "do you hear? TELL BERRY THAT HAWKINS WANTS HIM!"

As for resisting the law of Hawkins, you might as soon think of
resisting immortal Jove. Berry and Tolmash, who was to be his
bottle-holder, made their appearance immediately, and walked out into
the green where Hawkins was waiting, and, with an irresistible audacity
that only belonged to himself, in the face of nature and all the
regulations of the place, was smoking a cigar. When Berry and Tolmash
found him, the three began slowly pacing up and down in the sunshine,
and we little boys watched them.

Hawkins moved his arms and hands every now and then, and was evidently
laying down the law about boxing. We saw his fists darting out every now
and then with mysterious swiftness, hitting one, two, quick as thought,
as if in the face of an adversary; now his left hand went up, as if
guarding his own head, now his immense right fist dreadfully flapped
the air, as if punishing his imaginary opponent's miserable ribs. The
conversation lasted for some ten minutes, about which time gown-boys'
dinner was over, and we saw these youths, in their black horned-button
jackets and knee-breeches, issuing from their door in the cloisters.
There were no hoops, no cricket-bats, as usual on a half-holiday. Who
would have thought of play in expectation of such tremendous sport as
was in store for us?

Towering among the gown-boys, of whom he was the head and the tyrant,
leaning upon Bushby's arm, and followed at a little distance by many
curious pale awe-stricken boys, dressed in his black silk stockings,
which he always sported, and with a crimson bandanna tied round his
waist, came BIGGS. His nose was swollen with the blow given before
school, but his eyes flashed fire. He was laughing and sneering with
Bushby, and evidently intended to make minced meat of Berry.

The betting began pretty freely: the bets were against poor Berry. Five
to three were offered--in ginger-beer. I took six to four in raspberry
open tarts. The upper boys carried the thing farther still: and I know
for a fact, that Swang's book amounted to four pound three (but he
hedged a good deal), and Tittery lost seventeen shillings in a single
bet to Pitts, who took the odds.

As Biggs and his party arrived, I heard Hawkins say to Berry, "For
heaven's sake, my boy, fib with your right, and MIND HIS LEFT HAND!"

Middle Briars was voted to be too confined a space for the combat, and
it was agreed that it should take place behind the under-school in
the shade, whither we all went. Hawkins, with his immense silver
hunting-watch, kept the time; and water was brought from the pump close
to Notley's the pastrycook's, who did not admire fisticuffs at all on
half-holidays, for the fights kept the boys away from his shop. Gutley
was the only fellow in the school who remained faithful to him, and
he sat on the counter--the great gormandising brute!--eating tarts the
whole day.

This famous fight, as every Slaughter House man knows, lasted for two
hours and twenty-nine minutes, by Hawkins's immense watch. All this time
the air resounded with cries of "Go it, Berry!" "Go it, Biggs!" "Pitch
into him!" "Give it him!" and so on. Shall I describe the hundred and
two rounds of the combat?--No!--It would occupy too much space, and the
taste for such descriptions has passed away. [3]

1st round. Both the combatants fresh, and in prime order. The weight
and inches somewhat on the gown-boy's side. Berry goes gallantly in,
and delivers a clinker on the gown-boy's jaw. Biggs makes play with his
left. Berry down.

                    *****

4th round. Claret drawn in profusion from the gown-boy's grogshop. (He
went down, and had his front tooth knocked out, but the blow cut Berry's
knuckles a great deal.)

                    *****

15th round. Chancery. Fibbing. Biggs makes dreadful work with his
left. Break away. Rally. Biggs down. Betting still six to four on the
gown-boy.

                    *****

20th round. The men both dreadfully punished. Berry somewhat shy of his
adversary's left hand.

                    *****

29th to 42nd round. The Chipsite all this while breaks away from the
gown-boy's left, and goes down on a knee. Six to four on the gown-boy,
until the fortieth round, when the bets became equal.

                    *****

102nd and last round. For half-an-hour the men had stood up to each
other, but were almost too weary to strike. The gown-boy's face hardly
to be recognised, swollen and streaming with blood. The Chipsite in
a similar condition, and still more punished about his side from his
enemy's left hand. Berry gives a blow at his adversary's face, and falls
over him as he falls.

The gown-boy can't come up to time. And thus ended the great fight of
Berry and Biggs.

And what, pray, has this horrid description of a battle and parcel of
schoolboys to do with Men's Wives?

What has it to do with Men's Wives?--A great deal more, madam, than you
think for. Only read Chapter II., and you shall hear.



CHAPTER II. THE COMBAT AT VERSAILLES.

I afterwards came to be Berry's fag, and, though beaten by him daily, he
allowed, of course, no one else to lay a hand upon me, and I got no more
thrashing than was good for me. Thus an intimacy grew up between us,
and after he left Slaughter House and went into the dragoons, the honest
fellow did not forget his old friend, but actually made his appearance
one day in the playground in moustaches and a braided coat, and gave
me a gold pencil-case and a couple of sovereigns. I blushed when I took
them, but take them I did; and I think the thing I almost best recollect
in my life, is the sight of Berry getting behind an immense bay
cab-horse, which was held by a correct little groom, and was waiting
near the school in Slaughter House Square. He proposed, too, to have me
to "Long's," where he was lodging for the time; but this invitation
was refused on my behalf by Doctor Buckle, who said, and possibly with
correctness, that I should get little good by spending my holiday with
such a scapegrace.

Once afterwards he came to see me at Christ Church, and we made a show
of writing to one another, and didn't, and always had a hearty mutual
goodwill; and though we did not quite burst into tears on parting, were
yet quite happy when occasion threw us together, and so almost lost
sight of each other. I heard lately that Berry was married, and am
rather ashamed to say, that I was not so curious as even to ask the
maiden name of his lady.

Last summer I was at Paris, and had gone over to Versailles to meet a
party, one of which was a young lady to whom I was tenderly--But, never
mind. The day was rainy, and the party did not keep its appointment;
and after yawning through the interminable Palace picture-galleries, and
then making an attempt to smoke a cigar in the Palace garden--for which
crime I was nearly run through the body by a rascally sentinel--I was
driven, perforce, into the great bleak lonely place before the Palace,
with its roads branching off to all the towns in the world, which Louis
and Napoleon once intended to conquer, and there enjoyed my favourite
pursuit at leisure, and was meditating whether I should go back to
"Vefour's" for dinner, or patronise my friend M. Duboux of the "Hotel
des Reservoirs" who gives not only a good dinner, but as dear a one as
heart can desire. I was, I say, meditating these things, when a carriage
passed by. It was a smart low calash, with a pair of bay horses and a
postilion in a drab jacket that twinkled with innumerable buttons, and
I was too much occupied in admiring the build of the machine, and
the extreme tightness of the fellow's inexpressibles, to look at the
personages within the carriage, when the gentleman roared out "Fitz!"
and the postilion pulled up, and the lady gave a shrill scream, and
a little black-muzzled spaniel began barking and yelling with all his
might, and a man with moustaches jumped out of the vehicle, and began
shaking me by the hand.

"Drive home, John," said the gentleman: "I'll be with you, my love, in
an instant--it's an old friend. Fitz, let me present you to Mrs. Berry."

The lady made an exceedingly gentle inclination of her black-velvet
bonnet, and said, "Pray, my love, remember that it is just dinner-time.
However, never mind ME." And with another slight toss and a nod to the
postilion, that individual's white leather breeches began to jump up
and down again in the saddle, and the carriage disappeared, leaving me
shaking my old friend Berry by the hand.

He had long quitted the army, but still wore his military beard,
which gave to his fair pink face a fierce and lion-like look. He was
extraordinarily glad to see me, as only men are glad who live in a small
town, or in dull company. There is no destroyer of friendships like
London, where a man has no time to think of his neighbour, and has
far too many friends to care for them. He told me in a breath of his
marriage, and how happy he was, and straight insisted that I must
come home to dinner, and see more of Angelica, who had invited me
herself--didn't I hear her?

"Mrs. Berry asked YOU, Frank; but I certainly did not hear her ask ME!"

"She would not have mentioned the dinner but that she meant me to ask
you. I know she did," cried Frank Berry. "And, besides--hang it--I'm
master of the house. So come you shall. No ceremony, old boy--one or two
friends--snug family party--and we'll talk of old times over a bottle of
claret."

There did not seem to me to be the slightest objection to this
arrangement, except that my boots were muddy, and my coat of the morning
sort. But as it was quite impossible to go to Paris and back again in
a quarter of an hour, and as a man may dine with perfect comfort to
himself in a frock-coat, it did not occur to me to be particularly
squeamish, or to decline an old friend's invitation upon a pretext so
trivial.

Accordingly we walked to a small house in the Avenue de Paris, and were
admitted first into a small garden ornamented by a grotto, a fountain,
and several nymphs in plaster-of-Paris, then up a mouldy old steep stair
into a hall, where a statue of Cupid and another of Venus welcomed us
with their eternal simper; then through a salle-a-manger where covers
were laid for six; and finally to a little saloon, where Fido the dog
began to howl furiously according to his wont.

It was one of the old pavilions that had been built for a pleasure-house
in the gay days of Versailles, ornamented with abundance of damp Cupids
and cracked gilt cornices, and old mirrors let into the walls, and
gilded once, but now painted a dingy French white. The long low windows
looked into the court, where the fountain played its ceaseless dribble,
surrounded by numerous rank creepers and weedy flowers, but in the midst
of which the statues stood with their bases quite moist and green.

I hate fountains and statues in dark confined places: that cheerless,
endless plashing of water is the most inhospitable sound ever heard. The
stiff grin of those French statues, or ogling Canova Graces, is by no
means more happy, I think, than the smile of a skeleton, and not so
natural. Those little pavilions in which the old roues sported were
never meant to be seen by daylight, depend on't. They were lighted up
with a hundred wax-candles, and the little fountain yonder was meant
only to cool their claret. And so, my first impression of Berry's
place of abode was rather a dismal one. However, I heard him in the
salle-a-manger drawing the corks, which went off with a CLOOP, and that
consoled me.

As for the furniture of the rooms appertaining to the Berrys, there
was a harp in a leather case, and a piano, and a flute-box, and a huge
tambour with a Saracen's nose just begun, and likewise on the table
a multiplicity of those little gilt books, half sentimental and half
religious, which the wants of the age and of our young ladies have
produced in such numbers of late. I quarrel with no lady's taste in that
way; but heigho! I had rather that Mrs. Fitz-Boodle should read "Humphry
Clinker!"

Besides these works, there was a "Peerage," of course. What genteel
family was ever without one?

I was making for the door to see Frank drawing the corks, and was
bounced at by the amiable little black-muzzled spaniel, who fastened his
teeth in my pantaloons, and received a polite kick in consequence, which
sent him howling to the other end of the room, and the animal was just
in the act of performing that feat of agility, when the door opened
and madame made her appearance. Frank came behind her, peering over her
shoulder with rather an anxious look.

Mrs. Berry is an exceedingly white and lean person. She has thick
eyebrows, which meet rather dangerously over her nose, which is Grecian,
and a small mouth with no lips--a sort of feeble pucker in the face as
it were. Under her eyebrows are a pair of enormous eyes, which she is
in the habit of turning constantly ceiling-wards. Her hair is rather
scarce, and worn in bandeaux, and she commonly mounts a sprig of laurel,
or a dark flower or two, which with the sham tour--I believe that is the
name of the knob of artificial hair that many ladies sport--gives her
a rigid and classical look. She is dressed in black, and has invariably
the neatest of silk stockings and shoes: for forsooth her foot is a fine
one, and she always sits with it before her, looking at it, stamping it,
and admiring it a great deal. "Fido," she says to her spaniel, "you have
almost crushed my poor foot;" or, "Frank," to her husband, "bring me a
footstool:" or, "I suffer so from cold in the feet," and so forth; but
be the conversation what it will, she is always sure to put HER FOOT
into it.

She invariably wears on her neck the miniature of her late father, Sir
George Catacomb, apothecary to George III.; and she thinks those two men
the greatest the world ever saw. She was born in Baker Street, Portman
Square, and that is saying almost enough of her. She is as long, as
genteel, and as dreary, as that deadly-lively place, and sports, by
way of ornament, her papa's hatchment, as it were, as every tenth Baker
Street house has taught her.

What induced such a jolly fellow as Frank Berry to marry Miss Angelica
Catacomb no one can tell. He met her, he says, at a ball at Hampton
Court, where his regiment was quartered, and where, to this day, lives
"her aunt Lady Pash." She alludes perpetually in conversation to that
celebrated lady; and if you look in the "Baronetage" to the pedigree
of the Pash family, you may see manuscript notes by Mrs. Frank Berry,
relative to them and herself. Thus, when you see in print that Sir John
Pash married Angelica, daughter of Graves Catacomb, Esquire, in a neat
hand you find written, AND SISTER OF THE LATE SIR GEORGE CATACOMB, OF
BAKER STREET, PORTMAN SQUARE: "A.B." follows of course. It is a wonder
how fond ladies are of writing in books, and signing their charming
initials! Mrs. Berry's before-mentioned little gilt books are scored
with pencil-marks, or occasionally at the margin with a!--note of
interjection, or the words "TOO TRUE, A.B." and so on. Much may be
learned with regard to lovely woman by a look at the books she reads in;
and I had gained no inconsiderable knowledge of Mrs. Berry by the ten
minutes spent in the drawing-room, while she was at her toilet in the
adjoining bedchamber.

"You have often heard me talk of George Fitz," says Berry, with an
appealing look to madame.

"Very often," answered his lady, in a tone which clearly meant "a great
deal too much." "Pray, sir," continued she, looking at my boots with all
her might, "are we to have your company at dinner?"

"Of course you are, my dear; what else do you think he came for? You
would not have the man go back to Paris to get his evening coat, would
you?"

"At least, my love, I hope you will go and put on YOURS, and change
those muddy boots. Lady Pash will be here in five minutes, and you know
Dobus is as punctual as clockwork." Then turning to me with a sort of
apology that was as consoling as a box on the ear, "We have some friends
at dinner, sir, who are rather particular persons; but I am sure when
they hear that you only came on a sudden invitation, they will excuse
your morning dress.--Bah! what a smell of smoke!"

With this speech madame placed herself majestically on a sofa, put out
her foot, called Fido, and relapsed into an icy silence. Frank had long
since evacuated the premises, with a rueful look at his wife, but never
daring to cast a glance at me. I saw the whole business at once: here
was this lion of a fellow tamed down by a she Van Amburgh, and fetching
and carrying at her orders a great deal more obediently than her little
yowling black-muzzled darling of a Fido.

I am not, however, to be tamed so easily, and was determined in this
instance not to be in the least disconcerted, or to show the smallest
sign of ill-humour: so to renouer the conversation, I began about Lady
Pash.

"I heard you mention the name of Pash, I think?" said I. "I know a lady
of that name, and a very ugly one it is too."

"It is most probably not the same person," answered Mrs. Berry, with
a look which intimated that a fellow like me could never have had the
honour to know so exalted a person.

"I mean old Lady Pash of Hampton Court. Fat woman--fair, ain't she?--and
wears an amethyst in her forehead, has one eye, a blond wig, and dresses
in light green?"

"Lady Pash, sir, is MY AUNT," answered Mrs. Berry (not altogether
displeased, although she expected money from the old lady; but you know
we love to hear our friends abused when it can be safely done).

"Oh, indeed! she was a daughter of old Catacomb's of Windsor, I
remember, the undertaker. They called her husband Callipash, and her
ladyship Pishpash. So you see, madam, that I know the whole family!"

"Mr. Fitz-Simons!" exclaimed Mrs. Berry, rising, "I am not accustomed to
hear nicknames applied to myself and my family; and must beg you,
when you honour us with your company, to spare our feelings as much as
possible. Mr. Catacomb had the confidence of his SOVEREIGN, sir, and Sir
John Pash was of Charles II.'s creation. The one was my uncle, sir; the
other my grandfather!"

"My dear madam, I am extremely sorry, and most sincerely apologise
for my inadvertence. But you owe me an apology too: my name is not
Fitz-Simons, but Fitz-Boodle."

"What! of Boodle Hall--my husband's old friend; of Charles I.'s
creation? My dear sir, I beg you a thousand pardons, and am delighted
to welcome a person of whom I have heard Frank say so much. Frank!" (to
Berry, who soon entered in very glossy boots and a white waistcoat), "do
you know, darling, I mistook Mr. Fitz-Boodle for Mr. Fitz-Simons--that
horrid Irish horse-dealing person; and I never, never, never can pardon
myself for being so rude to him."

The big eyes here assumed an expression that was intended to kill me
outright with kindness: from being calm, still, reserved, Angelica
suddenly became gay, smiling, confidential, and folatre. She told me she
had heard I was a sad creature, and that she intended to reform me, and
that I must come and see Frank a great deal.

Now, although Mr. Fitz-Simons, for whom I was mistaken, is as low
a fellow as ever came out of Dublin, and having been a captain in
somebody's army, is now a blackleg and horse-dealer by profession; yet,
if I had brought him home to Mrs. Fitz-Boodle to dinner, I should have
liked far better that that imaginary lady should have received him with
decent civility, and not insulted the stranger within her husband's
gates. And, although it was delightful to be received so cordially
when the mistake was discovered, yet I found that ALL Berry's old
acquaintances were by no means so warmly welcomed; for another old
school-chum presently made his appearance, who was treated in a very
different manner.

This was no other than poor Jack Butts, who is a sort of small artist
and picture-dealer by profession, and was a dayboy at Slaughter House
when we were there, and very serviceable in bringing in sausages,
pots of pickles, and other articles of merchandise, which we could not
otherwise procure. The poor fellow has been employed, seemingly, in the
same office of fetcher and carrier ever since; and occupied that post
for Mrs. Berry. It was, "Mr. Butts, have you finished that drawing for
Lady Pash's album?" and Butts produced it; and, "Did you match the silk
for me at Delille's?" and there was the silk, bought, no doubt, with the
poor fellow's last five francs; and, "Did you go to the furniture-man in
the Rue St. Jacques; and bring the canary-seed, and call about my
shawl at that odious dawdling Madame Fichet's; and have you brought the
guitar-strings?"

Butts hadn't brought the guitar-strings; and thereupon Mrs. Berry's
countenance assumed the same terrible expression which I had formerly
remarked in it, and which made me tremble for Berry.

"My dear Angelica," though said he with some spirit, "Jack Butts isn't
a baggage-waggon, nor a Jack-of-all-trades; you make him paint pictures
for your women's albums, and look after your upholsterer, and your
canary-bird, and your milliners, and turn rusty because he forgets your
last message."

"I did not turn RUSTY, Frank, as you call it elegantly. I'm very much
obliged to Mr. Butts for performing my commissions--very much obliged.
And as for not paying for the pictures to which you so kindly allude,
Frank, _I_ should never have thought of offering payment for so paltry a
service; but I'm sure I shall be happy to pay if Mr. Butts will send me
in his bill."

"By Jove, Angelica, this is too much!" bounced out Berry; but the little
matrimonial squabble was abruptly ended, by Berry's French man flinging
open the door and announcing MILADI PASH and Doctor Dobus, which two
personages made their appearance.

The person of old Pash has been already parenthetically described. But
quite different from her dismal niece in temperament, she is as jolly an
old widow as ever wore weeds. She was attached somehow to the Court, and
has a multiplicity of stories about the princesses and the old King,
to which Mrs. Berry never fails to call your attention in her grave,
important way. Lady Pash has ridden many a time to the Windsor hounds;
she made her husband become a member of the Four-in-hand Club, and has
numberless stories about Sir Godfrey Webster, Sir John Lade, and the
old heroes of those times. She has lent a rouleau to Dick Sheridan,
and remembers Lord Byron when he was a sulky slim young lad. She says
Charles Fox was the pleasantest fellow she ever met with, and has not
the slightest objection to inform you that one of the princes was very
much in love with her. Yet somehow she is only fifty-two years old, and
I have never been able to understand her calculation. One day or other
before her eye went out, and before those pearly teeth of hers were
stuck to her gums by gold, she must have been a pretty-looking body
enough. Yet, in spite of the latter inconvenience, she eats and
drinks too much every day, and tosses off a glass of maraschino with a
trembling pudgy hand, every finger of which twinkles with a dozen, at
least, of old rings. She has a story about every one of those rings, and
a stupid one too. But there is always something pleasant, I think, in
stupid family stories: they are good-hearted people who tell them.

As for Mrs. Muchit, nothing need be said of her; she is Pash's
companion; she has lived with Lady Pash since the peace. Nor does my
Lady take any more notice of her than of the dust of the earth. She
calls her "poor Muchit," and considers her a half-witted creature. Mrs.
Berry hates her cordially, and thinks she is a designing toad-eater,
who has formed a conspiracy to rob her of her aunt's fortune. She never
spoke a word to poor Muchit during the whole of dinner, or offered to
help her to anything on the table.

In respect to Dobus, he is an old Peninsular man, as you are made to
know before you have been very long in his company; and, like most army
surgeons, is a great deal more military in his looks and conversation,
than the combatant part of the forces. He has adopted the
sham-Duke-of-Wellington air, which is by no means uncommon in veterans;
and, though one of the easiest and softest fellows in existence, speaks
slowly and briefly, and raps out an oath or two occasionally, as it is
said a certain great captain does. Besides the above, we sat down to
table with Captain Goff, late of the ---- Highlanders; the Reverend
Lemuel Whey, who preaches at St. Germains; little Cutler, and the
Frenchman, who always WILL be at English parties on the Continent, and
who, after making some frightful efforts to speak English, subsides and
is heard no more. Young married ladies and heads of families generally
have him for the purpose of waltzing, and in return he informs his
friends of the club or the cafe that he has made the conquest of a
charmante Anglaise. Listen to me, all family men who read this! and
never LET AN UNMARRIED FRENCHMAN INTO YOUR DOORS. This lecture alone is
worth the price of the book. It is not that they do any harm in one case
out of a thousand, Heaven forbid! but they mean harm. They look on our
Susannas with unholy dishonest eyes. Hearken to two of the grinning
rogues chattering together as they clink over the asphalte of
the Boulevard with lacquered boots, and plastered hair, and waxed
moustaches, and turned-down shirt-collars, and stays and goggling eyes,
and hear how they talk of a good simple giddy vain dull Baker
Street creature, and canvass her points, and show her letters, and
insinuate--never mind, but I tell you my soul grows angry when I think
of the same; and I can't hear of an Englishwoman marrying a Frenchman
without feeling a sort of shame and pity for her. [4]

To return to the guests. The Reverend Lemuel Whey is a tea-party man,
with a curl on his forehead and a scented pocket-handkerchief. He ties
his white neckcloth to a wonder, and I believe sleeps in it. He brings
his flute with him; and prefers Handel, of course; but has one or two
pet profane songs of the sentimental kind, and will occasionally lift
up his little pipe in a glee. He does not dance, but the honest fellow
would give the world to do it; and he leaves his clogs in the passage,
though it is a wonder he wears them, for in the muddiest weather he
never has a speck on his foot. He was at St. John's College, Cambridge,
and was rather gay for a term or two, he says. He is, in a word, full of
the milk-and-water of human kindness, and his family lives near Hackney.

As for Goff, he has a huge shining bald forehead, and immense bristling
Indian-red whiskers. He wears white wash-leather gloves, drinks fairly,
likes a rubber, and has a story for after dinner, beginning, "Doctor, ye
racklackt Sandy M'Lellan, who joined us in the West Indies. Wal, sir,"
etc. These and little Cutler made up the party.

Now it may not have struck all readers, but any sharp fellow conversant
with writing must have found out long ago, that if there had been
something exceedingly interesting to narrate with regard to this dinner
at Frank Berry's, I should have come out with it a couple of pages
since, nor have kept the public looking for so long a time at the
dish-covers and ornaments of the table.

But the simple fact must now be told, that there was nothing of the
slightest importance occurred at this repast, except that it gave me an
opportunity of studying Mrs. Berry in many different ways; and, in spite
of the extreme complaisance which she now showed me, of forming, I am
sorry to say, a most unfavourable opinion of that fair lady. Truth to
tell, I would much rather she should have been civil to Mrs. Muchit,
than outrageously complimentary to your humble servant; and as she
professed not to know what on earth there was for dinner, would it not
have been much more natural for her not to frown, and bob, and wink,
and point, and pinch her lips as often as Monsieur Anatole, her French
domestic, not knowing the ways of English dinner-tables, placed anything
out of its due order? The allusions to Boodle Hall were innumerable,
and I don't know any greater bore than to be obliged to talk of a place
which belongs to one's elder brother. Many questions were likewise asked
about the dowager and her Scotch relatives, the Plumduffs, about whom
Lady Pash knew a great deal, having seen them at Court and at Lord
Melville's. Of course she had seen them at Court and at Lord Melville's,
as she might have seen thousands of Scotchmen besides; but what mattered
it to me, who care not a jot for old Lady Fitz-Boodle? "When you write,
you'll say you met an old friend of her Ladyship's," says Mrs. Berry,
and I faithfully promised I would when I wrote; but if the New Post
Office paid us for writing letters (as very possibly it will soon), I
could not be bribed to send a line to old Lady Fitz.

In a word, I found that Berry, like many simple fellows before him, had
made choice of an imperious, ill-humoured, and underbred female for a
wife, and could see with half an eye that he was a great deal too much
her slave.

The struggle was not over yet, however. Witness that little encounter
before dinner; and once or twice the honest fellow replied rather
smartly during the repast, taking especial care to atone as much
as possible for his wife's inattention to Jack and Mrs. Muchit, by
particular attention to those personages, whom he helped to everything
round about and pressed perpetually to champagne; he drank but little
himself, for his amiable wife's eye was constantly fixed on him.

Just at the conclusion of the dessert, madame, who had bouded Berry
during dinner-time, became particularly gracious to her lord and master,
and tenderly asked me if I did not think the French custom was a good
one, of men leaving table with the ladies.

"Upon my word, ma'am," says I, "I think it's a most abominable
practice."

"And so do I," says Cutler.

"A most abominable practice! Do you hear THAT?" cries Berry, laughing,
and filling his glass.

"I'm sure, Frank, when we are alone you always come to the
drawing-room," replies the lady, sharply.

"Oh, yes! when we're alone, darling," says Berry, blushing; "but now
we're NOT alone--ha, ha! Anatole, du Bordeaux!"

"I'm sure they sat after the ladies at Carlton House; didn't they, Lady
Pash?" says Dobus, who likes his glass.

"THAT they did!" says my Lady, giving him a jolly nod.

"I racklackt," exclaims Captain Goff, "when I was in the Mauritius, that
Mestress MacWhirter, who commanded the Saxty-Sackond, used to say, 'Mac,
if ye want to get lively, ye'll not stop for more than two hours after
the leddies have laft ye: if ye want to get drunk, ye'll just dine at
the mass.' So ye see, Mestress Barry, what was Mac's allowance--haw,
haw! Mester Whey, I'll trouble ye for the o-lives."

But although we were in a clear majority, that indomitable woman, Mrs.
Berry, determined to make us all as uneasy as possible, and would take
the votes all round. Poor Jack, of course, sided with her, and Whey said
he loved a cup of tea and a little music better than all the wine of
Bordeaux. As for the Frenchman, when Mrs. Berry said, "And what do you
think, M. le Vicomte?"

"Vat you speak?" said M. de Blagueval, breaking silence for the first
time during two hours. "Yase--eh? to me you speak?"

"Apry deeny, aimy-voo ally avec les dam?"

"Comment avec les dames?"

"Ally avec les dam com a Parry, ou resty avec les Messew com on
Onglyterre?"

"Ah, madame! vous me le demandez?" cries the little wretch, starting up
in a theatrical way, and putting out his hand, which Mrs. Berry took,
and with this the ladies left the room. Old Lady Pash trotted after her
niece with her hand in Whey's, very much wondering at such practices,
which were not in the least in vogue in the reign of George III.

Mrs. Berry cast a glance of triumph at her husband, at the defection;
and Berry was evidently annoyed that three-eighths of his male forces
had left him.

But fancy our delight and astonishment, when in a minute they all three
came back again; the Frenchman looking entirely astonished, and the
parson and the painter both very queer. The fact is, old downright Lady
Pash, who had never been in Paris in her life before, and had no notion
of being deprived of her usual hour's respite and nap, said at once to
Mrs. Berry, "My dear Angelica, you're surely not going to keep these
three men here? Send them back to the dining-room, for I've a thousand
things to say to you." And Angelica, who expects to inherit her aunt's
property, of course did as she was bid; on which the old lady fell into
an easy chair, and fell asleep immediately,--so soon, that is, as
the shout caused by the reappearance of the three gentlemen in the
dining-room had subsided.

I had meanwhile had some private conversation with little Cutler
regarding the character of Mrs. Berry. "She's a regular screw,"
whispered he; "a regular Tartar. Berry shows fight, though, sometimes,
and I've known him have his own way for a week together. After dinner
he is his own master, and hers when he has had his share of wine; and
that's why she will never allow him to drink any."

Was it a wicked, or was it a noble and honourable thought which came
to us both at the same minute, to rescue Berry from his captivity? The
ladies, of course, will give their verdict according to their gentle
natures; but I know what men of courage will think, and by their jovial
judgment will abide.

We received, then, the three lost sheep back into our innocent fold
again with the most joyous shouting and cheering. We made Berry (who
was, in truth, nothing loth) order up I don't know how much more claret.
We obliged the Frenchman to drink malgre lui, and in the course of
a short time we had poor Whey in such a state of excitement, that he
actually volunteered to sing a song, which he said he had heard at some
very gay supper-party at Cambridge, and which begins:

     "A pye sat on a pear-tree,
      A pye sat on a pear-tree,
      A pye sat on a pear-tree,
        Heigh-ho, heigh-ho, heigh-ho!"

Fancy Mrs. Berry's face as she looked in, in the midst of that
Bacchanalian ditty, when she saw no less a person than the Reverend
Lemuel Whey carolling it!

"Is it you, my dear?" cries Berry, as brave now as any Petruchio. "Come
in, and sit down, and hear Whey's song."

"Lady Pash is asleep, Frank," said she.

"Well, darling! that's the very reason. Give Mrs. Berry a glass, Jack,
will you?"

"Would you wake your aunt, sir?" hissed out madame.

"NEVER MIND ME, LOVE! I'M AWAKE, AND LIKE IT!" cried the venerable Lady
Pash from the salon. "Sing away, gentlemen!"

At which we all set up an audacious cheer; and Mrs. Berry flounced back
to the drawing-room, but did not leave the door open, that her aunt
might hear our melodies.

Berry had by this time arrived at that confidential state to which a
third bottle always brings the well-regulated mind; and he made a clean
confession to Cutler and myself of his numerous matrimonial annoyances.
He was not allowed to dine out, he said, and but seldom to ask his
friends to meet him at home. He never dared smoke a cigar for the life
of him, not even in the stables. He spent the mornings dawdling in
eternal shops, the evenings at endless tea-parties, or in reading
poems or missionary tracts to his wife. He was compelled to take physic
whenever she thought he looked a little pale, to change his shoes and
stockings whenever he came in from a walk. "Look here," said he, opening
his chest, and shaking his fist at Dobus; "look what Angelica and that
infernal Dobus have brought me to."

I thought it might be a flannel waistcoat into which madame had
forced him; but it was worse: I give you my word of honour it was a
PITCH-PLASTER!

We all roared at this, and the doctor as loud as anyone; but he vowed
that he had no hand in the pitch-plaster. It was a favourite family
remedy of the late apothecary Sir George Catacomb, and had been put on
by Mrs. Berry's own fair hands.

When Anatole came in with coffee, Berry was in such high courage, that
he told him to go to the deuce with it; and we never caught sight of
Lady Pash more, except when, muffled up to the nose, she passed through
the salle-a-manger to go to her carriage, in which Dobus and the parson
were likewise to be transported to Paris. "Be a man, Frank," says she,
"and hold your own"--for the good old lady had taken her nephew's part
in the matrimonial business--"and you, Mr. Fitz-Boodle, come and see him
often. You're a good fellow, take old one-eyed Callipash's word for it.
Shall I take you to Paris?"

Dear kind Angelica, she had told her aunt all I said!

"Don't go, George," says Berry, squeezing me by the hand. So I said I
was going to sleep at Versailles that night; but if she would give a
convoy to Jack Butts, it would be conferring a great obligation on him;
with which favour the old lady accordingly complied, saying to him,
with great coolness, "Get up and sit with John in the rumble, Mr.
What-d'ye-call-'im." The fact is, the good old soul despises an artist
as much as she does a tailor.

Jack tripped to his place very meekly; and "Remember Saturday," cried
the Doctor; and "Don't forget Thursday!" exclaimed the divine,--"a
bachelor's party, you know." And so the cavalcade drove thundering down
the gloomy old Avenue de Paris.

The Frenchman, I forgot to say, had gone away exceedingly ill long
before; and the reminiscences of "Thursday" and "Saturday" evoked by
Dobus and Whey, were, to tell the truth, parts of our conspiracy; for in
the heat of Berry's courage, we had made him promise to dine with us all
round en garcon; with all except Captain Goff, who "racklacted" that he
was engaged every day for the next three weeks: as indeed he is, to
a thirty-sous ordinary which the gallant officer frequents, when not
invited elsewhere.

Cutler and I then were the last on the field; and though we were for
moving away, Berry, whose vigour had, if possible, been excited by the
bustle and colloquy in the night air, insisted upon dragging us back
again, and actually proposed a grill for supper!

We found in the salle-a-manger a strong smell of an extinguished lamp,
and Mrs. Berry was snuffing out the candles on the sideboard.

"Hullo, my dear!" shouts Berry: "easy, if you please; we've not done
yet!"

"Not done yet, Mr. Berry!" groans the lady, in a hollow sepulchral tone.

"No, Mrs. B., not done yet. We are going to have some supper, ain't we,
George?"

"I think it's quite time to go home," said Mr. Fitz-Boodle (who, to say
the truth, began to tremble himself).

"I think it is, sir; you are quite right, sir; you will pardon me,
gentlemen, I have a bad headache, and will retire."

"Good-night, my dear!" said that audacious Berry. "Anatole, tell the
cook to broil a fowl and bring some wine."

If the loving couple had been alone, or if Cutler had not been an
attache to the embassy, before whom she was afraid of making herself
ridiculous, I am confident that Mrs. Berry would have fainted away on
the spot; and that all Berry's courage would have tumbled down lifeless
by the side of her. So she only gave a martyrised look, and left the
room; and while we partook of the very unnecessary repast, was good
enough to sing some hymn-tunes to an exceedingly slow movement in the
next room, intimating that she was awake, and that, though suffering,
she found her consolations in religion.

These melodies did not in the least add to our friend's courage. The
devilled fowl had, somehow, no devil in it. The champagne in the glasses
looked exceedingly flat and blue. The fact is, that Cutler and I were
now both in a state of dire consternation, and soon made a move for
our hats, and lighting each a cigar in the hall, made across the little
green where the Cupids and nymphs were listening to the dribbling
fountain in the dark.

"I'm hanged if I don't have a cigar too!" says Berry, rushing after us;
and accordingly putting in his pocket a key about the size of a shovel,
which hung by the little handle of the outer grille, forth he sallied,
and joined us in our fumigation.

He stayed with us a couple of hours, and returned homewards in perfect
good spirits, having given me his word of honour he would dine with us
the next day. He put his immense key into the grille, and unlocked it;
but the gate would not open: IT WAS BOLTED WITHIN.

He began to make a furious jangling and ringing at the bell; and in
oaths, both French and English, called upon the recalcitrant Anatole.

After much tolling of the bell, a light came cutting across the crevices
of the inner door; it was thrown open, and a figure appeared with a
lamp,--a tall slim figure of a woman, clothed in white from head to
foot.

It was Mrs. Berry, and when Cutler and I saw her, we both ran away as
fast as our legs could carry us.

Berry, at this, shrieked with a wild laughter. "Remember to-morrow, old
boys," shouted he,--"six o'clock;" and we were a quarter of a mile off
when the gate closed, and the little mansion of the Avenue de Paris was
once more quiet and dark.

The next afternoon, as we were playing at billiards, Cutler saw Mrs.
Berry drive by in her carriage; and as soon as rather a long rubber was
over, I thought I would go and look for our poor friend, and so went
down to the Pavilion. Every door was open, as the wont is in France, and
I walked in unannounced, and saw this:

He was playing a duet with her on the flute. She had been out but for
half-an-hour, after not speaking all the morning; and having seen Cutler
at the billiard-room window, and suspecting we might take advantage
of her absence, she had suddenly returned home again, and had flung
herself, weeping, into her Frank's arms, and said she could not bear to
leave him in anger. And so, after sitting for a little while sobbing on
his knee, she had forgotten and forgiven every thing!

The dear angel! I met poor Frank in Bond Street only yesterday; but he
crossed over to the other side of the way. He had on goloshes, and is
grown very fat and pale. He has shaved off his moustaches, and, instead,
wears a respirator. He has taken his name off all his clubs, and lives
very grimly in Baker Street. Well, ladies, no doubt you say he is right:
and what are the odds, so long as YOU are happy?




DENNIS HAGGARTY'S WIFE.


There was an odious Irishwoman who with her daughter used to frequent
the "Royal Hotel" at Leamington some years ago, and who went by the name
of Mrs. Major Gam. Gam had been a distinguished officer in His Majesty's
service, whom nothing but death and his own amiable wife could overcome.
The widow mourned her husband in the most becoming bombazeen she could
muster, and had at least half an inch of lampblack round the immense
visiting tickets which she left at the houses of the nobility and gentry
her friends.

Some of us, I am sorry to say, used to call her Mrs. Major Gammon; for
if the worthy widow had a propensity, it was to talk largely of herself
and family (of her own family, for she held her husband's very cheap),
and of the wonders of her paternal mansion, Molloyville, county of Mayo.
She was of the Molloys of that county; and though I never heard of the
family before, I have little doubt, from what Mrs. Major Gam stated,
that they were the most ancient and illustrious family of that part of
Ireland. I remember there came down to see his aunt a young fellow
with huge red whiskers and tight nankeens, a green coat, and an awful
breastpin, who, after two days' stay at the Spa, proposed marriage to
Miss S----, or, in default, a duel with her father; and who drove a
flash curricle with a bay and a grey, and who was presented with much
pride by Mrs. Gam as Castlereagh Molloy of Molloyville. We all agreed
that he was the most insufferable snob of the whole season, and were
delighted when a bailiff came down in search of him.

Well, this is all I know personally of the Molloyville family; but at
the house if you met the widow Gam, and talked on any subject in life,
you were sure to hear of it. If you asked her to have peas at dinner,
she would say, "Oh, sir, after the peas at Molloyville, I really don't
care for any others,--do I, dearest Jemima? We always had a dish in the
month of June, when my father gave his head gardener a guinea (we had
three at Molloyville), and sent him with his compliments and a quart of
peas to our neighbour, dear Lord Marrowfat. What a sweet place Marrowfat
Park is! isn't it, Jemima?" If a carriage passed by the window, Mrs.
Major Gammon would be sure to tell you that there were three carriages
at Molloyville, "the barouche, the chawiot, and the covered cyar." In
the same manner she would favour you with the number and names of the
footmen of the establishment; and on a visit to Warwick Castle (for this
bustling woman made one in every party of pleasure that was formed from
the hotel), she gave us to understand that the great walk by the river
was altogether inferior to the principal avenue of Molloyville Park.
I should not have been able to tell so much about Mrs. Gam and her
daughter, but that, between ourselves, I was particularly sweet upon a
young lady at the time, whose papa lived at the "Royal," and was under
the care of Doctor Jephson.

The Jemima appealed to by Mrs. Gam in the above sentence was, of course,
her daughter, apostrophised by her mother, "Jemima, my soul's darling?"
or, "Jemima, my blessed child!" or, "Jemima, my own love!" The
sacrifices that Mrs. Gam had made for that daughter were, she said,
astonishing. The money she had spent in masters upon her, the illnesses
through which she had nursed her, the ineffable love the mother bore
her, were only known to Heaven, Mrs. Gam said. They used to come into
the room with their arms round each other's waists: at dinner between
the courses the mother would sit with one hand locked in her daughter's;
and if only two or three young men were present at the time, would be
pretty sure to kiss her Jemima more than once during the time whilst the
bohea was poured out.

As for Miss Gam, if she was not handsome, candour forbids me to say she
was ugly. She was neither one nor t'other. She was a person who wore
ringlets and a band round her forehead; she knew four songs, which
became rather tedious at the end of a couple of months' acquaintance;
she had excessively bare shoulders; she inclined to wear numbers of
cheap ornaments, rings, brooches, ferronnieres, smelling-bottles, and
was always, we thought, very smartly dressed: though old Mrs. Lynx
hinted that her gowns and her mother's were turned over and over again,
and that her eyes were almost put out by darning stockings.

These eyes Miss Gam had very large, though rather red and weak, and used
to roll them about at every eligible unmarried man in the place. But
though the widow subscribed to all the balls, though she hired a fly
to go to the meet of the hounds, though she was constant at church, and
Jemima sang louder than any person there except the clerk, and though,
probably, any person who made her a happy husband would be invited down
to enjoy the three footmen, gardeners, and carriages at Molloyville, yet
no English gentleman was found sufficiently audacious to propose.
Old Lynx used to say that the pair had been at Tunbridge, Harrogate,
Brighton, Ramsgate, Cheltenham, for this eight years past; where they
had met, it seemed, with no better fortune. Indeed, the widow looked
rather high for her blessed child: and as she looked with the contempt
which no small number of Irish people feel upon all persons who get
their bread by labour or commerce; and as she was a person whose
energetic manners, costume, and brogue were not much to the taste of
quiet English country gentlemen, Jemima--sweet, spotless flower--still
remained on her hands, a thought withered, perhaps, and seedy.

Now, at this time, the 120th Regiment was quartered at Weedon Barracks,
and with the corps was a certain Assistant-Surgeon Haggarty, a large,
lean, tough, raw-boned man, with big hands, knock-knees, and carroty
whiskers, and, withal, as honest a creature as ever handled a lancet.
Haggarty, as his name imports, was of the very same nation as Mrs. Gam,
and, what is more, the honest fellow had some of the peculiarities which
belonged to the widow, and bragged about his family almost as much as
she did. I do not know of what particular part of Ireland they were
kings; but monarchs they must have been, as have been the ancestors of
so many thousand Hibernian families; but they had been men of no small
consideration in Dublin, "where my father," Haggarty said, "is as well
known as King William's statue, and where he 'rowls his carriage, too,'
let me tell ye."

Hence, Haggarty was called by the wags "Rowl the carriage," and several
of them made inquiries of Mrs. Gam regarding him: "Mrs. Gam, when you
used to go up from Molloyville to the Lord Lieutenant's balls, and had
your townhouse in Fitzwilliam Square, used you to meet the famous Doctor
Haggarty in society?"

"Is it Surgeon Haggarty of Gloucester Street ye mean? The black Papist!
D'ye suppose that the Molloys would sit down to table with a creature of
that sort?"

"Why, isn't he the most famous physician in Dublin, and doesn't he rowl
his carriage there?"

"The horrid wretch! He keeps a shop, I tell ye, and sends his sons out
with the medicine. He's got four of them off into the army, Ulick and
Phil, and Terence and Denny, and now it's Charles that takes out the
physic. But how should I know about these odious creatures? Their mother
was a Burke, of Burke's Town, county Cavan, and brought Surgeon Haggarty
two thousand pounds. She was a Protestant; and I am surprised how she
could have taken up with a horrid odious Popish apothecary!"

From the extent of the widow's information, I am led to suppose that the
inhabitants of Dublin are not less anxious about their neighbours than
are the natives of English cities; and I think it is very probable that
Mrs. Gam's account of the young Haggartys who carried out the medicine
is perfectly correct, for a lad in the 120th made a caricature of
Haggarty coming out of a chemist's shop with an oilcloth basket under
his arm, which set the worthy surgeon in such a fury that there would
have been a duel between him and the ensign, could the fiery doctor have
had his way.

Now, Dionysius Haggarty was of an exceedingly inflammable temperament,
and it chanced that of all the invalids, the visitors, the young squires
of Warwickshire, the young manufacturers from Birmingham, the young
officers from the barracks--it chanced, unluckily for Miss Gam and
himself, that he was the only individual who was in the least smitten
by her personal charms. He was very tender and modest about his love,
however, for it must be owned that he respected Mrs. Gam hugely, and
fully admitted, like a good simple fellow as he was, the superiority of
that lady's birth and breeding to his own. How could he hope that he, a
humble assistant-surgeon, with a thousand pounds his Aunt Kitty left
him for all his fortune--how could he hope that one of the race of
Molloyville would ever condescend to marry him?

Inflamed, however, by love, and inspired by wine, one day at a picnic at
Kenilworth, Haggarty, whose love and raptures were the talk of the whole
regiment, was induced by his waggish comrades to make a proposal in
form.

"Are you aware, Mr. Haggarty, that you are speaking to a Molloy?"
was all the reply majestic Mrs. Gam made when, according to the usual
formula, the fluttering Jemima referred her suitor to "Mamma." She left
him with a look which was meant to crush the poor fellow to earth; she
gathered up her cloak and bonnet, and precipitately called for her fly.
She took care to tell every single soul in Leamington that the son of
the odious Papist apothecary had had the audacity to propose for her
daughter (indeed a proposal, coming from whatever quarter it may,
does no harm), and left Haggarty in a state of extreme depression and
despair.

His down-heartedness, indeed, surprised most of his acquaintances in and
out of the regiment, for the young lady was no beauty, and a doubtful
fortune, and Dennis was a man outwardly of an unromantic turn, who
seemed to have a great deal more liking for beefsteak and whisky-punch
than for women, however fascinating.

But there is no doubt this shy uncouth rough fellow had a warmer and
more faithful heart hid within him than many a dandy who is as handsome
as Apollo. I, for my part, never can understand why a man falls in love,
and heartily give him credit for so doing, never mind with what or
whom. THAT I take to be a point quite as much beyond an individual's own
control as the catching of the small-pox or the colour of his hair. To
the surprise of all, Assistant-Surgeon Dionysius Haggarty was deeply and
seriously in love; and I am told that one day he very nearly killed the
before-mentioned young ensign with a carving-knife, for venturing to
make a second caricature, representing Lady Gammon and Jemima in a
fantastical park, surrounded by three gardeners, three carriages, three
footmen, and the covered cyar. He would have no joking concerning them.
He became moody and quarrelsome of habit. He was for some time much more
in the surgery and hospital than in the mess. He gave up the eating, for
the most part, of those vast quantities of beef and pudding, for which
his stomach used to afford such ample and swift accommodation; and when
the cloth was drawn, instead of taking twelve tumblers, and singing
Irish melodies, as he used to do, in a horrible cracked yelling voice,
he would retire to his own apartment, or gloomily pace the barrack-yard,
or madly whip and spur a grey mare he had on the road to Leamington,
where his Jemima (although invisible for him) still dwelt.

The season at Leamington coming to a conclusion by the withdrawal of the
young fellows who frequented that watering-place, the widow Gam retired
to her usual quarters for the other months of the year. Where these
quarters were, I think we have no right to ask, for I believe she had
quarrelled with her brother at Molloyville, and besides, was a great
deal too proud to be a burden on anybody.

Not only did the widow quit Leamington, but very soon afterwards the
120th received its marching orders, and left Weedon and Warwickshire.
Haggarty's appetite was by this time partially restored, but his love
was not altered, and his humour was still morose and gloomy. I am
informed that at this period of his life he wrote some poems relative to
his unhappy passion; a wild set of verses of several lengths, and in
his handwriting, being discovered upon a sheet of paper in which a
pitch-plaster was wrapped up, which Lieutenant and Adjutant Wheezer was
compelled to put on for a cold.

Fancy then, three years afterwards, the surprise of all Haggarty's
acquaintances on reading in the public papers the following
announcement:

"Married, at Monkstown on the 12th instant, Dionysius Haggarty, Esq.,
of H.M. 120th Foot, to Jemima Amelia Wilhelmina Molloy, daughter of the
late Major Lancelot Gam, R.M., and granddaughter of the late, and niece
of the present Burke Bodkin Blake Molloy, Esq., Molloyville, county
Mayo."

"Has the course of true love at last begun to run smooth?" thought I, as
I laid down the paper; and the old times, and the old leering bragging
widow, and the high shoulders of her daughter, and the jolly days with
the 120th, and Doctor Jephson's one-horse chaise, and the Warwickshire
hunt, and--and Louisa S----, but never mind HER,--came back to my mind.
Has that good-natured simple fellow at last met with his reward? Well,
if he has not to marry the mother-in-law too, he may get on well enough.

Another year announced the retirement of Assistant-Surgeon Haggarty
from the 120th, where he was replaced by Assistant-Surgeon Angus
Rothsay Leech, a Scotchman, probably; with whom I have not the least
acquaintance, and who has nothing whatever to do with this little
history.

Still more years passed on, during which time I will not say that I kept
a constant watch upon the fortunes of Mr. Haggarty and his lady; for,
perhaps, if the truth were known, I never thought for a moment about
them; until one day, being at Kingstown, near Dublin, dawdling on
the beach, and staring at the Hill of Howth, as most people at that
watering-place do, I saw coming towards me a tall gaunt man, with a pair
of bushy red whiskers, of which I thought I had seen the like in former
years, and a face which could be no other than Haggarty's. It was
Haggarty, ten years older than when we last met, and greatly more grim
and thin. He had on one shoulder a young gentleman in a dirty tartan
costume, and a face exceedingly like his own peeping from under a
battered plume of black feathers, while with his other hand he was
dragging a light green go-cart, in which reposed a female infant of some
two years old. Both were roaring with great power of lungs.

As soon as Dennis saw me, his face lost the dull puzzled expression
which had seemed to characterise it; he dropped the pole of the go-cart
from one hand, and his son from the other, and came jumping forward to
greet me with all his might, leaving his progeny roaring in the road.

"Bless my sowl," says he, "sure it's Fitz-Boodle? Fitz, don't you
remember me? Dennis Haggarty of the 120th? Leamington, you know? Molloy,
my boy, hould your tongue, and stop your screeching, and Jemima's too;
d'ye hear? Well, it does good to sore eyes to see an old face. How fat
you're grown, Fitz; and were ye ever in Ireland before? and a'n't ye
delighted with it? Confess, now, isn't it beautiful?"

This question regarding the merits of their country, which I have
remarked is put by most Irish persons, being answered in a satisfactory
manner, and the shouts of the infants appeased from an apple-stall
hard by, Dennis and I talked of old times; I congratulated him on his
marriage with the lovely girl whom we all admired, and hoped he had a
fortune with her, and so forth. His appearance, however, did not bespeak
a great fortune: he had an old grey hat, short old trousers, an old
waistcoat with regimental buttons, and patched Blucher boots, such as
are not usually sported by persons in easy life.

"Ah!" says he, with a sigh, in reply to my queries, "times are changed
since them days, Fitz-Boodle. My wife's not what she was--the beautiful
creature you knew her. Molloy, my boy, run off in a hurry to your mamma,
and tell her an English gentleman is coming home to dine; for you'll
dine with me, Fitz, in course?" And I agreed to partake of that meal;
though Master Molloy altogether declined to obey his papa's orders with
respect to announcing the stranger.

"Well, I must announce you myself," said Haggarty, with a smile. "Come,
it's just dinner-time, and my little cottage is not a hundred yards
off." Accordingly, we all marched in procession to Dennis's little
cottage, which was one of a row and a half of one-storied houses, with
little courtyards before them, and mostly with very fine names on the
doorposts of each. "Surgeon Haggarty" was emblazoned on Dennis's gate,
on a stained green copper-plate; and, not content with this, on the
door-post above the bell was an oval with the inscription of "New
Molloyville." The bell was broken, of course; the court, or garden-path,
was mouldy, weedy, seedy; there were some dirty rocks, by way of
ornament, round a faded glass-plat in the centre, some clothes and
rags hanging out of most part of the windows of New Molloyville, the
immediate entrance to which was by a battered scraper, under a broken
trellis-work, up which a withered creeper declined any longer to climb.

"Small, but snug," says Haggarty: "I'll lead the way, Fitz; put your hat
on the flower-pot there, and turn to the left into the drawing-room."
A fog of onions and turf-smoke filled the whole of the house, and gave
signs that dinner was not far off. Far off? You could hear it frizzling
in the kitchen, where the maid was also endeavouring to hush the crying
of a third refractory child. But as we entered, all three of Haggarty's
darlings were in full roar.

"Is it you, Dennis?" cried a sharp raw voice, from a dark corner in
the drawing-room to which we were introduced, and in which a dirty
tablecloth was laid for dinner, some bottles of porter and a cold
mutton-bone being laid out on a rickety grand piano hard by. "Ye're
always late, Mr. Haggarty. Have you brought the whisky from Nowlan's?
I'll go bail ye've not, now."

"My dear, I've brought an old friend of yours and mine to take pot-luck
with us to-day," said Dennis.

"When is he to come?" said the lady. At which speech I was rather
surprised, for I stood before her.

"Here he is, Jemima my love," answered Dennis, looking at me. "Mr.
Fitz-Boodle: don't you remember him in Warwickshire, darling?"

"Mr. Fitz-Boodle! I am very glad to see him," said the lady, rising and
curtseying with much cordiality.

Mrs. Haggarty was blind.

Mrs. Haggarty was not only blind, but it was evident that smallpox
had been the cause of her loss of vision. Her eyes were bound with a
bandage, her features were entirely swollen, scarred and distorted by
the horrible effects of the malady. She had been knitting in a corner
when we entered, and was wrapped in a very dirty bedgown. Her voice to
me was quite different to that in which she addressed her husband. She
spoke to Haggarty in broad Irish: she addressed me in that most odious
of all languages--Irish-English, endeavouring to the utmost to disguise
her brogue, and to speak with the true dawdling distingue English air.

"Are you long in I-a-land?" said the poor creature in this accent. "You
must faind it a sad ba'ba'ous place, Mr Fitz-Boodle, I'm shu-ah! It was
vary kaind of you to come upon us en famille, and accept a dinner sans
ceremonie. Mr. Haggarty, I hope you'll put the waine into aice, Mr.
Fitz-Boodle must be melted with this hot weathah."

For some time she conducted the conversation in this polite strain, and
I was obliged to say, in reply to a query of hers, that I did not find
her the least altered, though I should never have recognised her but for
this rencontre. She told Haggarty with a significant air to get the wine
from the cellah, and whispered to me that he was his own butlah; and the
poor fellow, taking the hint, scudded away into the town for a pound of
beefsteak and a couple of bottles of wine from the tavern.

"Will the childhren get their potatoes and butther here?" said a
barefoot girl, with long black hair flowing over her face, which she
thrust in at the door.

"Let them sup in the nursery, Elizabeth, and send--ah! Edwards to me."

"Is it cook you mane, ma'am?" said the girl.

"Send her at once!" shrieked the unfortunate woman; and the noise of
frying presently ceasing, a hot woman made her appearance, wiping her
brows with her apron, and asking, with an accent decidedly Hibernian,
what the misthress wanted.

"Lead me up to my dressing-room, Edwards: I really am not fit to be seen
in this dishabille by Mr. Fitz-Boodle."

"Fait' I can't!" says Edwards; "sure the masther's at the butcher's, and
can't look to the kitchen-fire!"

"Nonsense, I must go!" cried Mrs. Haggarty; and Edwards, putting on a
resigned air, and giving her arm and face a further rub with her apron,
held out her arm to Mrs. Dennis, and the pair went upstairs.

She left me to indulge my reflections for half-an-hour, at the end of
which period she came downstairs dressed in an old yellow satin, with
the poor shoulders exposed just as much as ever. She had mounted a
tawdry cap, which Haggarty himself must have selected for her. She had
all sorts of necklaces, bracelets, and earrings in gold, in garnets,
in mother-of-pearl, in ormolu. She brought in a furious savour of musk,
which drove the odours of onions and turf-smoke before it; and she
waved across her wretched angular mean scarred features an old cambric
handkerchief with a yellow lace-border.

"And so you would have known me anywhere, Mr. Fitz-Boodle?" said she,
with a grin that was meant to be most fascinating. "I was sure you
would; for though my dreadful illness deprived me of my sight, it is a
mercy that it did not change my features or complexion at all!"

This mortification had been spared the unhappy woman; but I don't
know whether, with all her vanity, her infernal pride, folly, and
selfishness, it was charitable to leave her in her error.

Yet why correct her? There is a quality in certain people which is
above all advice, exposure, or correction. Only let a man or woman have
DULNESS sufficient, and they need bow to no extant authority. A dullard
recognises no betters; a dullard can't see that he is in the wrong;
a dullard has no scruples of conscience, no doubts of pleasing, or
succeeding, or doing right; no qualms for other people's feelings, no
respect but for the fool himself. How can you make a fool perceive he is
a fool? Such a personage can no more see his own folly than he can see
his own ears. And the great quality of Dulness is to be unalterably
contented with itself. What myriads of souls are there of this admirable
sort,--selfish, stingy, ignorant, passionate, brutal; bad sons, mothers,
fathers, never known to do kind actions!

To pause, however, in this disquisition, which was carrying us far off
Kingstown, New Molloyville, Ireland--nay, into the wide world wherever
Dulness inhabits--let it be stated that Mrs. Haggarty, from my brief
acquaintance with her and her mother, was of the order of persons just
mentioned. There was an air of conscious merit about her, very hard to
swallow along with the infamous dinner poor Dennis managed, after
much delay, to get on the table. She did not fail to invite me to
Molloyville, where she said her cousin would be charmed to see me; and
she told me almost as many anecdotes about that place as her mother used
to impart in former days. I observed, moreover, that Dennis cut her
the favourite pieces of the beefsteak, that she ate thereof with great
gusto, and that she drank with similar eagerness of the various strong
liquors at table. "We Irish ladies are all fond of a leetle glass of
punch," she said, with a playful air, and Dennis mixed her a powerful
tumbler of such violent grog as I myself could swallow only with some
difficulty. She talked of her suffering a great deal, of her sacrifices,
of the luxuries to which she had been accustomed before marriage,--in
a word, of a hundred of those themes on which some ladies are in the
custom of enlarging when they wish to plague some husbands.

But honest Dennis, far from being angry at this perpetual, wearisome,
impudent recurrence to her own superiority, rather encouraged the
conversation than otherwise. It pleased him to hear his wife discourse
about her merits and family splendours. He was so thoroughly beaten
down and henpecked, that he, as it were, gloried in his servitude, and
fancied that his wife's magnificence reflected credit on himself. He
looked towards me, who was half sick of the woman and her egotism, as
if expecting me to exhibit the deepest sympathy, and flung me glances
across the table as much as to say, "What a gifted creature my Jemima
is, and what a fine fellow I am to be in possession of her!" When the
children came down she scolded them, of course, and dismissed them
abruptly (for which circumstance, perhaps, the writer of these pages
was not in his heart very sorry), and, after having sat a preposterously
long time, left us, asking whether we would have coffee there or in her
boudoir.

"Oh! here, of course," said Dennis, with rather a troubled air, and
in about ten minutes the lovely creature was led back to us again by
"Edwards," and the coffee made its appearance. After coffee her husband
begged her to let Mr. Fitz-Boodle hear her voice: "He longs for some of
his old favourites."

"No! DO you?" said she; and was led in triumph to the jingling old
piano, and with a screechy wiry voice, sang those very abominable old
ditties which I had heard her sing at Leamington ten years back.

Haggarty, as she sang, flung himself back in the chair delighted.
Husbands always are, and with the same song, one that they have heard
when they were nineteen years old probably; most Englishmen's tunes have
that date, and it is rather affecting, I think, to hear an old gentleman
of sixty or seventy quavering the old ditty that was fresh when HE was
fresh and in his prime. If he has a musical wife, depend on it he thinks
her old songs of 1788 are better than any he has heard since: in fact
he has heard NONE since. When the old couple are in high good-humour the
old gentleman will take the old lady round the waist, and say, "My dear,
do sing me one of your own songs," and she sits down and sings with her
old voice, and, as she sings, the roses of her youth bloom again for a
moment. Ranelagh resuscitates, and she is dancing a minuet in powder and
a train.

This is another digression. It was occasioned by looking at poor
Dennis's face while his wife was screeching (and, believe me, the former
was the more pleasant occupation). Bottom tickled by the fairies could
not have been in greater ecstasies. He thought the music was divine;
and had further reason for exulting in it, which was, that his wife was
always in a good humour after singing, and never would sing but in that
happy frame of mind. Dennis had hinted so much in our little colloquy
during the ten minutes of his lady's absence in the "boudoir;" so, at
the conclusion of each piece, we shouted "Bravo!" and clapped our hands
like mad.

Such was my insight into the life of Surgeon Dionysius Haggarty and his
wife; and I must have come upon him at a favourable moment too, for poor
Dennis has spoken, subsequently, of our delightful evening at Kingstown,
and evidently thinks to this day that his friend was fascinated by
the entertainment there. His inward economy was as follows: he had his
half-pay, a thousand pounds, about a hundred a year that his father
left, and his wife had sixty pounds a year from the mother; which the
mother, of course, never paid. He had no practice, for he was absorbed
in attention to his Jemima and the children, whom he used to wash, to
dress, to carry out, to walk, or to ride, as we have seen, and who
could not have a servant, as their dear blind mother could never be left
alone. Mrs. Haggarty, a great invalid, used to lie in bed till one, and
have breakfast and hot luncheon there. A fifth part of his income was
spent in having her wheeled about in a chair, by which it was his duty
to walk daily for an allotted number of hours. Dinner would ensue, and
the amateur clergy, who abound in Ireland, and of whom Mrs. Haggarty
was a great admirer, lauded her everywhere as a model of resignation and
virtue, and praised beyond measure the admirable piety with which she
bore her sufferings.

Well, every man to his taste. It did not certainly appear to me that SHE
was the martyr of the family.

"The circumstances of my marriage with Jemima," Dennis said to me, in
some after conversations we had on this interesting subject, "were the
most romantic and touching you can conceive. You saw what an impression
the dear girl had made upon me when we were at Weedon; for from the
first day I set eyes on her, and heard her sing her delightful song of
'Dark-eyed Maiden of Araby,' I felt, and said to Turniquet of ours, that
very night, that SHE was the dark-eyed maid of Araby for ME--not that
she was, you know, for she was born in Shropshire. But I felt that I had
seen the woman who was to make me happy or miserable for life. You know
how I proposed for her at Kenilworth, and how I was rejected, and how I
almost shot myself in consequence--no, you don't know that, for I said
nothing about it to anyone, but I can tell you it was a very near thing;
and a very lucky thing for me I didn't do it: for,--would you believe
it?--the dear girl was in love with me all the time."

"Was she really?" said I, who recollected that Miss Gam's love of those
days showed itself in a very singular manner; but the fact is, when
women are most in love they most disguise it.

"Over head and ears in love with poor Dennis," resumed that worthy
fellow, "who'd ever have thought it? But I have it from the best
authority, from her own mother, with whom I'm not over and above good
friends now; but of this fact she assured me, and I'll tell you when and
how.

"We were quartered at Cork three years after we were at Weedon, and it
was our last year at home; and a great mercy that my dear girl spoke
in time, or where should we have been now? Well, one day, marching
home from parade, I saw a lady seated at an open window, by another who
seemed an invalid, and the lady at the window, who was dressed in the
profoundest mourning, cried out, with a scream, 'Gracious, heavens! it's
Mr. Haggarty of the 120th.'

"'Sure I know that voice,' says I to Whiskerton.

"'It's a great mercy you don't know it a deal too well,' says he: 'it's
Lady Gammon. She's on some husband-hunting scheme, depend on it, for
that daughter of hers. She was at Bath last year on the same errand, and
at Cheltenham the year before, where, Heaven bless you! she's as well
known as the "Hen and Chickens."'

"'I'll thank you not to speak disrespectfully of Miss Jemima Gam,' said
I to Whiskerton; 'she's of one of the first families in Ireland, and
whoever says a word against a woman I once proposed for, insults me,--do
you understand?'

"'Well, marry her, if you like,' says Whiskerton, quite peevish: 'marry
her, and be hanged!'

"Marry her! the very idea of it set my brain a-whirling, and made me a
thousand times more mad than I am by nature.

"You may be sure I walked up the hill to the parade-ground that
afternoon, and with a beating heart too. I came to the widow's house. It
was called 'New Molloyville,' as this is. Wherever she takes a house for
six months she calls it 'New Molloyville;' and has had one in Mallow,
in Bandon, in Sligo, in Castlebar, in Fermoy, in Drogheda, and the deuce
knows where besides: but the blinds were down, and though I thought I
saw somebody behind 'em, no notice was taken of poor Denny Haggarty,
and I paced up and down all mess-time in hopes of catching a glimpse of
Jemima, but in vain. The next day I was on the ground again; I was just
as much in love as ever, that's the fact. I'd never been in that way
before, look you; and when once caught, I knew it was for life.

"There's no use in telling you how long I beat about the bush, but when
I DID get admittance to the house (it was through the means of young
Castlereagh Molloy, whom you may remember at Leamington, and who was
at Cork for the regatta, and used to dine at our mess, and had taken a
mighty fancy to me)--when I DID get into the house, I say, I rushed in
medias res at once; I couldn't keep myself quiet, my heart was too full.

"Oh, Fitz! I shall never forget the day,--the moment I was inthrojuiced
into the dthrawing-room" (as he began to be agitated, Dennis's brogue
broke out with greater richness than ever; but though a stranger may
catch, and repeat from memory, a few words, it is next to impossible for
him to KEEP UP A CONVERSATION in Irish, so that we had best give up all
attempts to imitate Dennis). "When I saw old mother Gam," said he, "my
feelings overcame me all at once. I rowled down on the ground, sir, as
if I'd been hit by a musket-ball. 'Dearest madam,' says I, 'I'll die if
you don't give me Jemima.'

"'Heavens, Mr. Haggarty!' says she, 'how you seize me with surprise!
Castlereagh, my dear nephew, had you not better leave us?' and away he
went, lighting a cigar, and leaving me still on the floor.

"'Rise, Mr. Haggarty,' continued the widow. 'I will not attempt to deny
that this constancy towards my daughter is extremely affecting, however
sudden your present appeal may be. I will not attempt to deny that,
perhaps, Jemima may have a similar feeling; but, as I said, I never
could give my daughter to a Catholic.'

"'I'm as good a Protestant as yourself, ma'am,' says I; 'my mother was
an heiress, and we were all brought up her way.'

"'That makes the matter very different,' says she, turning up the whites
of her eyes. 'How could I ever have reconciled it to my conscience to
see my blessed child married to a Papist? How could I ever have taken
him to Molloyville? Well, this obstacle being removed, _I_ must put
myself no longer in the way between two young people. _I_ must sacrifice
myself; as I always have when my darling girl was in question. YOU shall
see her, the poor dear lovely gentle sufferer, and learn your fate from
her own lips.'

"'The sufferer, ma'am,' says I; 'has Miss Gam been ill?'

"'What! haven't you heard?' cried the widow. 'Haven't you heard of the
dreadful illness which so nearly carried her from me? For nine weeks,
Mr. Haggarty, I watched her day and night, without taking a wink of
sleep,--for nine weeks she lay trembling between death and life; and I
paid the doctor eighty-three guineas. She is restored now; but she is
the wreck of the beautiful creature she was. Suffering, and, perhaps,
ANOTHER DISAPPOINTMENT--but we won't mention that NOW--have so pulled
her down. But I will leave you, and prepare my sweet girl for this
strange, this entirely unexpected visit.'

"I won't tell you what took place between me and Jemima, to whom I was
introduced as she sat in the darkened room, poor sufferer! nor describe
to you with what a thrill of joy I seized (after groping about for it)
her poor emaciated hand. She did not withdraw it; I came out of that
room an engaged man, sir; and NOW I was enabled to show her that I had
always loved her sincerely, for there was my will, made three years
back, in her favour: that night she refused me, as I told ye. I would
have shot myself, but they'd have brought me in non compos; and my
brother Mick would have contested the will, and so I determined to live,
in order that she might benefit by my dying. I had but a thousand pounds
then: since that my father has left me two more. I willed every shilling
to her, as you may fancy, and settled it upon her when we married, as we
did soon after. It was not for some time that I was allowed to see
the poor girl's face, or, indeed, was aware of the horrid loss she had
sustained. Fancy my agony, my dear fellow, when I saw that beautiful
wreck!"

There was something not a little affecting to think, in the conduct of
this brave fellow, that he never once, as he told his story, seemed to
allude to the possibility of his declining to marry a woman who was not
the same as the woman he loved; but that he was quite as faithful to
her now, as he had been when captivated by the poor tawdry charms of the
silly Miss of Leamington. It was hard that such a noble heart as this
should be flung away upon yonder foul mass of greedy vanity. Was it
hard, or not, that he should remain deceived in his obstinate humility,
and continue to admire the selfish silly being whom he had chosen to
worship?

"I should have been appointed surgeon of the regiment," continued
Dennis, "soon after, when it was ordered abroad to Jamaica, where it now
is. But my wife would not hear of going, and said she would break her
heart if she left her mother. So I retired on half-pay, and took this
cottage; and in case any practice should fall in my way--why, there is
my name on the brass plate, and I'm ready for anything that comes. But
the only case that ever DID come was one day when I was driving my wife
in the chaise; and another, one night, of a beggar with a broken head.
My wife makes me a present of a baby every year, and we've no debts; and
between you and me and the post, as long as my mother-in-law is out of
the house, I'm as happy as I need be."

"What! you and the old lady don't get on well?" said I.

"I can't say we do; it's not in nature, you know," said Dennis, with a
faint grin. "She comes into the house, and turns it topsy-turvy. When
she's here I'm obliged to sleep in the scullery. She's never paid her
daughter's income since the first year, though she brags about her
sacrifices as if she had ruined herself for Jemima; and besides, when
she's here, there's a whole clan of the Molloys, horse, foot, and
dragoons, that are quartered upon us, and eat me out of house and home."

"And is Molloyville such a fine place as the widow described it?" asked
I, laughing, and not a little curious.

"Oh, a mighty fine place entirely!" said Dennis. "There's the oak park
of two hundred acres, the finest land ye ever saw, only they've cut all
the wood down. The garden in the old Molloys' time, they say, was the
finest ever seen in the West of Ireland; but they've taken all the glass
to mend the house windows: and small blame to them either. There's a
clear rent-roll of thirty-five hundred a year, only it's in the hand of
receivers; besides other debts, for which there is no land security."

"Your cousin-in-law, Castlereagh Molloy, won't come into a large
fortune?"

"Oh, he'll do very well," said Dennis. "As long as he can get credit,
he's not the fellow to stint himself. Faith, I was fool enough to put my
name to a bit of paper for him, and as they could not catch him in Mayo,
they laid hold of me at Kingstown here. And there was a pretty to do.
Didn't Mrs. Gam say I was ruining her family, that's all? I paid it by
instalments (for all my money is settled on Jemima); and Castlereagh,
who's an honourable fellow, offered me any satisfaction in life. Anyhow,
he couldn't do more than THAT."

"Of course not: and now you're friends?"

"Yes, and he and his aunt have had a tiff, too; and he abuses her
properly, I warrant ye. He says that she carried about Jemima from place
to place, and flung her at the head of every unmarried man in England
a'most--my poor Jemima, and she all the while dying in love with me!
As soon as she got over the small-pox--she took it at Fermoy--God bless
her, I wish I'd been by to be her nurse-tender--as soon as she was
rid of it, the old lady said to Castlereagh, 'Castlereagh, go to the
bar'cks, and find out in the Army List where the 120th is.' Off she came
to Cork hot foot. It appears that while she was ill, Jemima's love for
me showed itself in such a violent way that her mother was overcome, and
promised that, should the dear child recover, she would try and bring us
together. Castlereagh says she would have gone after us to Jamaica."

"I have no doubt she would," said I.

"Could you have a stronger proof of love than that?" cried Dennis. "My
dear girl's illness and frightful blindness have, of course, injured her
health and her temper. She cannot in her position look to the children,
you know, and so they come under my charge for the most part; and her
temper is unequal, certainly. But you see what a sensitive, refined,
elegant creature she is, and may fancy that she's often put out by a
rough fellow like me."

Here Dennis left me, saying it was time to go and walk out the children;
and I think his story has matter of some wholesome reflection in it for
bachelors who are about to change their condition, or may console some
who are mourning their celibacy. Marry, gentlemen, if you like; leave
your comfortable dinner at the club for cold-mutton and curl-papers at
your home; give up your books or pleasures, and take to yourselves wives
and children; but think well on what you do first, as I have no doubt
you will after this advice and example. Advice is always useful in
matters of love; men always take it; they always follow other people's
opinions, not their own: they always profit by example. When they see a
pretty woman, and feel the delicious madness of love coming over them,
they always stop to calculate her temper, her money, their own money,
or suitableness for the married life.... Ha, ha, ha! Let us fool in this
way no more. I have been in love forty-three times with all ranks and
conditions of women, and would have married every time if they would
have let me. How many wives had King Solomon, the wisest of men? And is
not that story a warning to us that Love is master of the wisest? It is
only fools who defy him.

I must come, however, to the last, and perhaps the saddest, part of poor
Denny Haggarty's history. I met him once more, and in such a condition
as made me determine to write this history.

In the month of June last I happened to be at Richmond, a delightful
little place of retreat; and there, sunning himself upon the terrace,
was my old friend of the 120th: he looked older, thinner, poorer,
and more wretched than I had ever seen him. "What! you have given up
Kingstown?" said I, shaking him by the hand.

"Yes," says he.

"And is my lady and your family here at Richmond?"

"No," says he, with a sad shake of the head; and the poor fellow's
hollow eyes filled with tears.

"Good heavens, Denny! what's the matter?" said I. He was squeezing my
hand like a vice as I spoke.

"They've LEFT me!" he burst out with a dreadful shout of passionate
grief--a horrible scream which seemed to be wrenched out of his heart.
"Left me!" said he, sinking down on a seat, and clenching his great
fists, and shaking his lean arms wildly. "I'm a wise man now, Mr.
Fitz-Boodle. Jemima has gone away from me, and yet you know how I loved
her, and how happy we were! I've got nobody now; but I'll die soon,
that's one comfort: and to think it's she that'll kill me after all!"

The story, which he told with a wild and furious lamentation such as is
not known among men of our cooler country, and such as I don't like now
to recall, was a very simple one. The mother-in-law had taken possession
of the house, and had driven him from it. His property at his marriage
was settled on his wife. She had never loved him, and told him this
secret at last, and drove him out of doors with her selfish scorn and
ill-temper. The boy had died; the girls were better, he said, brought up
among the Molloys than they could be with him; and so he was quite alone
in the world, and was living, or rather dying, on forty pounds a year.

His troubles are very likely over by this time. The two fools who caused
his misery will never read this history of him; THEY never read godless
stories in magazines: and I wish, honest reader, that you and I went to
church as much as they do. These people are not wicked BECAUSE of
their religious observances, but IN SPITE of them. They are too dull to
understand humility, too blind to see a tender and simple heart under
a rough ungainly bosom. They are sure that all their conduct towards my
poor friend here has been perfectly righteous, and that they have given
proofs of the most Christian virtue. Haggarty's wife is considered by
her friends as a martyr to a savage husband, and her mother is the angel
that has come to rescue her. All they did was to cheat him and desert
him. And safe in that wonderful self-complacency with which the fools
of this earth are endowed, they have not a single pang of conscience for
their villany towards him, consider their heartlessness as a proof and
consequence of their spotless piety and virtue.




FOOTNOTES

[Footnote 1: The words of this song are copyright, nor will the
copyright be sold for less than twopence-halfpenny.]

[Footnote 2: A French proverbe furnished the author with the notion of
the rivalry between the Barber and the Tailor.]

[Footnote 3: As it is very probable that many fair readers may not
approve of the extremely forcible language in which the combat is
depicted, I beg them to skip it and pass on to the next chapter, and to
remember that it has been modelled on the style of the very best writers
of the sporting papers.]

[Footnote 4: Every person who has lived abroad can, of course, point out
a score of honourable exceptions to the case above hinted at, and knows
many such unions in which it is the Frenchman who honours the English
lady by marrying her. But it must be remembered that marrying in France
means commonly fortune-hunting: and as for the respect in which marriage
is held in France, let all the French novels in M. Rolandi's library be
perused by those who wish to come to a decision upon the question.]

========================================
========================================

CATHERINE: A STORY


by William Makepeace Thackeray

[Catherine, A Story by Ikey Solomons, Esq., Junior.]



Contents

Advertisement

1. Introducing to the reader the chief personages of this narrative.

2. In which are depicted the pleasures of a sentimental attachment.

3. In which a narcotic is administered, and a great deal of genteel
society depicted.

4. In which Mrs. Catherine becomes an honest woman again.

5. Contains Mr. Brock's autobiography, and other matter.

6. The adventures of the ambassador, Mr. MacShane.

7. Which embraces a period of seven years.

8. Enumerates the accomplishments of Master Thomas Billings--introduces
Brock as Doctor Wood--and announces the execution of Ensign MacShane.

9. Interview between Count Galgenstein and Master Thomas Billings, when
he informs the Count of his parentage.

10. Showing how Galgenstein and Mrs. Cat recognise each other in
Marylebone Gardens--and how the Count drives her home in his carrige.

11. Of some domestic quarrels, and the consequence thereof.

12. Treats of love, and prepares for death.

13. Being a preparation for the end.

Chapter the Last.

Another Last Chapter.




ADVERTISEMENT


The story of "Catherine," which appeared in Fraser's Magazine in
1839-40, was written by Mr. Thackeray, under the name of Ikey Solomons,
Jun., to counteract the injurious influence of some popular fictions of
that day, which made heroes of highwaymen and burglars, and created a
false sympathy for the vicious and criminal.

With this purpose, the author chose for the subject of his story a
woman named Catherine Hayes, who was burned at Tyburn, in 1726, for the
deliberate murder of her husband, under very revolting circumstances.
Mr. Thackeray's aim obviously was to describe the career of this
wretched woman and her associates with such fidelity to truth as to
exhibit the danger and folly of investing such persons with heroic and
romantic qualities.




CHAPTER I. Introducing to the reader the chief personages of this
narrative.


At that famous period of history, when the seventeenth century (after
a deal of quarrelling, king-killing, reforming, republicanising,
restoring, re-restoring, play-writing, sermon-writing,
Oliver-Cromwellising, Stuartising, and Orangising, to be sure) had sunk
into its grave, giving place to the lusty eighteenth; when Mr. Isaac
Newton was a tutor of Trinity, and Mr. Joseph Addison Commissioner of
Appeals; when the presiding genius that watched over the destinies of
the French nation had played out all the best cards in his hand, and his
adversaries began to pour in their trumps; when there were two kings in
Spain employed perpetually in running away from one another; when there
was a queen in England, with such rogues for Ministers as have never
been seen, no, not in our own day; and a General, of whom it may be
severely argued, whether he was the meanest miser or the greatest hero
in the world; when Mrs. Masham had not yet put Madam Marlborough's nose
out of joint; when people had their ears cut off for writing very
meek political pamphlets; and very large full-bottomed wigs were just
beginning to be worn with powder; and the face of Louis the Great, as
his was handed in to him behind the bed-curtains, was, when issuing
thence, observed to look longer, older, and more dismal daily....

About the year One thousand seven hundred and five, that is, in the
glorious reign of Queen Anne, there existed certain characters, and
befell a series of adventures, which, since they are strictly in
accordance with the present fashionable style and taste; since they have
been already partly described in the "Newgate Calendar;" since they are
(as shall be seen anon) agreeably low, delightfully disgusting, and at
the same time eminently pleasing and pathetic, may properly be set down
here.

And though it may be said, with some considerable show of reason, that
agreeably low and delightfully disgusting characters have already been
treated, both copiously and ably, by some eminent writers of the present
(and, indeed, of future) ages; though to tread in the footsteps of
the immortal FAGIN requires a genius of inordinate stride, and to go
a-robbing after the late though deathless TURPIN, the renowned
JACK SHEPPARD, or the embryo DUVAL, may be impossible, and not an
infringement, but a wasteful indication of ill-will towards the eighth
commandment; though it may, on the one hand, be asserted that only vain
coxcombs would dare to write on subjects already described by men really
and deservedly eminent; on the other hand, that these subjects have been
described so fully, that nothing more can be said about them; on the
third hand (allowing, for the sake of argument, three hands to one
figure of speech), that the public has heard so much of them, as to
be quite tired of rogues, thieves, cutthroats, and Newgate
altogether;--though all these objections may be urged, and each is
excellent, yet we intend to take a few more pages from the "Old Bailey
Calendar," to bless the public with one more draught from the Stone
Jug:[*]--yet awhile to listen, hurdle-mounted, and riding down the
Oxford Road, to the bland conversation of Jack Ketch, and to hang with
him round the neck of his patient, at the end of our and his history.
We give the reader fair notice, that we shall tickle him with a few such
scenes of villainy, throat-cutting, and bodily suffering in general, as
are not to be found, no, not in--; never mind comparisons, for such are
odious.

     * This, as your Ladyship is aware, is the polite name for
     Her Majesty's Prison of Newgate.

In the year 1705, then, whether it was that the Queen of England did
feel seriously alarmed at the notion that a French prince should occupy
the Spanish throne; or whether she was tenderly attached to the Emperor
of Germany; or whether she was obliged to fight out the quarrel of
William of Orange, who made us pay and fight for his Dutch provinces;
or whether poor old Louis Quatorze did really frighten her; or whether
Sarah Jennings and her husband wanted to make a fight, knowing how much
they should gain by it;--whatever the reason was, it was evident that
the war was to continue, and there was almost as much soldiering
and recruiting, parading, pike and gun-exercising, flag-flying,
drum-beating, powder-blazing, and military enthusiasm, as we can all
remember in the year 1801, what time the Corsican upstart menaced our
shores. A recruiting-party and captain of Cutts's regiment (which had
been so mangled at Blenheim the year before) were now in Warwickshire;
and having their depot at Warwick, the captain and his attendant, the
corporal, were used to travel through the country, seeking for heroes to
fill up the gaps in Cutts's corps,--and for adventures to pass away the
weary time of a country life.

Our Captain Plume and Sergeant Kite (it was at this time, by the way,
that those famous recruiting-officers were playing their pranks in
Shrewsbury) were occupied very much in the same manner with Farquhar's
heroes. They roamed from Warwick to Stratford, and from Stratford to
Birmingham, persuading the swains of Warwickshire to leave the plough
for the Pike, and despatching, from time to time, small detachments
of recruits to extend Marlborough's lines, and to act as food for the
hungry cannon at Ramillies and Malplaquet.

Of those two gentlemen who are about to act a very important part in our
history, one only was probably a native of Britain,--we say probably,
because the individual in question was himself quite uncertain, and, it
must be added, entirely indifferent about his birthplace; but speaking
the English language, and having been during the course of his life
pretty generally engaged in the British service, he had a tolerably
fair claim to the majestic title of Briton. His name was Peter Brock,
otherwise Corporal Brock, of Lord Cutts's regiment of dragoons; he was
of age about fifty-seven (even that point has never been ascertained);
in height about five feet six inches; in weight, nearly thirteen stone;
with a chest that the celebrated Leitch himself might envy; an arm
that was like an opera-dancer's leg; a stomach so elastic that it would
accommodate itself to any given or stolen quantity of food; a great
aptitude for strong liquors; a considerable skill in singing chansons de
table of not the most delicate kind; he was a lover of jokes, of which
he made many, and passably bad; when pleased, simply coarse, boisterous,
and jovial; when angry, a perfect demon: bullying, cursing, storming,
fighting, as is sometimes the wont with gentlemen of his cloth and
education.

Mr. Brock was strictly, what the Marquis of Rodil styled himself in a
proclamation to his soldiers after running away, a hijo de la guerra--a
child of war. Not seven cities, but one or two regiments, might contend
for the honour of giving him birth; for his mother, whose name he took,
had acted as camp-follower to a Royalist regiment; had then obeyed the
Parliamentarians; died in Scotland when Monk was commanding in that
country; and the first appearance of Mr. Brock in a public capacity
displayed him as a fifer in the General's own regiment of Coldstreamers,
when they marched from Scotland to London, and from a republic at once
into a monarchy. Since that period, Brock had been always with the army,
he had had, too, some promotion, for he spake of having a command at the
battle of the Boyne; though probably (as he never mentioned the fact)
upon the losing side. The very year before this narrative commences,
he had been one of Mordaunt's forlorn hope at Schellenberg, for which
service he was promised a pair of colours; he lost them, however, and
was almost shot (but fate did not ordain that his career should close
in that way) for drunkenness and insubordination immediately after the
battle; but having in some measure reinstated himself by a display
of much gallantry at Blenheim, it was found advisable to send him to
England for the purposes of recruiting, and remove him altogether from
the regiment where his gallantry only rendered the example of his riot
more dangerous.

Mr. Brock's commander was a slim young gentleman of twenty-six, about
whom there was likewise a history, if one would take the trouble to
inquire. He was a Bavarian by birth (his mother being an English lady),
and enjoyed along with a dozen other brothers the title of count: eleven
of these, of course, were penniless; one or two were priests, one a
monk, six or seven in various military services, and the elder at home
at Schloss Galgenstein breeding horses, hunting wild boars, swindling
tenants, living in a great house with small means; obliged to be sordid
at home all the year, to be splendid for a month at the capital, as
is the way with many other noblemen. Our young count, Count Gustavus
Adolphus Maximilian von Galgenstein, had been in the service of the
French as page to a nobleman; then of His Majesty's gardes du corps;
then a lieutenant and captain in the Bavarian service; and when, after
the battle of Blenheim, two regiments of Germans came over to the
winning side, Gustavus Adolphus Maximilian found himself among them; and
at the epoch when this story commences, had enjoyed English pay for a
year or more. It is unnecessary to say how he exchanged into his present
regiment; how it appeared that, before her marriage, handsome John
Churchill had known the young gentleman's mother, when they were both
penniless hangers-on at Charles the Second's court;--it is, we say,
quite useless to repeat all the scandal of which we are perfectly
masters, and to trace step by step the events of his history. Here,
however, was Gustavus Adolphus, in a small inn, in a small village of
Warwickshire, on an autumn evening in the year 1705; and at the very
moment when this history begins, he and Mr. Brock, his corporal and
friend, were seated at a round table before the kitchen-fire while a
small groom of the establishment was leading up and down on the
village green, before the inn door, two black, glossy, long-tailed,
barrel-bellied, thick-flanked, arch-necked, Roman-nosed Flanders horses,
which were the property of the two gentlemen now taking their ease at
the "Bugle Inn." The two gentlemen were seated at their ease at the inn
table, drinking mountain-wine; and if the reader fancies from the sketch
which we have given of their lives, or from his own blindness and belief
in the perfectibility of human nature, that the sun of that autumn
evening shone upon any two men in county or city, at desk or harvest, at
Court or at Newgate, drunk or sober, who were greater rascals than
Count Gustavus Galgenstein and Corporal Peter Brock, he is egregiously
mistaken, and his knowledge of human nature is not worth a fig. If they
had not been two prominent scoundrels, what earthly business should we
have in detailing their histories? What would the public care for
them? Who would meddle with dull virtue, humdrum sentiment, or stupid
innocence, when vice, agreeable vice, is the only thing which the
readers of romances care to hear?

The little horse-boy, who was leading the two black Flanders horses up
and down the green, might have put them in the stable for any good that
the horses got by the gentle exercise which they were now taking in the
cool evening air, as their owners had not ridden very far or very hard,
and there was not a hair turned of their sleek shining coats; but the
lad had been especially ordered so to walk the horses about until he
received further commands from the gentlemen reposing in the "Bugle"
kitchen; and the idlers of the village seemed so pleased with the
beasts, and their smart saddles and shining bridles, that it would have
been a pity to deprive them of the pleasure of contemplating such an
innocent spectacle. Over the Count's horse was thrown a fine red cloth,
richly embroidered in yellow worsted, a very large count's coronet and a
cipher at the four corners of the covering; and under this might be
seen a pair of gorgeous silver stirrups, and above it, a couple of
silver-mounted pistols reposing in bearskin holsters; the bit was silver
too, and the horse's head was decorated with many smart ribbons. Of the
Corporal's steed, suffice it to say, that the ornaments were in brass,
as bright, though not perhaps so valuable, as those which decorated the
Captain's animal. The boys, who had been at play on the green, first
paused and entered into conversation with the horse-boy; then the
village matrons followed; and afterwards, sauntering by ones and twos,
came the village maidens, who love soldiers as flies love treacle;
presently the males began to arrive, and lo! the parson of the parish,
taking his evening walk with Mrs. Dobbs, and the four children his
offspring, at length joined himself to his flock.

To this audience the little ostler explained that the animals belonged
to two gentlemen now reposing at the "Bugle:" one young with gold
hair, the other old with grizzled locks; both in red coats; both in
jack-boots; putting the house into a bustle, and calling for the best.
He then discoursed to some of his own companions regarding the merits of
the horses; and the parson, a learned man, explained to the villagers,
that one of the travellers must be a count, or at least had a count's
horsecloth; pronounced that the stirrups were of real silver, and
checked the impetuosity of his son, William Nassau Dobbs, who was for
mounting the animals, and who expressed a longing to fire off one of the
pistols in the holsters.

As this family discussion was taking place, the gentlemen whose
appearance had created so much attention came to the door of the inn,
and the elder and stouter was seen to smile at his companion; after
which he strolled leisurely over the green, and seemed to examine
with much benevolent satisfaction the assemblage of villagers who were
staring at him and the quadrupeds.

Mr. Brock, when he saw the parson's band and cassock, took off his
beaver reverently, and saluted the divine: "I hope your reverence won't
baulk the little fellow," said he; "I think I heard him calling out for
a ride, and whether he should like my horse, or his Lordship's horse, I
am sure it is all one. Don't be afraid, sir! the horses are not tired;
we have only come seventy mile to-day, and Prince Eugene once rode a
matter of fifty-two leagues (a hundred and fifty miles), sir, upon that
horse, between sunrise and sunset."

"Gracious powers! on which horse?" said Doctor Dobbs, very solemnly.

"On THIS, sir,--on mine, Corporal Brock of Cutts's black gelding,
'William of Nassau.' The Prince, sir, gave it me after Blenheim fight,
for I had my own legs carried away by a cannon-ball, just as I cut down
two of Sauerkrauter's regiment, who had made the Prince prisoner."

"Your own legs, sir!" said the Doctor. "Gracious goodness! this is more
and more astonishing!"

"No, no, not my own legs, my horse's I mean, sir; and the Prince gave me
'William of Nassau' that very day."

To this no direct reply was made; but the Doctor looked at Mrs. Dobbs,
and Mrs. Dobbs and the rest of the children at her eldest son, who
grinned and said, "Isn't it wonderful?" The Corporal to this answered
nothing, but, resuming his account, pointed to the other horse and said,
"THAT horse, sir--good as mine is--that horse, with the silver stirrups,
is his Excellency's horse, Captain Count Maximilian Gustavus Adolphus
von Galgenstein, captain of horse and of the Holy Roman Empire" (he
lifted here his hat with much gravity, and all the crowd, even to
the parson, did likewise). "We call him 'George of Denmark,' sir, in
compliment to Her Majesty's husband: he is Blenheim too, sir; Marshal
Tallard rode him on that day, and you know how HE was taken prisoner by
the Count."

"George of Denmark, Marshal Tallard, William of Nassau! this is strange
indeed, most wonderful! Why, sir, little are you aware that there are
before you, AT THIS MOMENT, two other living beings who bear these
venerated names! My boys, stand forward! Look here, sir: these children
have been respectively named after our late sovereign and the husband of
our present Queen."

"And very good names too, sir; ay, and very noble little fellows too;
and I propose that, with your reverence and your ladyship's leave,
William Nassau here shall ride on George of Denmark, and George of
Denmark shall ride on William of Nassau."

When this speech of the Corporal's was made, the whole crowd set up a
loyal hurrah; and, with much gravity, the two little boys were lifted up
into the saddles; and the Corporal leading one, entrusted the other to
the horse-boy, and so together marched stately up and down the green.

The popularity which Mr. Brock gained by this manoeuvre was very great;
but with regard to the names of the horses and children, which coincided
so extraordinarily, it is but fair to state, that the christening of the
quadrupeds had only taken place about two minutes before the dragoon's
appearance on the green. For if the fact must be confessed, he, while
seated near the inn window, had kept a pretty wistful eye upon all going
on without; and the horses marching thus to and fro for the wonderment
of the village, were only placards or advertisements for the riders.

There was, besides the boy now occupied with the horses, and the
landlord and landlady of the "Bugle Inn," another person connected with
that establishment--a very smart, handsome, vain, giggling servant-girl,
about the age of sixteen, who went by the familiar name of Cat, and
attended upon the gentlemen in the parlour, while the landlady was
employed in cooking their supper in the kitchen. This young person had
been educated in the village poor-house, and having been pronounced
by Doctor Dobbs and the schoolmaster the idlest, dirtiest, and most
passionate little minx with whom either had ever had to do, she was,
after receiving a very small portion of literary instruction (indeed
it must be stated that the young lady did not know her letters), bound
apprentice at the age of nine years to Mrs. Score, her relative, and
landlady of the "Bugle Inn."

If Miss Cat, or Catherine Hall, was a slattern and a minx, Mrs. Score
was a far superior shrew; and for the seven years of her apprenticeship
the girl was completely at her mistress's mercy. Yet though wondrously
stingy, jealous, and violent, while her maid was idle and extravagant,
and her husband seemed to abet the girl, Mrs. Score put up with the
wench's airs, idleness, and caprices, without ever wishing to dismiss
her from the "Bugle." The fact is, that Miss Catherine was a great
beauty, and for about two years, since her fame had begun to spread,
the custom of the inn had also increased vastly. When there was a debate
whether the farmers, on their way from market, would take t'other pot,
Catherine, by appearing with it, would straightway cause the liquor to
be swallowed and paid for; and when the traveller who proposed riding
that night and sleeping at Coventry or Birmingham, was asked by Miss
Catherine whether he would like a fire in his bedroom, he generally was
induced to occupy it, although he might before have vowed to Mrs. Score
that he would not for a thousand guineas be absent from home that night.
The girl had, too, half-a-dozen lovers in the village; and these were
bound in honour to spend their pence at the alehouse she inhabited. O
woman, lovely woman! what strong resolves canst thou twist round thy
little finger! what gunpowder passions canst thou kindle with a single
sparkle of thine eye! what lies and fribble nonsense canst thou make us
listen to, as they were gospel truth or splendid wit! above all what bad
liquor canst thou make us swallow when thou puttest a kiss within the
cup--and we are content to call the poison wine!

The mountain-wine at the "Bugle" was, in fact, execrable; but Mrs. Cat,
who served it to the two soldiers, made it so agreeable to them, that
they found it a passable, even a pleasant task, to swallow the contents
of a second bottle. The miracle had been wrought instantaneously on her
appearance: for whereas at that very moment the Count was employed in
cursing the wine, the landlady, the wine-grower, and the English nation
generally, when the young woman entered and (choosing so to
interpret the oaths) said, "Coming, your honour; I think your honour
called"--Gustavus Adolphus whistled, stared at her very hard, and
seeming quite dumb-stricken by her appearance, contented himself by
swallowing a whole glass of mountain by way of reply.

Mr. Brock was, however, by no means so confounded as his captain: he was
thirty years older than the latter, and in the course of fifty years of
military life had learned to look on the most dangerous enemy, or the
most beautiful woman, with the like daring, devil-may-care determination
to conquer.

"My dear Mary," then said that gentleman, "his honour is a lord; as good
as a lord, that is; for all he allows such humble fellows as I am to
drink with him."

Catherine dropped a low curtsey, and said, "Well, I don't know if you
are joking a poor country girl, as all you soldier gentlemen do; but his
honour LOOKS like a lord: though I never see one, to be sure."

"Then," said the Captain, gathering courage, "how do you know I look
like one, pretty Mary?"

"Pretty Catherine: I mean Catherine, if you please, sir."

Here Mr. Brock burst into a roar of laughter, and shouting with many
oaths that she was right at first, invited her to give him what he
called a buss.

Pretty Catherine turned away from him at this request, and muttered
something about "Keep your distance, low fellow! buss indeed; poor
country girl," etc. etc., placing herself, as if for protection, on the
side of the Captain. That gentleman looked also very angry; but whether
at the sight of innocence so outraged, or the insolence of the Corporal
for daring to help himself first, we cannot say. "Hark ye, Mr. Brock,"
he cried very fiercely, "I will suffer no such liberties in my presence:
remember, it is only my condescension which permits you to share my
bottle in this way; take care I don't give you instead a taste of my
cane." So saying, he, in a protecting manner, placed one hand round
Mrs. Catherine's waist, holding the other clenched very near to the
Corporal's nose.

Mrs. Catherine, for HER share of this action of the Count's, dropped
another curtsey and said, "Thank you, my Lord." But Galgenstein's threat
did not appear to make any impression on Mr. Brock, as indeed there was
no reason that it should; for the Corporal, at a combat of fisticuffs,
could have pounded his commander into a jelly in ten minutes; so he
contented himself by saying, "Well, noble Captain, there's no harm done;
it IS an honour for poor old Peter Brock to be at table with you, and I
AM sorry, sure enough."

"In truth, Peter, I believe thou art; thou hast good reason, eh, Peter?
But never fear, man; had I struck thee, I never would have hurt thee."

"I KNOW you would not," replied Brock, laying his hand on his heart
with much gravity; and so peace was made, and healths were drunk. Miss
Catherine condescended to put her lips to the Captain's glass; who swore
that the wine was thus converted into nectar; and although the girl had
not previously heard of that liquor, she received the compliment as a
compliment, and smiled and simpered in return.

The poor thing had never before seen anybody so handsome, or so finely
dressed as the Count; and, in the simplicity of her coquetry, allowed
her satisfaction to be quite visible. Nothing could be more clumsy than
the gentleman's mode of complimenting her; but for this, perhaps, his
speeches were more effective than others more delicate would have been;
and though she said to each, "Oh, now, my Lord," and "La, Captain, how
can you flatter one so?" and "Your honour's laughing at me," and made
such polite speeches as are used on these occasions, it was manifest
from the flutter and blush, and the grin of satisfaction which lighted
up the buxom features of the little country beauty, that the Count's
first operations had been highly successful. When following up his
attack, he produced from his neck a small locket (which had been given
him by a Dutch lady at the Brill), and begged Miss Catherine to wear it
for his sake, and chucked her under the chin and called her his little
rosebud, it was pretty clear how things would go: anybody who could see
the expression of Mr. Brock's countenance at this event might judge of
the progress of the irresistible High-Dutch conqueror.

Being of a very vain communicative turn, our fair barmaid gave her two
companions, not only a pretty long account of herself, but of many other
persons in the village, whom she could perceive from the window opposite
to which she stood. "Yes, your honour," said she--"my Lord, I mean;
sixteen last March, though there's a many girl in the village that at
my age is quite chits. There's Polly Randall now, that red-haired girl
along with Thomas Curtis: she's seventeen if she's a day, though he is
the very first sweetheart she has had. Well, as I am saying, I was bred
up here in the village--father and mother died very young, and I was
left a poor orphan--well, bless us! if Thomas haven't kissed her!--to
the care of Mrs. Score, my aunt, who has been a mother to me--a
stepmother, you know;--and I've been to Stratford fair, and to Warwick
many a time; and there's two people who have offered to marry me, and
ever so many who want to, and I won't have none--only a gentleman,
as I've always said; not a poor clodpole, like Tom there with the red
waistcoat (he was one that asked me), nor a drunken fellow like Sam
Blacksmith yonder, him whose wife has got the black eye, but a real
gentleman, like--"

"Like whom, my dear?" said the Captain, encouraged.

"La, sir, how can you? Why, like our squire, Sir John, who rides in
such a mortal fine gold coach; or, at least, like the parson, Doctor
Dobbs--that's he, in the black gown, walking with Madam Dobbs in red."

"And are those his children?"

"Yes: two girls and two boys; and only think, he calls one William
Nassau, and one George Denmark--isn't it odd?" And from the parson, Mrs.
Catherine went on to speak of several humble personages of the village
community, who, as they are not necessary to our story, need not be
described at full length. It was when, from the window, Corporal Brock
saw the altercation between the worthy divine and his son, respecting
the latter's ride, that he judged it a fitting time to step out on the
green, and to bestow on the two horses those famous historical names
which we have just heard applied to them.

Mr. Brock's diplomacy was, as we have stated, quite successful; for,
when the parson's boys had ridden and retired along with their mamma and
papa, other young gentlemen of humbler rank in the village were placed
upon "George of Denmark" and "William of Nassau;" the Corporal joking
and laughing with all the grown-up people. The women, in spite of Mr.
Brock's age, his red nose, and a certain squint of his eye, vowed the
Corporal was a jewel of a man; and among the men his popularity was
equally great.

"How much dost thee get, Thomas Clodpole?" said Mr. Brock to a
countryman (he was the man whom Mrs. Catherine had described as her
suitor), who had laughed loudest at some of his jokes: "how much dost
thee get for a week's work, now?"

Mr. Clodpole, whose name was really Bullock, stated that his wages
amounted to "three shillings and a puddn."

"Three shillings and a puddn!--monstrous!--and for this you toil like a
galley-slave, as I have seen them in Turkey and America,--ay, gentlemen,
and in the country of Prester John! You shiver out of bed on icy winter
mornings, to break the ice for Ball and Dapple to drink."

"Yes, indeed," said the person addressed, who seemed astounded at the
extent of the Corporal's information.

"Or you clean pigsty, and take dung down to meadow; or you act watchdog
and tend sheep; or you sweep a scythe over a great field of grass; and
when the sun has scorched the eyes out of your head, and sweated the
flesh off your bones, and well-nigh fried the soul out of your body,
you go home, to what?--three shillings a week and a puddn! Do you get
pudding every day?"

"No; only Sundays."

"Do you get money enough?"

"No, sure."

"Do you get beer enough?"

"Oh no, NEVER!" said Mr. Bullock quite resolutely.

"Worthy Clodpole, give us thy hand: it shall have beer enough this day,
or my name's not Corporal Brock. Here's the money, boy! there are twenty
pieces in this purse: and how do you think I got 'em? and how do you
think I shall get others when these are gone?--by serving Her Sacred
Majesty, to be sure: long life to her, and down with the French King!"

Bullock, a few of the men, and two or three of the boys, piped out
an hurrah, in compliment to this speech of the Corporal's: but it
was remarked that the greater part of the crowd drew back--the women
whispering ominously to them and looking at the Corporal.

"I see, ladies, what it is," said he. "You are frightened, and think I
am a crimp come to steal your sweethearts away. What! call Peter Brock a
double-dealer? I tell you what, boys, Jack Churchill himself has shaken
this hand, and drunk a pot with me: do you think he'd shake hands with
a rogue? Here's Tummas Clodpole has never had beer enough, and here am
I will stand treat to him and any other gentleman: am I good enough
company for him? I have money, look you, and like to spend it: what
should _I_ be doing dirty actions for--hay, Tummas?"

A satisfactory reply to this query was not, of course, expected by the
Corporal nor uttered by Mr. Bullock; and the end of the dispute was,
that he and three or four of the rustic bystanders were quite convinced
of the good intentions of their new friend, and accompanied him back
to the "Bugle," to regale upon the promised beer. Among the Corporal's
guests was one young fellow whose dress would show that he was somewhat
better to do in the world than Clodpole and the rest of the sunburnt
ragged troop, who were marching towards the alehouse. This man was the
only one of his hearers who, perhaps, was sceptical as to the truth of
his stories; but as soon as Bullock accepted the invitation to drink,
John Hayes, the carpenter (for such was his name and profession), said,
"Well, Thomas, if thou goest, I will go too."

"I know thee wilt," said Thomas: "thou'lt goo anywhere Catty Hall is,
provided thou canst goo for nothing."

"Nay, I have a penny to spend as good as the Corporal here."

"A penny to KEEP, you mean: for all your love for the lass at the
'Bugle,' did thee ever spend a shilling in the house? Thee wouldn't go
now, but that I am going too, and the Captain here stands treat."

"Come, come, gentlemen, no quarrelling," said Mr. Brock. "If this pretty
fellow will join us, amen say I: there's lots of liquor, and plenty
of money to pay the score. Comrade Tummas, give us thy arm. Mr. Hayes,
you're a hearty cock, I make no doubt, and all such are welcome. Come
along, my gentleman farmers, Mr. Brock shall have the honour to pay for
you all." And with this, Corporal Brock, accompanied by Messrs. Hayes,
Bullock, Blacksmith, Baker's-boy, Butcher, and one or two others,
adjourned to the inn; the horses being, at the same time, conducted to
the stable.

Although we have, in this quiet way, and without any flourishing of
trumpets, or beginning of chapters, introduced Mr. Hayes to the public;
and although, at first sight, a sneaking carpenter's boy may seem hardly
worthy of the notice of an intelligent reader, who looks for a good
cut-throat or highwayman for a hero, or a pickpocket at the very least:
this gentleman's words and actions should be carefully studied by the
public, as he is destined to appear before them under very polite and
curious circumstances during the course of this history. The speech of
the rustic Juvenal, Mr. Clodpole, had seemed to infer that Hayes was at
once careful of his money and a warm admirer of Mrs. Catherine of the
"Bugle:" and both the charges were perfectly true. Hayes's father
was reported to be a man of some substance; and young John, who was
performing his apprenticeship in the village, did not fail to talk very
big of his pretensions to fortune--of his entering, at the close of his
indentures, into partnership with his father--and of the comfortable
farm and house over which Mrs. John Hayes, whoever she might be, would
one day preside. Thus, next to the barber and butcher, and above even
his own master, Mr. Hayes took rank in the village: and it must not be
concealed that his representation of wealth had made some impression
upon Mrs. Hall toward whom the young gentleman had cast the eyes of
affection. If he had been tolerably well-looking, and not pale, rickety,
and feeble as he was; if even he had been ugly, but withal a man of
spirit, it is probable the girl's kindness for him would have been
much more decided. But he was a poor weak creature, not to compare
with honest Thomas Bullock, by at least nine inches; and so notoriously
timid, selfish, and stingy, that there was a kind of shame in receiving
his addresses openly; and what encouragement Mrs. Catherine gave him
could only be in secret.

But no mortal is wise at all times: and the fact was, that Hayes, who
cared for himself intensely, had set his heart upon winning Catherine;
and loved her with a desperate greedy eagerness and desire of
possession, which makes passions for women often so fierce and
unreasonable among very cold and selfish men. His parents (whose
frugality he had inherited) had tried in vain to wean him from this
passion, and had made many fruitless attempts to engage him with women
who possessed money and desired husbands; but Hayes was, for a wonder,
quite proof against their attractions; and, though quite ready
to acknowledge the absurdity of his love for a penniless alehouse
servant-girl, nevertheless persisted in it doggedly. "I know I'm a
fool," said he; "and what's more, the girl does not care for me; but
marry her I must, or I think I shall just die: and marry her I will."
For very much to the credit of Miss Catherine's modesty, she had
declared that marriage was with her a sine qua non, and had dismissed,
with the loudest scorn and indignation, all propositions of a less
proper nature.

Poor Thomas Bullock was another of her admirers, and had offered to
marry her; but three shillings a week and a puddn was not to the girl's
taste, and Thomas had been scornfully rejected. Hayes had also made her
a direct proposal. Catherine did not say no: she was too prudent: but
she was young and could wait; she did not care for Mr. Hayes yet enough
to marry him--(it did not seem, indeed, in the young woman's nature to
care for anybody)--and she gave her adorer flatteringly to understand
that, if nobody better appeared in the course of a few years, she might
be induced to become Mrs. Hayes. It was a dismal prospect for the
poor fellow to live upon the hope of being one day Mrs. Catherine's
pis-aller.

In the meantime she considered herself free as the wind, and permitted
herself all the innocent gaieties which that "chartered libertine," a
coquette, can take. She flirted with all the bachelors, widowers, and
married men, in a manner which did extraordinary credit to her years:
and let not the reader fancy such pastimes unnatural at her early age.
The ladies--Heaven bless them!--are, as a general rule, coquettes from
babyhood upwards. Little SHE'S of three years old play little airs and
graces upon small heroes of five; simpering misses of nine make attacks
upon young gentlemen of twelve; and at sixteen, a well-grown girl, under
encouraging circumstances--say, she is pretty, in a family of ugly elder
sisters, or an only child and heiress, or a humble wench at a country
inn, like our fair Catherine--is at the very pink and prime of her
coquetry: they will jilt you at that age with an ease and arch infantine
simplicity that never can be surpassed in maturer years.

Miss Catherine, then, was a franche coquette, and Mr. John Hayes was
miserable. His life was passed in a storm of mean passions and bitter
jealousies, and desperate attacks upon the indifference-rock of Mrs.
Catherine's heart, which not all his tempest of love could beat down. O
cruel cruel pangs of love unrequited! Mean rogues feel them as well as
great heroes. Lives there the man in Europe who has not felt them many
times?--who has not knelt, and fawned, and supplicated, and wept, and
cursed, and raved, all in vain; and passed long wakeful nights with
ghosts of dead hopes for company; shadows of buried remembrances that
glide out of their graves of nights, and whisper, "We are dead now,
but we WERE once; and we made you happy, and we come now to mock
you:--despair, O lover, despair, and die"?--O cruel pangs!--dismal
nights!--Now a sly demon creeps under your nightcap, and drops into
your ear those soft hope-breathing sweet words, uttered on the
well-remembered evening: there, in the drawer of your dressing-table
(along with the razors, and Macassar oil), lies the dead flower that
Lady Amelia Wilhelmina wore in her bosom on the night of a certain
ball--the corpse of a glorious hope that seemed once as if it would live
for ever, so strong was it, so full of joy and sunshine: there, in
your writing-desk, among a crowd of unpaid bills, is the dirty scrap of
paper, thimble-sealed, which came in company with a pair of muffetees of
her knitting (she was a butcher's daughter, and did all she could, poor
thing!), begging "you would ware them at collidge, and think of her
who"--married a public-house three weeks afterwards, and cares for you
no more now than she does for the pot-boy. But why multiply instances,
or seek to depict the agony of poor mean-spirited John Hayes? No mistake
can be greater than that of fancying such great emotions of love are
only felt by virtuous or exalted men: depend upon it, Love, like Death,
plays havoc among the pauperum tabernas, and sports with rich and poor,
wicked and virtuous, alike. I have often fancied, for instance, on
seeing the haggard pale young old-clothesman, who wakes the echoes of
our street with his nasal cry of "Clo'!"--I have often, I said, fancied
that, besides the load of exuvial coats and breeches under which
he staggers, there is another weight on him--an atrior cura at his
tail--and while his unshorn lips and nose together are performing that
mocking, boisterous, Jack-indifferent cry of "Clo', clo'!" who knows
what woeful utterances are crying from the heart within? There he is,
chaffering with the footman at No. 7 about an old dressing-gown: you
think his whole soul is bent only on the contest about the garment.
Psha! there is, perhaps, some faithless girl in Holywell Street who
fills up his heart; and that desultory Jew-boy is a peripatetic hell!
Take another instance:--take the man in the beef-shop in Saint Martin's
Court. There he is, to all appearances quite calm: before the same round
of beef--from morning till sundown--for hundreds of years very likely.
Perhaps when the shutters are closed, and all the world tired and
silent, there is HE silent, but untired--cutting, cutting, cutting. You
enter, you get your meat to your liking, you depart; and, quite unmoved,
on, on he goes, reaping ceaselessly the Great Harvest of Beef. You would
fancy that if Passion ever failed to conquer, it had in vain assailed
the calm bosom of THAT MAN. I doubt it, and would give much to know his
history.

Who knows what furious Aetna-flames are raging underneath the surface of
that calm flesh-mountain--who can tell me that that calmness itself is
not DESPAIR?

                    *****

The reader, if he does not now understand why it was that Mr. Hayes
agreed to drink the Corporal's proffered beer, had better just read the
foregoing remarks over again, and if he does not understand THEN, why,
small praise to his brains. Hayes could not bear that Mr. Bullock should
have a chance of seeing, and perhaps making love to Mrs. Catherine in
his absence; and though the young woman never diminished her coquetries,
but, on the contrary, rather increased them in his presence, it was
still a kind of dismal satisfaction to be miserable in her company.

On this occasion, the disconsolate lover could be wretched to his
heart's content; for Catherine had not a word or a look for him, but
bestowed all her smiles upon the handsome stranger who owned the black
horse. As for poor Tummas Bullock, his passion was never violent; and
he was content in the present instance to sigh and drink beer. He sighed
and drank, sighed and drank, and drank again, until he had swallowed so
much of the Corporal's liquor, as to be induced to accept a guinea from
his purse also; and found himself, on returning to reason and sobriety,
a soldier of Queen Anne's.

But oh! fancy the agonies of Mr. Hayes when, seated with the Corporal's
friends at one end of the kitchen, he saw the Captain at the place of
honour, and the smiles which the fair maid bestowed upon him; when, as
she lightly whisked past him with the Captain's supper, she, pointing
to the locket that once reposed on the breast of the Dutch lady at the
Brill, looked archly on Hayes and said, "See, John, what his Lordship
has given me;" and when John's face became green and purple with
rage and jealousy, Mrs. Catherine laughed ten times louder, and cried
"Coming, my Lord," in a voice of shrill triumph, that bored through the
soul of Mr. John Hayes and left him gasping for breath.

On Catherine's other lover, Mr. Thomas, this coquetry had no effect: he,
and two comrades of his, had by this time quite fallen under the spell
of the Corporal; and hope, glory, strong beer, Prince Eugene, pair of
colours, more strong beer, her blessed Majesty, plenty more strong beer,
and such subjects, martial and bacchic, whirled through their dizzy
brains at a railroad pace.

And now, if there had been a couple of experienced reporters present at
the "Bugle Inn," they might have taken down a conversation on love
and war--the two themes discussed by the two parties occupying the
kitchen--which, as the parts were sung together, duetwise, formed
together some very curious harmonies. Thus, while the Captain was
whispering the softest nothings, the Corporal was shouting the fiercest
combats of the war; and, like the gentleman at Penelope's table, on it
exiguo pinxit praelia tota bero. For example:

CAPTAIN. What do you say to a silver trimming, pretty Catherine? Don't
you think a scarlet riding-cloak, handsomely laced, would become you
wonderfully well?--and a grey hat with a blue feather--and a pretty nag
to ride on--and all the soldiers to present arms as you pass, and say,
"There goes the Captain's lady"? What do you think of a side-box at
Lincoln's Inn playhouse, or of standing up to a minuet with my Lord
Marquis at--?

CORPORAL. The ball, sir, ran right up his elbow, and was found the next
day by Surgeon Splinter of ours,--where do you think, sir?--upon my
honour as a gentleman it came out of the nape of his--

CAPTAIN. Necklace--and a sweet pair of diamond earrings, mayhap--and a
little shower of patches, which ornament a lady's face wondrously--and
a leetle rouge--though, egad! such peach-cheeks as yours don't want
it;--fie! Mrs. Catherine, I should think the birds must come and peck at
them as if they were fruit--

CORPORAL. Over the wall; and three-and-twenty of our fellows jumped
after me. By the Pope of Rome, friend Tummas, that was a day!--Had you
seen how the Mounseers looked when four-and-twenty rampaging he-devils,
sword and pistol, cut and thrust, pell-mell came tumbling into the
redoubt! Why, sir, we left in three minutes as many artillerymen's heads
as there were cannon-balls. It was, "Ah sacre!" "D----- you, take that!"
"O mon Dieu!" "Run him through!" "Ventrebleu!" and it WAS ventrebleu
with him, I warrant you; for bleu, in the French language, means
"through;" and ventre--why, you see, ventre means--

CAPTAIN. Waists, which are worn now excessive long; and for the hoops,
if you COULD but see them--stap my vitals, my dear, but there was a lady
at Warwick's Assembly (she came in one of my Lord's coaches) who had a
hoop as big as a tent: you might have dined under it comfortably;--ha!
ha! 'pon my faith, now--

CORPORAL. And there we found the Duke of Marlborough seated along with
Marshal Tallard, who was endeavouring to drown his sorrow over a cup of
Johannisberger wine; and a good drink too, my lads, only not to compare
to Warwick beer. "Who was the man who has done this?" said our noble
General. I stepped up. "How many heads was it," says he, "that you cut
off?" "Nineteen," says I, "besides wounding several." When he heard it
(Mr. Hayes, you don't drink) I'm blest if he didn't burst into tears!
"Noble noble fellow," says he. "Marshal, you must excuse me if I am
pleased to hear of the destruction of your countrymen. Noble noble
fellow!--here's a hundred guineas for you." Which sum he placed in my
hand. "Nay," says the Marshal "the man has done his duty:" and, pulling
out a magnificent gold diamond-hilted snuff-box, he gave me--

MR. BULLOCK. What, a goold snuff-box? Wauns, but thee WAST in luck,
Corporal!

CORPORAL. No, not the snuff-box, but--A PINCH OF SNUFF,--ha! ha!--run me
through the body if he didn't. Could you but have seen the smile on
Jack Churchill's grave face at this piece of generosity! So, beckoning
Colonel Cadogan up to him, he pinched his Ear and whispered--

CAPTAIN. "May I have the honour to dance a minuet with your Ladyship?"
The whole room was in titters at Jack's blunder; for, as you know very
well, poor Lady Susan HAS A WOODEN LEG. Ha! ha! fancy a minuet and a
wooden leg, hey, my dear?--

MRS. CATHERINE. Giggle--giggle--giggle: he! he! he! Oh, Captain, you
rogue, you--

SECOND TABLE. Haw! haw! haw! Well you be a foony mon, Sergeant, zure
enoff.

                    *****

This little specimen of the conversation must be sufficient. It will
show pretty clearly that EACH of the two military commanders was
conducting his operations with perfect success. Three of the detachment
of five attacked by the Corporal surrendered to him: Mr. Bullock,
namely, who gave in at a very early stage of the evening, and
ignominiously laid down his arms under the table, after standing not
more than a dozen volleys of beer; Mr. Blacksmith's boy, and a labourer
whose name we have not been able to learn. Mr. Butcher himself was on
the point of yielding, when he was rescued by the furious charge of a
detachment that marched to his relief: his wife namely, who, with two
squalling children, rushed into the "Bugle," boxed Butcher's ears, and
kept up such a tremendous fire of oaths and screams upon the Corporal,
that he was obliged to retreat. Fixing then her claws into Mr. Butcher's
hair, she proceeded to drag him out of the premises; and thus Mr. Brock
was overcome. His attack upon John Hayes was a still greater failure;
for that young man seemed to be invincible by drink, if not by love:
and at the end of the drinking-bout was a great deal more cool than
the Corporal himself; to whom he wished a very polite good-evening, as
calmly he took his hat to depart. He turned to look at Catherine, to be
sure, and then he was not quite so calm: but Catherine did not give any
reply to his good-night. She was seated at the Captain's table playing
at cribbage with him; and though Count Gustavus Maximilian lost every
game, he won more than he lost,--sly fellow!--and Mrs. Catherine was no
match for him.

It is to be presumed that Hayes gave some information to Mrs. Score,
the landlady: for, on leaving the kitchen, he was seen to linger for a
moment in the bar; and very soon after Mrs. Catherine was called away
from her attendance on the Count, who, when he asked for a sack and
toast, was furnished with those articles by the landlady herself: and,
during the half-hour in which he was employed in consuming this drink,
Monsieur de Galgenstein looked very much disturbed and out of humour,
and cast his eyes to the door perpetually; but no Catherine came. At
last, very sulkily, he desired to be shown to bed, and walked as well as
he could (for, to say truth, the noble Count was by this time somewhat
unsteady on his legs) to his chamber. It was Mrs. Score who showed
him to it, and closed the curtains, and pointed triumphantly to the
whiteness of the sheets.

"It's a very comfortable room," said she, "though not the best in the
house; which belong of right to your Lordship's worship; but our
best room has two beds, and Mr. Corporal is in that, locked and
double-locked, with his three tipsy recruits. But your honour will find
this here bed comfortable and well-aired; I've slept in it myself this
eighteen years."

"What, my good woman, you are going to sit up, eh? It's cruel hard on
you, madam."

"Sit up, my Lord? bless you, no! I shall have half of our Cat's bed; as
I always do when there's company." And with this Mrs. Score curtseyed
and retired.

Very early the next morning the active landlady and her bustling
attendant had prepared the ale and bacon for the Corporal and his three
converts, and had set a nice white cloth for the Captain's breakfast.
The young blacksmith did not eat with much satisfaction; but Mr. Bullock
and his friend betrayed no sign of discontent, except such as may be
consequent upon an evening's carouse. They walked very contentedly to be
registered before Doctor Dobbs, who was also justice of the peace, and
went in search of their slender bundles, and took leave of their few
acquaintances without much regret: for the gentlemen had been bred in
the workhouse, and had not, therefore, a large circle of friends.

It wanted only an hour of noon, and the noble Count had not descended.
The men were waiting for him, and spent much of the Queen's money
(earned by the sale of their bodies overnight) while thus expecting him.
Perhaps Mrs. Catherine expected him too, for she had offered many times
to run up--with my Lord's boots--with the hot water--to show Mr. Brock
the way; who sometimes condescended to officiate as barber. But on all
these occasions Mrs. Score had prevented her; not scolding, but with
much gentleness and smiling. At last, more gentle and smiling than ever,
she came downstairs and said, "Catherine darling, his honour the Count
is mighty hungry this morning, and vows he could pick the wing of a
fowl. Run down, child, to Farmer Brigg's and get one: pluck it
before you bring it, you know, and we will make his Lordship a pretty
breakfast."

Catherine took up her basket, and away she went by the back-yard,
through the stables. There she heard the little horse-boy whistling and
hissing after the manner of horseboys; and there she learned that Mrs.
Score had been inventing an ingenious story to have her out of the way.
The ostler said he was just going to lead the two horses round to the
door. The Corporal had been, and they were about to start on the instant
for Stratford.

The fact was that Count Gustavus Adolphus, far from wishing to pick the
wing of a fowl, had risen with a horror and loathing for everything in
the shape of food, and for any liquor stronger than small beer. Of this
he had drunk a cup, and said he should ride immediately to Stratford;
and when, on ordering his horses, he had asked politely of the landlady
"why the d---- SHE always came up, and why she did not send the girl,"
Mrs. Score informed the Count that her Catherine was gone out for a walk
along with the young man to whom she was to be married, and would not
be visible that day. On hearing this the Captain ordered his horses
that moment, and abused the wine, the bed, the house, the landlady, and
everything connected with the "Bugle Inn."

Out the horses came: the little boys of the village gathered round; the
recruits, with bunches of ribands in their beavers, appeared presently;
Corporal Brock came swaggering out, and, slapping the pleased blacksmith
on the back, bade him mount his horse; while the boys hurrah'd. Then the
Captain came out, gloomy and majestic; to him Mr. Brock made a military
salute, which clumsily, and with much grinning, the recruits imitated.
"I shall walk on with these brave fellows, your honour, and meet you at
Stratford," said the Corporal. "Good," said the Captain, as he
mounted. The landlady curtseyed; the children hurrah'd more; the little
horse-boy, who held the bridle with one hand and the stirrup with the
other, and expected a crown-piece from such a noble gentleman, got only
a kick and a curse, as Count von Galgenstein shouted, "D----- you all,
get out of the way!" and galloped off; and John Hayes, who had been
sneaking about the inn all the morning, felt a weight off his heart when
he saw the Captain ride off alone.

O foolish Mrs. Score! O dolt of a John Hayes! If the landlady had
allowed the Captain and the maid to have their way, and meet but for a
minute before recruits, sergeant, and all, it is probable that no
harm would have been done, and that this history would never have been
written.

When Count von Galgenstein had ridden half a mile on the Stratford road,
looking as black and dismal as Napoleon galloping from the romantic
village of Waterloo, he espied, a few score yards onwards, at the
turn of the road, a certain object which caused him to check his horse
suddenly, brought a tingling red into his cheeks, and made his heart to
go thump--thump! against his side. A young lass was sauntering slowly
along the footpath, with a basket swinging from one hand, and a bunch of
hedge-flowers in the other. She stopped once or twice to add a fresh one
to her nosegay, and might have seen him, the Captain thought; but
no, she never looked directly towards him, and still walked on. Sweet
innocent! she was singing as if none were near; her voice went soaring
up to the clear sky, and the Captain put his horse on the grass, that
the sound of the hoofs might not disturb the music.

     "When the kine had given a pailful,
        And the sheep came bleating home,
      Poll, who knew it would be healthful,
        Went a-walking out with Tom.
      Hand in hand, sir, on the land, sir,
        As they walked to and fro,
      Tom made jolly love to Polly,
        But was answered no, no, no."

The Captain had put his horse on the grass, that the sound of his hoofs
might not disturb the music; and now he pushed its head on to the bank,
where straightway "George of Denmark" began chewing of such a salad
as grew there. And now the Captain slid off stealthily; and smiling
comically, and hitching up his great jack-boots, and moving forward with
a jerking tiptoe step, he, just as she was trilling the last o-o-o
of the last no in the above poem of Tom D'Urfey, came up to her, and
touching her lightly on the waist, said,

"My dear, your very humble servant."

Mrs. Catherine (you know you have found her out long ago!) gave a scream
and a start, and would have turned pale if she could. As it was, she
only shook all over, and said,

"Oh, sir, how you DID frighten me!"

"Frighten you, my rosebud! why, run me through, I'd die rather than
frighten you. Gad, child, tell me now, am I so VERY frightful?"

"Oh no, your honour, I didn't mean that; only I wasn't thinking to meet
you here, or that you would ride so early at all: for, if you please,
sir, I was going to fetch a chicken for your Lordship's breakfast, as
my mistress said you would like one; and I thought, instead of going to
Farmer Brigg's, down Birmingham way, as she told me, I'd go to Farmer
Bird's, where the chickens is better, sir,--my Lord, I mean."

"Said I'd like a chicken for breakfast, the old cat! why, I told her
I would not eat a morsel to save me--I was so dru--I mean I ate such a
good supper last night--and I bade her to send me a pot of small beer,
and to tell you to bring it; and the wretch said you were gone out with
your sweetheart--"

"What! John Hayes, the creature? Oh, what a naughty story-telling
woman!"

"--You had walked out with your sweetheart, and I was not to see you
any more; and I was mad with rage, and ready to kill myself; I was, my
dear."

"Oh, sir! pray, PRAY don't."

"For your sake, my sweet angel?"

"Yes, for my sake, if such a poor girl as me can persuade noble
gentlemen."

"Well, then, for YOUR sake, I won't; no, I'll live; but why live? Hell
and fury, if I do live I'm miserable without you; I am,--you know I
am,--you adorable, beautiful, cruel, wicked Catherine!"

Catherine's reply to this was "La, bless me! I do believe your horse is
running away." And so he was! for having finished his meal in the hedge,
he first looked towards his master and paused, as it were, irresolutely;
then, by a sudden impulse, flinging up his tail and his hind legs, he
scampered down the road.

Mrs. Hall ran lightly after the horse, and the Captain after Mrs. Hall;
and the horse ran quicker and quicker every moment, and might have led
them a long chase,--when lo! debouching from a twist in the road, came
the detachment of cavalry and infantry under Mr. Brock. The moment
he was out of sight of the village, that gentleman had desired the
blacksmith to dismount, and had himself jumped into the saddle,
maintaining the subordination of his army by drawing a pistol and
swearing that he would blow out the brains of any person who attempted
to run. When the Captain's horse came near the detachment he paused, and
suffered himself to be caught by Tummas Bullock, who held him until the
owner and Mrs. Catherine came up.

Mr. Bullock looked comically grave when he saw the pair; but the
Corporal graciously saluted Mrs. Catherine, and said it was a fine day
for walking.

"La, sir, and so it is," said she, panting in a very pretty and
distressing way, "but not for RUNNING. I do protest--ha!--and vow that
I really can scarcely stand. I'm so tired of running after that naughty
naughty horse!"

"How do, Cattern?" said Thomas. "Zee, I be going a zouldiering because
thee wouldn't have me." And here Mr. Bullock grinned. Mrs. Catherine
made no sort of reply, but protested once more she should die of
running. If the truth were told, she was somewhat vexed at the arrival
of the Corporal's detachment, and had had very serious thoughts of
finding herself quite tired just as he came in sight.

A sudden thought brought a smile of bright satisfaction in the Captain's
eyes. He mounted the horse which Tummas still held. "TIRED, Mrs
Catherine," said he, "and for my sake? By heavens! you shan't walk a
step farther. No, you shall ride back with a guard of honour! Back to
the village, gentlemen!--rightabout face! Show those fellows, Corporal,
how to rightabout face. Now, my dear, mount behind me on Snowball; he's
easy as a sedan. Put your dear little foot on the toe of my boot. There
now,--up!--jump! hurrah!"

"THAT'S not the way, Captain," shouted out Thomas, still holding on to
the rein as the horse began to move. "Thee woan't goo with him, will
thee, Catty?"

But Mrs. Catherine, though she turned away her head, never let go her
hold round the Captain's waist; and he, swearing a dreadful oath at
Thomas, struck him across the face and hands with his riding whip. The
poor fellow, who at the first cut still held on to the rein, dropped it
at the second, and as the pair galloped off, sat down on the roadside
and fairly began to weep.

"MARCH, you dog!" shouted out the Corporal a minute after. And so he
did: and when next he saw Mrs. Catherine she WAS the Captain's lady sure
enough, and wore a grey hat, with a blue feather, and red riding-coat
trimmed with silverlace. But Thomas was then on a bare-backed horse,
which Corporal Brock was flanking round a ring, and he was so occupied
looking between his horse's ears that he had no time to cry then, and at
length got the better of his attachment.

                    *****

This being a good opportunity for closing Chapter I, we ought, perhaps,
to make some apologies to the public for introducing them to characters
that are so utterly worthless; as we confess all our heroes, with the
exception of Mr. Bullock, to be. In this we have consulted nature and
history, rather than the prevailing taste and the general manner of
authors. The amusing novel of "Ernest Maltravers," for instance, opens
with a seduction; but then it is performed by people of the strictest
virtue on both sides: and there is so much religion and philosophy in
the heart of the seducer, so much tender innocence in the soul of the
seduced, that--bless the little dears!--their very peccadilloes make
one interested in them; and their naughtiness becomes quite sacred, so
deliciously is it described. Now, if we ARE to be interested by rascally
actions, let us have them with plain faces, and let them be performed,
not by virtuous philosophers, but by rascals. Another clever class of
novelists adopt the contrary system, and create interest by making their
rascals perform virtuous actions. Against these popular plans we here
solemnly appeal. We say, let your rogues in novels act like rogues,
and your honest men like honest men; don't let us have any juggling
and thimble-rigging with virtue and vice, so that, at the end of three
volumes, the bewildered reader shall not know which is which; don't let
us find ourselves kindling at the generous qualities of thieves, and
sympathising with the rascalities of noble hearts. For our own part, we
know what the public likes, and have chosen rogues for our characters,
and have taken a story from the "Newgate Calendar," which we hope to
follow out to edification. Among the rogues, at least, we will have
nothing that shall be mistaken for virtues. And if the British public
(after calling for three or four editions) shall give up, not only our
rascals, but the rascals of all other authors, we shall be content:--we
shall apply to Government for a pension, and think that our duty is
done.



CHAPTER II. IN WHICH ARE DEPICTED THE PLEASURES OF A SENTIMENTAL
ATTACHMENT.


It will not be necessary, for the purpose of this history, to follow out
very closely all the adventures which occurred to Mrs. Catherine from
the period when she quitted the "Bugle" and became the Captain's lady;
for although it would be just as easy to show as not, that the young
woman, by following the man of her heart, had only yielded to an
innocent impulse, and by remaining with him for a certain period, had
proved the depth and strength of her affection for him,--although we
might make very tender and eloquent apologies for the error of both
parties, the reader might possibly be disgusted at such descriptions
and such arguments: which, besides, are already done to his hand in the
novel of "Ernest Maltravers" before mentioned.

From the gentleman's manner towards Mrs. Catherine, and from his
brilliant and immediate success, the reader will doubtless have
concluded, in the first place, that Gustavus Adolphus had not a very
violent affection for Mrs. Cat; in the second place, that he was a
professional lady-killer, and therefore likely at some period to resume
his profession; thirdly, and to conclude, that a connection so begun,
must, in the nature of things, be likely to end speedily.

And so, to do the Count justice, it would, if he had been allowed to
follow his own inclination entirely; for (as many young gentlemen will,
and yet no praise to them) in about a week he began to be indifferent,
in a month to be weary, in two months to be angry, in three to proceed
to blows and curses; and, in short, to repent most bitterly the hour
when he had ever been induced to present Mrs. Catherine the toe of his
boot, for the purpose of lifting her on to his horse.

"Egad!" said he to the Corporal one day, when confiding his griefs to
Mr. Brock, "I wish my toe had been cut off before ever it served as a
ladder to this little vixen."

"Or perhaps your honour would wish to kick her downstairs with it?"
delicately suggested Mr. Brock.

"Kick her! why, the wench would hold so fast by the banisters that I
COULD not kick her down, Mr. Brock. To tell you a bit of a secret, I
HAVE tried as much--not to kick her--no, no, not kick her, certainly:
that's ungentlemanly--but to INDUCE her to go back to that cursed
pot-house where we fell in with her. I have given her many hints--"

"Oh, yes, I saw your honour give her one yesterday--with a mug of beer.
By the laws, as the ale run all down her face, and she clutched a knife
to run at you, I don't think I ever saw such a she-devil! That woman
will do for your honour some day, if you provoke her."

"Do for ME? No, hang it, Mr. Brock, never! She loves every hair of my
head, sir: she worships me, Corporal. Egad, yes! she worships me; and
would much sooner apply a knife to her own weasand than scratch my
little finger!"

"I think she does," said Mr. Brock.

"I'm sure of it," said the Captain. "Women, look you, are like dogs,
they like to be ill-treated: they like it, sir; I know they do. I never
had anything to do with a woman in my life but I ill-treated her, and
she liked me the better."

"Mrs. Hall ought to be VERY fond of you then, sure enough!" said Mr.
Corporal.

"Very fond;--ha, ha! Corporal, you wag you--and so she IS very fond.
Yesterday, after the knife-and-beer scene--no wonder I threw the liquor
in her face: it was so dev'lish flat that no gentleman could drink it:
and I told her never to draw it till dinner-time--"

"Oh, it was enough to put an angel in a fury!" said Brock.

"Well, yesterday, after the knife business, when you had got the carver
out of her hand, off she flings to her bedroom, will not eat a bit of
dinner forsooth, and remains locked up for a couple of hours. At
two o'clock afternoon (I was over a tankard), out comes the little
she-devil, her face pale, her eyes bleared, and the tip of her nose as
red as fire with sniffling and weeping. Making for my hand, 'Max,' says
she, 'will you forgive me?' 'What!' says I. 'Forgive a murderess?'
says I. 'No, curse me, never!' 'Your cruelty will kill me,' sobbed she.
'Cruelty be hanged!' says I; 'didn't you draw that beer an hour before
dinner?' She could say nothing to THIS, you know, and I swore that every
time she did so, I would fling it into her face again. Whereupon
back she flounced to her chamber, where she wept and stormed until
night-time."

"When you forgave her?"

"I DID forgive her, that's positive. You see I had supped at the 'Rose'
along with Tom Trippet and half-a-dozen pretty fellows; and I had eased
a great fat-headed Warwickshire landjunker--what d'ye call him?--squire,
of forty pieces; and I'm dev'lish good-humoured when I've won, and so
Cat and I made it up: but I've taught her never to bring me stale beer
again--ha, ha!"

This conversation will explain, a great deal better than any description
of ours, however eloquent, the state of things as between Count
Maximilian and Mrs. Catherine, and the feelings which they entertained
for each other. The woman loved him, that was the fact. And, as we have
shown in the previous chapter how John Hayes, a mean-spirited fellow
as ever breathed, in respect of all other passions a pigmy, was in the
passion of love a giant, and followed Mrs. Catherine with a furious
longing which might seem at the first to be foreign to his nature; in
the like manner, and playing at cross-purposes, Mrs. Hall had become
smitten of the Captain; and, as he said truly, only liked him the better
for the brutality which she received at his hands. For it is my opinion,
madam, that love is a bodily infirmity, from which humankind can no more
escape than from small-pox; and which attacks every one of us, from the
first duke in the Peerage down to Jack Ketch inclusive: which has no
respect for rank, virtue, or roguery in man, but sets each in his turn
in a fever; which breaks out the deuce knows how or why, and, raging its
appointed time, fills each individual of the one sex with a blind
fury and longing for some one of the other (who may be pure, gentle,
blue-eyed, beautiful, and good; or vile, shrewish, squinting,
hunchbacked, and hideous, according to circumstances and luck); which
dies away, perhaps, in the natural course, if left to have its way,
but which contradiction causes to rage more furiously than ever. Is not
history, from the Trojan war upwards and downwards, full of instances of
such strange inexplicable passions? Was not Helen, by the most moderate
calculation, ninety years of age when she went off with His Royal
Highness Prince Paris of Troy? Was not Madame La Valliere ill-made,
blear-eyed, tallow-complexioned, scraggy, and with hair like tow? Was
not Wilkes the ugliest, charmingest, most successful man in the world?
Such instances might be carried out so as to fill a volume; but cui
bono? Love is fate, and not will; its origin not to be explained, its
progress irresistible: and the best proof of this may be had at Bow
Street any day, where if you ask any officer of the establishment how
they take most thieves, he will tell you at the houses of the women.
They must see the dear creatures though they hang for it; they will
love, though they have their necks in the halter. And with regard to the
other position, that ill-usage on the part of the man does not destroy
the affection of the woman, have we not numberless police-reports,
showing how, when a bystander would beat a husband for beating his wife,
man and wife fall together on the interloper and punish him for his
meddling?

These points, then, being settled to the satisfaction of all parties,
the reader will not be disposed to question the assertion that Mrs. Hall
had a real affection for the gallant Count, and grew, as Mr. Brock was
pleased to say, like a beefsteak, more tender as she was thumped. Poor
thing, poor thing! his flashy airs and smart looks had overcome her in
a single hour; and no more is wanted to plunge into love over head and
ears; no more is wanted to make a first love with--and a woman's first
love lasts FOR EVER (a man's twenty-fourth or twenty-fifth is perhaps
the best): you can't kill it, do what you will; it takes root, and lives
and even grows, never mind what the soil may be in which it is planted,
or the bitter weather it must bear--often as one has seen a wallflower
grow--out of a stone.

In the first weeks of their union, the Count had at least been liberal
to her: she had a horse and fine clothes, and received abroad some of
those flattering attentions which she held at such high price. He had,
however, some ill-luck at play, or had been forced to pay some bills, or
had some other satisfactory reason for being poor, and his establishment
was very speedily diminished. He argued that, as Mrs. Catherine had
been accustomed to wait on others all her life, she might now wait upon
herself and him; and when the incident of the beer arose, she had
been for some time employed as the Count's housekeeper, with unlimited
superintendence over his comfort, his cellar, his linen, and such
matters as bachelors are delighted to make over to active female hands.
To do the poor wretch justice, she actually kept the man's menage in the
best order; nor was there any point of extravagance with which she could
be charged, except a little extravagance of dress displayed on the
very few occasions when he condescended to walk abroad with her, and
extravagance of language and passion in the frequent quarrels they
had together. Perhaps in such a connection as subsisted between this
precious couple, these faults are inevitable on the part of the woman.
She must be silly and vain, and will pretty surely therefore be fond of
dress; and she must, disguise it as she will, be perpetually miserable
and brooding over her fall, which will cause her to be violent and
quarrelsome.

Such, at least, was Mrs. Hall; and very early did the poor vain
misguided wretch begin to reap what she had sown.

For a man, remorse under these circumstances is perhaps uncommon.
No stigma affixes on HIM for betraying a woman; no bitter pangs of
mortified vanity; no insulting looks of superiority from his neighbour,
and no sentence of contemptuous banishment is read against him; these
all fall on the tempted, and not on the tempter, who is permitted to
go free. The chief thing that a man learns after having successfully
practised on a woman is to despise the poor wretch whom he has won.
The game, in fact, and the glory, such as it is, is all his, and the
punishment alone falls upon her. Consider this, ladies, when charming
young gentlemen come to woo you with soft speeches. You have nothing to
win, except wretchedness, and scorn, and desertion. Consider this, and
be thankful to your Solomons for telling it.

It came to pass, then, that the Count had come to have a perfect
contempt and indifference for Mrs. Hall;--how should he not for a young
person who had given herself up to him so easily?--and would have been
quite glad of any opportunity of parting with her. But there was a
certain lingering shame about the man, which prevented him from saying
at once and abruptly, "Go!" and the poor thing did not choose to take
such hints as fell out in the course of their conversation and quarrels.
And so they kept on together, he treating her with simple insult, and
she hanging on desperately, by whatever feeble twig she could find, to
the rock beyond which all was naught, or death, to her.

Well, after the night with Tom Trippet and the pretty fellows at the
"Rose," to which we have heard the Count allude in the conversation
just recorded, Fortune smiled on him a good deal; for the Warwickshire
squire, who had lost forty pieces on that occasion, insisted on having
his revenge the night after; when, strange to say, a hundred and fifty
more found their way into the pouch of his Excellency the Count. Such a
sum as this quite set the young nobleman afloat again, and brought back
a pleasing equanimity to his mind, which had been a good deal disturbed
in the former difficult circumstances; and in this, for a little and to
a certain extent, poor Cat had the happiness to share. He did not alter
the style of his establishment, which consisted, as before, of herself
and a small person who acted as scourer, kitchen-wench, and scullion;
Mrs. Catherine always putting her hand to the principal pieces of the
dinner; but he treated his mistress with tolerable good-humour; or, to
speak more correctly, with such bearable brutality as might be expected
from a man like him to a woman in her condition. Besides, a certain
event was about to take place, which not unusually occurs in
circumstances of this nature, and Mrs. Catherine was expecting soon to
lie in.

The Captain, distrusting naturally the strength of his own paternal
feelings, had kindly endeavoured to provide a parent for the coming
infant; and to this end had opened a negotiation with our friend Mr.
Thomas Bullock, declaring that Mrs. Cat should have a fortune of twenty
guineas, and reminding Tummas of his ancient flame for her: but Mr.
Tummas, when this proposition was made to him, declined it, with many
oaths, and vowed that he was perfectly satisfied with his present
bachelor condition. In this dilemma, Mr. Brock stepped forward, who
declared himself very ready to accept Mrs. Catherine and her fortune:
and might possibly have become the possessor of both, had not Mrs. Cat,
the moment she heard of the proposed arrangement, with fire in her eyes,
and rage--oh, how bitter!--in her heart, prevented the success of the
measure by proceeding incontinently to the first justice of the peace,
and there swearing before his worship who was the father of the coming
child.

This proceeding, which she had expected would cause not a little
indignation on the part of her lord and master, was received by him,
strangely enough, with considerable good-humour: he swore that the wench
had served him a good trick, and was rather amused at the anger, the
outbreak of fierce rage and contumely, and the wretched wretched tears
of heartsick desperation, which followed her announcement of this step
to him. For Mr. Brock, she repelled his offer with scorn and loathing,
and treated the notion of a union with Mr. Bullock with yet fiercer
contempt. Marry him indeed! a workhouse pauper carrying a brown-bess!
She would have died sooner, she said, or robbed on the highway. And so,
to do her justice, she would: for the little minx was one of the vainest
creatures in existence, and vanity (as I presume everybody knows)
becomes THE principle in certain women's hearts--their moral spectacles,
their conscience, their meat and drink, their only rule of right and
wrong.

As for Mr. Tummas, he, as we have seen, was quite unfriendly to the
proposition as she could be; and the Corporal, with a good deal of
comical gravity, vowed that, as he could not be satisfied in his
dearest wishes, he would take to drinking for a consolation: which he
straightway did.

"Come, Tummas," said he to Mr. Bullock "since we CAN'T have the girl
of our hearts, why, hang it, Tummas, let's drink her health!" To which
Bullock had no objection. And so strongly did the disappointment weigh
upon honest Corporal Brock, that even when, after unheard-of quantities
of beer, he could scarcely utter a word, he was seen absolutely to weep,
and, in accents almost unintelligible, to curse his confounded ill-luck
at being deprived, not of a wife, but of a child: he wanted one so, he
said, to comfort him in his old age.

The time of Mrs. Catherine's couche drew near, arrived, and was gone
through safely. She presented to the world a chopping boy, who might
use, if he liked, the Galgenstein arms with a bar-sinister; and in
her new cares and duties had not so many opportunities as usual of
quarrelling with the Count: who, perhaps, respected her situation, or,
at least, was so properly aware of the necessity of quiet to her, that
he absented himself from home morning, noon, and night.

The Captain had, it must be confessed, turned these continued absences
to a considerable worldly profit, for he played incessantly; and, since
his first victory over the Warwickshire Squire, Fortune had been so
favourable to him, that he had at various intervals amassed a sum of
nearly a thousand pounds, which he used to bring home as he won; and
which he deposited in a strong iron chest, cunningly screwed down by
himself under his own bed. This Mrs. Catherine regularly made, and the
treasure underneath it could be no secret to her. However, the noble
Count kept the key, and bound her by many solemn oaths (that he
discharged at her himself) not to reveal to any other person the
existence of the chest and its contents.

But it is not in a woman's nature to keep such secrets; and the Captain,
who left her for days and days, did not reflect that she would seek for
confidants elsewhere. For want of a female companion, she was compelled
to bestow her sympathies upon Mr. Brock; who, as the Count's
corporal, was much in his lodgings, and who did manage to survive the
disappointment which he had experienced by Mrs. Catherine's refusal of
him.

About two months after the infant's birth, the Captain, who was annoyed
by its squalling, put it abroad to nurse, and dismissed its attendant.
Mrs. Catherine now resumed her household duties, and was, as before,
at once mistress and servant of the establishment. As such, she had the
keys of the beer, and was pretty sure of the attentions of the Corporal;
who became, as we have said, in the Count's absence, his lady's chief
friend and companion. After the manner of ladies, she very speedily
confided to him all her domestic secrets; the causes of her former
discontent; the Count's ill-treatment of her; the wicked names he called
her; the prices that all her gowns had cost her; how he beat her; how
much money he won and lost at play; how she had once pawned a coat for
him; how he had four new ones, laced, and paid for; what was the best
way of cleaning and keeping gold-lace, of making cherry-brandy, pickling
salmon, etc., etc. Her confidences upon all these subjects used to
follow each other in rapid succession; and Mr. Brock became, ere long,
quite as well acquainted with the Captain's history for the last year as
the Count himself:--for he was careless, and forgot things; women
never do. They chronicle all the lover's small actions, his words, his
headaches, the dresses he has worn, the things he has liked for dinner
on certain days;--all which circumstances commonly are expunged from the
male brain immediately after they have occurred, but remain fixed with
the female.

To Brock, then, and to Brock only (for she knew no other soul), Mrs. Cat
breathed, in strictest confidence, the history of the Count's winnings,
and his way of disposing of them; how he kept his money screwed down in
an iron chest in their room; and a very lucky fellow did Brock consider
his officer for having such a large sum. He and Cat looked at the chest:
it was small, but mighty strong, sure enough, and would defy picklocks
and thieves. Well, if any man deserved money, the Captain did ("though
he might buy me a few yards of that lace I love so," interrupted
Cat),--if any man deserved money, he did, for he spent it like a prince,
and his hand was always in his pocket.

It must now be stated that Monsieur de Galgenstein had, during Cat's
seclusion, cast his eyes upon a young lady of good fortune, who
frequented the Assembly at Birmingham, and who was not a little smitten
by his title and person. The "four new coats, laced, and paid for," as
Cat said, had been purchased, most probably, by his Excellency for the
purpose of dazzling the heiress; and he and the coats had succeeded so
far as to win from the young woman an actual profession of love, and a
promise of marriage provided Pa would consent. This was obtained,--for
Pa was a tradesman; and I suppose every one of my readers has remarked
how great an effect a title has on the lower classes. Yes, thank Heaven!
there is about a freeborn Briton a cringing baseness, and lickspittle
awe of rank, which does not exist under any tyranny in Europe, and is
only to be found here and in America.

All these negotiations had been going on quite unknown to Cat; and, as
the Captain had determined, before two months were out, to fling that
young woman on the pave, he was kind to her in the meanwhile: people
always are when they are swindling you, or meditating an injury against
you.

The poor girl had much too high an opinion of her own charms to suspect
that the Count could be unfaithful to them, and had no notion of the
plot that was formed against her. But Mr. Brock had: for he had seen
many times a gilt coach with a pair of fat white horses ambling in
the neighbourhood of the town, and the Captain on his black steed
caracolling majestically by its side; and he had remarked a fat, pudgy,
pale-haired woman treading heavily down the stairs of the Assembly,
leaning on the Captain's arm: all these Mr. Brock had seen, not without
reflection. Indeed, the Count one day, in great good-humour, had slapped
him on the shoulder and told him that he was about speedily to purchase
a regiment; when, by his great gods, Mr. Brock should have a pair of
colours. Perhaps this promise occasioned his silence to Mrs. Catherine
hitherto; perhaps he never would have peached at all; and perhaps,
therefore, this history would never have been written, but for a small
circumstance which occurred at this period.

"What can you want with that drunken old Corporal always about your
quarters?" said Mr. Trippet to the Count one day, as they sat over their
wine, in the midst of a merry company, at the Captain's rooms.

"What!" said he. "Old Brock? The old thief has been more useful to me
than many a better man. He is as brave in a row as a lion, as cunning in
intrigue as a fox; he can nose a dun at an inconceivable distance, and
scent out a pretty woman be she behind ever so many stone walls. If a
gentleman wants a good rascal now, I can recommend him. I am going to
reform, you know, and must turn him out of my service."

"And pretty Mrs. Cat?"

"Oh, curse pretty Mrs. Cat! she may go too."

"And the brat?"

"Why, you have parishes, and what not, here in England. Egad! if a
gentleman were called upon to keep all his children, there would be no
living: no, stap my vitals! Croesus couldn't stand it."

"No, indeed," said Mr. Trippet: "you are right; and when a gentleman
marries, he is bound in honour to give up such low connections as are
useful when he is a bachelor."

"Of course; and give them up I will, when the sweet Mrs. Dripping is
mine. As for the girl, you can have her, Tom Trippet, if you take a
fancy to her; and as for the Corporal, he may be handed over to my
successor in Cutts's:--for I will have a regiment to myself, that's poz;
and to take with me such a swindling, pimping, thieving, brandy-faced
rascal as this Brock will never do. Egad! he's a disgrace to the
service. As it is, I've often a mind to have the superannuated vagabond
drummed out of the corps."

Although this resume of Mr. Brock's character and accomplishments
was very just, it came perhaps with an ill grace from Count Gustavus
Adolphus Maximilian, who had profited by all his qualities, and who
certainly would never have given this opinion of them had he known that
the door of his dining-parlour was open, and that the gallant Corporal,
who was in the passage, could hear every syllable that fell from the
lips of his commanding officer. We shall not say, after the fashion
of the story-books, that Mr. Brock listened with a flashing eye and a
distended nostril; that his chest heaved tumultuously, and that his
hand fell down mechanically to his side, where it played with the brass
handle of his sword. Mr. Kean would have gone through most of these
bodily exercises had he been acting the part of a villain enraged and
disappointed like Corporal Brock; but that gentleman walked away without
any gestures of any kind, and as gently as possible. "He'll turn me out
of the regiment, will he?" says he, quite piano; and then added (con
molta espressione), "I'll do for him."

And it is to be remarked how generally, in cases of this nature,
gentlemen stick to their word.



CHAPTER III. IN WHICH A NARCOTIC IS ADMINISTERED, AND A GREAT DEAL OF
GENTEEL SOCIETY DEPICTED.


When the Corporal, who had retreated to the street-door immediately on
hearing the above conversation, returned to the Captain's lodgings
and paid his respects to Mrs. Catherine, he found that lady in high
good-humour. The Count had been with her, she said, along with a friend
of his, Mr. Trippet; had promised her twelve yards of the lace she
coveted so much; had vowed that the child should have as much more for
a cloak; and had not left her until he had sat with her for an hour,
or more, over a bowl of punch, which he made on purpose for her. Mr.
Trippet stayed too. "A mighty pleasant man," said she; "only not very
wise, and seemingly a good deal in liquor."

"A good deal indeed!" said the Corporal. "He was so tipsy just now that
he could hardly stand. He and his honour were talking to Nan Fantail in
the market-place; and she pulled Trippet's wig off, for wanting to kiss
her."

"The nasty fellow!" said Mrs. Cat, "to demean himself with such low
people as Nan Fantail, indeed! Why, upon my conscience now, Corporal, it
was but an hour ago that Mr. Trippet swore he never saw such a pair of
eyes as mine, and would like to cut the Captain's throat for the love of
me. Nan Fantail, indeed!"

"Nan's an honest girl, Madam Catherine, and was a great favourite of
the Captain's before someone else came in his way. No one can say a word
against her--not a word."

"And pray, Corporal, who ever did?" said Mrs. Cat, rather offended. "A
nasty, ugly slut! I wonder what the men can see in her?"

"She has got a smart way with her, sure enough; it's what amuses the
men, and--"

"And what? You don't mean to say that my Max is fond of her NOW?" said
Mrs. Catherine, looking very fierce.

"Oh, no; not at all: not of HER;--that is--"

"Not of HER!" screamed she. "Of whom, then?"

"Oh, psha! nonsense! Of you, my dear, to be sure; who else should he
care for? And, besides, what business is it of mine?" And herewith
the Corporal began whistling, as if he would have no more of the
conversation. But Mrs. Cat was not to be satisfied,--not she,--and
carried on her cross-questions.

"Why, look you," said the Corporal, after parrying many of these,--"Why,
look you, I'm an old fool, Catherine, and I must blab. That man has been
the best friend I ever had, and so I was quiet; but I can't keep it in
any longer,--no, hang me if I can! It's my belief he's acting like a
rascal by you: he deceives you, Catherine; he's a scoundrel, Mrs. Hall,
that's the truth on't."

Catherine prayed him to tell all he knew; and he resumed.

"He wants you off his hands; he's sick of you, and so brought here that
fool Tom Trippet, who has taken a fancy to you. He has not the courage
to turn you out of doors like a man; though indoors he can treat you
like a beast. But I'll tell you what he'll do. In a month he will go to
Coventry, or pretend to go there, on recruiting business. No such thing,
Mrs. Hall; he's going on MARRIAGE business; and he'll leave you without
a farthing, to starve or to rot, for him. It's all arranged, I tell you:
in a month, you are to be starved into becoming Tom Trippet's
mistress; and his honour is to marry rich Miss Dripping, the
twenty-thousand-pounder from London; and to purchase a regiment;--and to
get old Brock drummed out of Cutts's too," said the Corporal, under his
breath. But he might have spoken out, if he chose; for the poor young
woman had sunk on the ground in a real honest fit.

"I thought I should give it her," said Mr. Brock as he procured a glass
of water; and, lifting her on to a sofa, sprinkled the same over her.
"Hang it! how pretty she is."

                    *****

When Mrs. Catherine came to herself again, Brock's tone with her was
kind, and almost feeling. Nor did the poor wench herself indulge in
any subsequent shiverings and hysterics, such as usually follow the
fainting-fits of persons of higher degree. She pressed him for further
explanations, which he gave, and to which she listened with a great deal
of calmness; nor did many tears, sobs, sighs, or exclamations of sorrow
or anger escape from her: only when the Corporal was taking his leave,
and said to her point-blank,--"Well, Mrs. Catherine, and what do you
intend to do?" she did not reply a word; but gave a look which made him
exclaim, on leaving the room,--

"By heavens! the woman means murder! I would not be the Holofernes to
lie by the side of such a Judith as that--not I!" And he went his way,
immersed in deep thought. When the Captain returned at night, she did
not speak to him; and when he swore at her for being sulky, she only
said she had a headache, and was dreadfully ill; with which excuse
Gustavus Adolphus seemed satisfied, and left her to herself.

He saw her the next morning for a moment: he was going a-shooting.

Catherine had no friend, as is usual in tragedies and romances,--no
mysterious sorceress of her acquaintance to whom she could apply for
poison,--so she went simply to the apothecaries, pretending at each that
she had a dreadful toothache, and procuring from them as much laudanum
as she thought would suit her purpose.

When she went home again she seemed almost gay. Mr. Brock complimented
her upon the alteration in her appearance; and she was enabled to
receive the Captain at his return from shooting in such a manner as made
him remark that she had got rid of her sulks of the morning, and might
sup with them, if she chose to keep her good-humour. The supper was
got ready, and the gentlemen had the punch-bowl when the cloth was
cleared,--Mrs. Catherine, with her delicate hands, preparing the liquor.

It is useless to describe the conversation that took place, or to reckon
the number of bowls that were emptied; or to tell how Mr. Trippet, who
was one of the guests, and declined to play at cards when some of the
others began, chose to remain by Mrs. Catherine's side, and make violent
love to her. All this might be told, and the account, however faithful,
would not be very pleasing. No, indeed! And here, though we are only in
the third chapter of this history, we feel almost sick of the characters
that appear in it, and the adventures which they are called upon to go
through. But how can we help ourselves? The public will hear of nothing
but rogues; and the only way in which poor authors, who must live, can
act honestly by the public and themselves, is to paint such thieves as
they are: not, dandy, poetical, rose-water thieves; but real downright
scoundrels, leading scoundrelly lives, drunken, profligate, dissolute,
low; as scoundrels will be. They don't quote Plato, like Eugene Aram; or
live like gentlemen, and sing the pleasantest ballads in the world, like
jolly Dick Turpin; or prate eternally about "to kalon,"[*] like that
precious canting Maltravers, whom we all of us have read about and
pitied; or die whitewashed saints, like poor "Biss Dadsy" in "Oliver
Twist." No, my dear madam, you and your daughters have no right to
admire and sympathise with any such persons, fictitious or real:
you ought to be made cordially to detest, scorn, loathe, abhor, and
abominate all people of this kidney. Men of genius like those whose
works we have above alluded to, have no business to make these
characters interesting or agreeable; to be feeding your morbid fancies,
or indulging their own, with such monstrous food. For our parts, young
ladies, we beg you to bottle up your tears, and not waste a single drop
of them on any one of the heroes or heroines in this history: they
are all rascals, every soul of them, and behave "as sich." Keep your
sympathy for those who deserve it: don't carry it, for preference, to
the Old Bailey, and grow maudlin over the company assembled there.

     * Anglicised version of the author's original Greek text.

Just, then, have the kindness to fancy that the conversation which took
place over the bowls of punch which Mrs. Catherine prepared, was such
as might be expected to take place where the host was a dissolute,
dare-devil, libertine captain of dragoons, the guests for the most
part of the same class, and the hostess a young woman originally from a
country alehouse, and for the present mistress to the entertainer of
the society. They talked, and they drank, and they grew tipsy; and very
little worth hearing occurred during the course of the whole evening.
Mr. Brock officiated, half as the servant, half as the companion of the
society. Mr. Thomas Trippet made violent love to Mrs. Catherine, while
her lord and master was playing at dice with the other gentlemen: and on
this night, strange to say, the Captain's fortune seemed to desert him.
The Warwickshire Squire, from whom he had won so much, had an amazing
run of good luck. The Captain called perpetually for more drink, and
higher stakes, and lost almost every throw. Three hundred, four hundred,
six hundred--all his winnings of the previous months were swallowed up
in the course of a few hours. The Corporal looked on; and, to do him
justice, seemed very grave as, sum by sum, the Squire scored down the
Count's losses on the paper before him.

Most of the company had taken their hats and staggered off. The Squire
and Mr. Trippet were the only two that remained, the latter still
lingering by Mrs. Catherine's sofa and table; and as she, as we have
stated, had been employed all the evening in mixing the liquor for
the gamesters, he was at the headquarters of love and drink, and had
swallowed so much of each as hardly to be able to speak.

The dice went rattling on; the candles were burning dim, with great long
wicks. Mr. Trippet could hardly see the Captain, and thought, as far as
his muzzy reason would let him, that the Captain could not see him:
so he rose from his chair as well as he could, and fell down on Mrs.
Catherine's sofa. His eyes were fixed, his face was pale, his jaw hung
down; and he flung out his arms and said, in a maudlin voice, "Oh, you
byoo-oo-oo-tifile Cathrine, I must have a kick-kick-iss."

"Beast!" said Mrs. Catherine, and pushed him away. The drunken wretch
fell off the sofa, and on to the floor, where he stayed; and, after
snorting out some unintelligible sounds, went to sleep.

The dice went rattling on; the candles were burning dim, with great long
wicks.

"Seven's the main," cried the Count. "Four. Three to two against the
caster."

"Ponies," said the Warwickshire Squire.

Rattle, rattle, rattle, rattle, clatter, NINE. Clap, clap, clap, clap,
ELEVEN. Clutter, clutter, clutter, clutter: "Seven it is," says the
Warwickshire Squire. "That makes eight hundred, Count."

"One throw for two hundred," said the Count. "But stop! Cat, give us
some more punch."

Mrs. Cat came forward; she looked a little pale, and her hand trembled
somewhat. "Here is the punch, Max," said she. It was steaming hot, in a
large glass. "Don't drink it all," said she; "leave me some."

"How dark it is!" said the Count, eyeing it.

"It's the brandy," said Cat.

"Well, here goes! Squire, curse you! here's your health, and bad luck
to you!" and he gulped off more than half the liquor at a draught. But
presently he put down the glass and cried, "What infernal poison is
this, Cat?"

"Poison!" said she. "It's no poison. Give me the glass." And she pledged
Max, and drank a little of it. "'Tis good punch, Max, and of my brewing;
I don't think you will ever get any better." And she went back to the
sofa again, and sat down, and looked at the players.

Mr. Brock looked at her white face and fixed eyes with a grim kind of
curiosity. The Count sputtered, and cursed the horrid taste of the punch
still; but he presently took the box, and made his threatened throw.

As before, the Squire beat him; and having booked his winnings, rose
from table as well as he might and besought to lead him downstairs;
which Mr. Brock did.

Liquor had evidently stupefied the Count: he sat with his head between
his hands, muttering wildly about ill-luck, seven's the main, bad punch,
and so on. The street-door banged to; and the steps of Brock and the
Squire were heard, until they could be heard no more.

"Max," said she; but he did not answer. "Max," said she again, laying
her hand on his shoulder.

"Curse you," said that gentleman, "keep off, and don't be laying your
paws upon me. Go to bed, you jade, or to ----, for what I care; and give me
first some more punch--a gallon more punch, do you hear?"

The gentleman, by the curses at the commencement of this little speech,
and the request contained at the end of it, showed that his losses vexed
him, and that he was anxious to forget them temporarily.

"Oh, Max!" whimpered Mrs. Cat, "you--don't--want any more punch?"

"Don't! Shan't I be drunk in my own house, you cursed whimpering jade,
you? Get out!" and with this the Captain proceeded to administer a blow
upon Mrs. Catherine's cheek.

Contrary to her custom, she did not avenge it, or seek to do so, as
on the many former occasions when disputes of this nature had arisen
between the Count and her; but now Mrs. Catherine fell on her knees and,
clasping her hands and looking pitifully in the Count's face, cried,
"Oh, Count, forgive me, forgive me!"

"Forgive you! What for? Because I slapped your face? Ha, ha! I'll
forgive you again, if you don't mind."

"Oh, no, no, no!" said she, wringing her hands. "It isn't that. Max,
dear Max, will you forgive me? It isn't the blow--I don't mind that;
it's--"

"It's what, you--maudlin fool?"

"IT'S THE PUNCH!"

The Count, who was more than half seas over, here assumed an air of much
tipsy gravity. "The punch! No, I never will forgive you that last glass
of punch. Of all the foul, beastly drinks I ever tasted, that was the
worst. No, I never will forgive you that punch."

"Oh, it isn't that, it isn't that!" said she.

"I tell you it is that,--you! That punch, I say that punch was no better
than paw--aw-oison." And here the Count's head sank back, and he fell to
snore.

"IT WAS POISON!" said she.

"WHAT!" screamed he, waking up at once, and spurning her away from him.
"What, you infernal murderess, have you killed me?"

"Oh, Max!--don't kill me, Max! It was laudanum--indeed it was. You were
going to be married, and I was furious, and I went and got--"

"Hold your tongue, you fiend," roared out the Count; and with more
presence of mind than politeness, he flung the remainder of the liquor
(and, indeed, the glass with it) at the head of Mrs. Catherine. But the
poisoned chalice missed its mark, and fell right on the nose of Mr. Tom
Trippet, who was left asleep and unobserved under the table.

Bleeding, staggering, swearing, indeed a ghastly sight, up sprang Mr.
Trippet, and drew his rapier. "Come on," says he; "never say die! What's
the row? I'm ready for a dozen of you." And he made many blind and
furious passes about the room.

"Curse you, we'll die together!" shouted the Count, as he too pulled out
his toledo, and sprang at Mrs. Catherine.

"Help! murder! thieves!" shrieked she. "Save me, Mr. Trippet, save me!"
and she placed that gentleman between herself and the Count, and then
made for the door of the bedroom, and gained it, and bolted it.

"Out of the way, Trippet," roared the Count--"out of the way, you
drunken beast! I'll murder her, I will--I'll have the devil's life." And
here he gave a swinging cut at Mr. Trippet's sword: it sent the weapon
whirling clean out of his hand, and through a window into the street.

"Take my life, then," said Mr. Trippet: "I'm drunk, but I'm a man, and,
damme! will never say die."

"I don't want your life, you stupid fool. Hark you, Trippet, wake and
be sober, if you can. That woman has heard of my marriage with Miss
Dripping."

"Twenty thousand pound," ejaculated Trippet.

"She has been jealous, I tell you, and POISONED us. She has put laudanum
into the punch."

"What, in MY punch?" said Trippet, growing quite sober and losing his
courage. "O Lord! O Lord!"

"Don't stand howling there, but run for a doctor; 'tis our only chance."
And away ran Mr. Trippet, as if the deuce were at his heels.

The Count had forgotten his murderous intentions regarding his mistress,
or had deferred them at least, under the consciousness of his own
pressing danger. And it must be said, in the praise of a man who had
fought for and against Marlborough and Tallard, that his courage in this
trying and novel predicament never for a moment deserted him, but that
he showed the greatest daring, as well as ingenuity, in meeting and
averting the danger. He flew to the sideboard, where were the relics of
a supper, and seizing the mustard and salt pots, and a bottle of oil,
he emptied them all into a jug, into which he further poured a vast
quantity of hot water. This pleasing mixture he then, without a moment's
hesitation, placed to his lips, and swallowed as much of it as nature
would allow him. But when he had imbibed about a quart, the anticipated
effect was produced, and he was enabled, by the power of this ingenious
extemporaneous emetic, to get rid of much of the poison which Mrs.
Catherine had administered to him.

He was employed in these efforts when the doctor entered, along with
Mr. Brock and Mr. Trippet; who was not a little pleased to hear that
the poisoned punch had not in all probability been given to him. He
was recommended to take some of the Count's mixture, as a precautionary
measure; but this he refused, and retired home, leaving the Count under
charge of the physician and his faithful corporal.

It is not necessary to say what further remedies were employed by
them to restore the Captain to health; but after some time the doctor,
pronouncing that the danger was, he hoped, averted, recommended that his
patient should be put to bed, and that somebody should sit by him; which
Brock promised to do.

"That she-devil will murder me, if you don't," gasped the poor Count.
"You must turn her out of the bedroom; or break open the door, if she
refuses to let you in."

And this step was found to be necessary; for, after shouting many
times, and in vain, Mr. Brock found a small iron bar (indeed, he had the
instrument for many days in his pocket), and forced the lock. The room
was empty, the window was open: the pretty barmaid of the "Bugle" had
fled.

"The chest," said the Count--"is the chest safe?"

The Corporal flew to the bed, under which it was screwed, and looked,
and said, "It IS safe, thank Heaven!" The window was closed. The
Captain, who was too weak to stand without help, was undressed and put
to bed. The Corporal sat down by his side; slumber stole over the eyes
of the patient; and his wakeful nurse marked with satisfaction the
progress of the beneficent restorer of health.

When the Captain awoke, as he did some time afterwards, he found, very
much to his surprise, that a gag had been placed in his mouth, and that
the Corporal was in the act of wheeling his bed to another part of the
room. He attempted to move, and gave utterance to such unintelligible
sounds as could issue through a silk handkerchief.

"If your honour stirs or cries out in the least, I will cut your
honour's throat," said the Corporal.

And then, having recourse to his iron bar (the reader will now see why
he was provided with such an implement, for he had been meditating this
coup for some days), he proceeded first to attempt to burst the lock of
the little iron chest in which the Count kept his treasure, and, failing
in this, to unscrew it from the ground; which operation he performed
satisfactorily.

"You see, Count," said he, calmly, "when rogues fall out there's the
deuce to pay. You'll have me drummed out of the regiment, will you?
I'm going to leave it of my own accord, look you, and to live like a
gentleman for the rest of my days. Schlafen Sie wohl, noble Captain: bon
repos. The Squire will be with you pretty early in the morning, to ask
for the money you owe him."

With these sarcastic observations Mr. Brock departed; not by the window,
as Mrs. Catherine had done, but by the door, quietly, and so into
the street. And when, the next morning, the doctor came to visit his
patient, he brought with him a story how, at the dead of night, Mr.
Brock had roused the ostler at the stables where the Captain's horses
were kept--had told him that Mrs. Catherine had poisoned the Count, and
had run off with a thousand pounds; and how he and all lovers of justice
ought to scour the country in pursuit of the criminal. For this end Mr.
Brock mounted the Count's best horse--that very animal on which he
had carried away Mrs. Catherine: and thus, on a single night, Count
Maximilian had lost his mistress, his money, his horse, his corporal,
and was very near losing his life.



CHAPTER IV. IN WHICH MRS. CATHERINE BECOMES AN HONEST WOMAN AGAIN.


In this woeful plight, moneyless, wifeless, horseless, corporalless,
with a gag in his mouth and a rope round his body, are we compelled to
leave the gallant Galgenstein, until his friends and the progress of
this history shall deliver him from his durance. Mr. Brock's adventures
on the Captain's horse must likewise be pretermitted; for it is our
business to follow Mrs. Catherine through the window by which she made
her escape, and among the various chances that befell her.

She had one cause to congratulate herself,--that she had not her baby at
her back; for the infant was safely housed under the care of a nurse,
to whom the Captain was answerable. Beyond this her prospects were but
dismal: no home to fly to, but a few shillings in her pocket, and a
whole heap of injuries and dark revengeful thoughts in her bosom: it was
a sad task to her to look either backwards or forwards. Whither was she
to fly? How to live? What good chance was to befriend her? There was an
angel watching over the steps of Mrs. Cat--not a good one, I think, but
one of those from that unnameable place, who have their many subjects
here on earth, and often are pleased to extricate them from worse
perplexities.

Mrs. Cat, now, had not committed murder, but as bad as murder; and as
she felt not the smallest repentance in her heart--as she had, in
the course of her life and connection with the Captain, performed and
gloried in a number of wicked coquetries, idlenesses, vanities, lies,
fits of anger, slanders, foul abuses, and what not--she was fairly bound
over to this dark angel whom we have alluded to; and he dealt with her,
and aided her, as one of his own children.

I do not mean to say that, in this strait, he appeared to her in the
likeness of a gentleman in black, and made her sign her name in blood
to a document conveying over to him her soul, in exchange for certain
conditions to be performed by him. Such diabolical bargains have always
appeared to me unworthy of the astute personage who is supposed to be
one of the parties to them; and who would scarcely be fool enough to pay
dearly for that which he can have in a few years for nothing. It is not,
then, to be supposed that a demon of darkness appeared to Mrs. Cat,
and led her into a flaming chariot harnessed by dragons, and careering
through air at the rate of a thousand leagues a minute. No such thing;
the vehicle that was sent to aid her was one of a much more vulgar
description.

The "Liverpool carryvan," then, which in the year 1706 used to perform
the journey between London and that place in ten days, left Birmingham
about an hour after Mrs. Catherine had quitted that town; and as she sat
weeping on a hillside, and plunged in bitter meditation, the lumbering,
jingling vehicle overtook her. The coachman was marching by the side of
his horses, and encouraging them to maintain their pace of two miles an
hour; the passengers had some of them left the vehicle, in order to
walk up the hill; and the carriage had arrived at the top of it, and,
meditating a brisk trot down the declivity, waited there until the
lagging passengers should arrive: when Jehu, casting a good-natured
glance upon Mrs. Catherine, asked the pretty maid whence she was come,
and whether she would like a ride in his carriage. To the latter of
which questions Mrs. Catherine replied truly yes; to the former, her
answer was that she had come from Stratford; whereas, as we very well
know, she had lately quitted Birmingham.

"Hast thee seen a woman pass this way, on a black horse, with a large
bag of goold over the saddle?" said Jehu, preparing to mount upon the
roof of his coach.

"No, indeed," said Mrs. Cat.

"Nor a trooper on another horse after her--no? Well, there be a mortal
row down Birmingham way about sich a one. She have killed, they say,
nine gentlemen at supper, and have strangled a German prince in bed.
She have robbed him of twenty thousand guineas, and have rode away on a
black horse."

"That can't be I," said Mrs. Cat, naively, "for I have but three
shillings and a groat."

"No, it can't be thee, truly, for where's your bag of goold? and,
besides, thee hast got too pretty a face to do such wicked things as to
kill nine gentlemen and strangle a German prince."

"Law, coachman," said Mrs. Cat, blushing archly-- "Law, coachman, DO you
think so?" The girl would have been pleased with a compliment even on
her way to be hanged; and the parley ended by Mrs. Catherine stepping
into the carriage, where there was room for eight people at least, and
where two or three individuals had already taken their places. For these
Mrs. Catherine had in the first place to make a story, which she did;
and a very glib one for a person of her years and education. Being asked
whither she was bound, and how she came to be alone of a morning sitting
by a road-side, she invented a neat history suitable to the occasion,
which elicited much interest from her fellow-passengers: one in
particular, a young man, who had caught a glimpse of her face under her
hood, was very tender in his attentions to her.

But whether it was that she had been too much fatigued by the
occurrences of the past day and sleepless night, or whether the little
laudanum which she had drunk a few hours previously now began to act
upon her, certain it is that Mrs. Cat now suddenly grew sick, feverish,
and extraordinarily sleepy; and in this state she continued for
many hours, to the pity of all her fellow-travellers. At length the
"carryvan" reached the inn, where horses and passengers were accustomed
to rest for a few hours, and to dine; and Mrs. Catherine was somewhat
awakened by the stir of the passengers, and the friendly voice of the
inn-servant welcoming them to dinner. The gentleman who had been smitten
by her beauty now urged her very politely to descend; which, taking the
protection of his arm, she accordingly did.

He made some very gallant speeches to her as she stepped out; and
she must have been very much occupied by them, or wrapt up in her own
thoughts, or stupefied by sleep, fever, and opium, for she did not take
any heed of the place into which she was going: which, had she done,
she would probably have preferred remaining in the coach, dinnerless and
ill. Indeed, the inn into which she was about to make her entrance was
no other than the "Bugle," from which she set forth at the commencement
of this history; and which then, as now, was kept by her relative, the
thrifty Mrs. Score. That good landlady, seeing a lady, in a smart hood
and cloak, leaning, as if faint, upon the arm of a gentleman of good
appearance, concluded them to be man and wife, and folks of quality too;
and with much discrimination, as well as sympathy, led them through the
public kitchen to her own private parlour, or bar, where she handed the
lady an armchair, and asked what she would like to drink. By this time,
and indeed at the very moment she heard her aunt's voice, Mrs. Catherine
was aware of her situation; and when her companion retired, and the
landlady, with much officiousness, insisted on removing her hood, she
was quite prepared for the screech of surprise which Mrs. Score gave on
dropping it, exclaiming, "Why, law bless us, it's our Catherine!"

"I'm very ill, and tired, aunt," said Cat; "and would give the world for
a few hours' sleep."

"A few hours and welcome, my love, and a sack-posset too. You do look
sadly tired and poorly, sure enough. Ah, Cat, Cat! you great ladies
are sad rakes, I do believe. I wager now, that with all your balls, and
carriages, and fine clothes, you are neither so happy nor so well as
when you lived with your poor old aunt, who used to love you so." And
with these gentle words, and an embrace or two, which Mrs. Catherine
wondered at, and permitted, she was conducted to that very bed which the
Count had occupied a year previously, and undressed, and laid in it, and
affectionately tucked up by her aunt, who marvelled at the fineness of
her clothes, as she removed them piece by piece; and when she saw
that in Mrs. Catherine's pocket there was only the sum of three and
fourpence, said, archly, "There was no need of money, for the Captain
took care of that."

Mrs. Cat did not undeceive her; and deceived Mrs. Score certainly
was,--for she imagined the well-dressed gentleman who led Cat from the
carriage was no other than the Count; and, as she had heard, from time
to time, exaggerated reports of the splendour of the establishment which
he kept up, she was induced to look upon her niece with the very highest
respect, and to treat her as if she were a fine lady. "And so she IS
a fine lady," Mrs. Score had said months ago, when some of these
flattering stories reached her, and she had overcome her first fury at
Catherine's elopement. "The girl was very cruel to leave me; but we must
recollect that she is as good as married to a nobleman, and must all
forget and forgive, you know."

This speech had been made to Doctor Dobbs, who was in the habit of
taking a pipe and a tankard at the "Bugle," and it had been roundly
reprobated by the worthy divine; who told Mrs. Score, that the crime
of Catherine was only the more heinous, if it had been committed from
interested motives; and protested that, were she a princess, he would
never speak to her again. Mrs. Score thought and pronounced the Doctor's
opinion to be very bigoted; indeed, she was one of those persons who
have a marvellous respect for prosperity, and a corresponding scorn for
ill-fortune. When, therefore, she returned to the public room, she
went graciously to the gentleman who had led Mrs. Catherine from the
carriage, and with a knowing curtsey welcomed him to the "Bugle;" told
him that his lady would not come to dinner, but bade her say, with her
best love to his Lordship, that the ride had fatigued her, and that she
would lie in bed for an hour or two.

This speech was received with much wonder by his Lordship; who was,
indeed, no other than a Liverpool tailor going to London to learn
fashions; but he only smiled, and did not undeceive the landlady, who
herself went off, smilingly, to bustle about dinner.

The two or three hours allotted to that meal by the liberal coachmasters
of those days passed away, and Mr. Coachman, declaring that his horses
were now rested enough, and that they had twelve miles to ride, put the
steeds to, and summoned the passengers. Mrs. Score, who had seen with
much satisfaction that her niece was really ill, and her fever more
violent, and hoped to have her for many days an inmate in her house, now
came forward, and casting upon the Liverpool tailor a look of profound
but respectful melancholy, said, "My Lord (for I recollect your Lordship
quite well), the lady upstairs is so ill, that it would be a sin to move
her: had I not better tell coachman to take down your Lordship's trunks,
and the lady's, and make you a bed in the next room?"

Very much to her surprise, this proposition was received with a roar
of laughter. "Madam," said the person addressed, "I'm not a lord, but
a tailor and draper; and as for that young woman, before to-day I never
set eyes on her."

"WHAT!" screamed out Mrs. Score. "Are not you the Count? Do you mean to
say that you a'n't Cat's--? DO you mean to say that you didn't order her
bed, and that you won't pay this here little bill?" And with this she
produced a document, by which the Count's lady was made her debtor in a
sum of half-a-guinea.

These passionate words excited more and more laughter. "Pay it, my
Lord," said the coachman; "and then come along, for time presses." "Our
respects to her Ladyship," said one passenger. "Tell her my Lord can't
wait," said another; and with much merriment one and all quitted the
hotel, entered the coach, and rattled off.

Dumb--pale with terror and rage--bill in hand, Mrs. Score had followed
the company; but when the coach disappeared, her senses returned. Back
she flew into the inn, overturning the ostler, not deigning to answer
Doctor Dobbs (who, from behind soft tobacco-fumes, mildly asked the
reason of her disturbance), and, bounding upstairs like a fury, she
rushed into the room where Catherine lay.

"Well, madam!" said she, in her highest key, "do you mean that you have
come into this here house to swindle me? Do you dare for to come with
your airs here, and call yourself a nobleman's lady, and sleep in the
best bed, when you're no better nor a common tramper? I'll thank you,
ma'am, to get out, ma'am. I'll have no sick paupers in this house,
ma'am. You know your way to the workhouse, ma'am, and there I'll trouble
you for to go." And here Mrs. Score proceeded quickly to pull off the
bedclothes; and poor Cat arose, shivering with fright and fever.

She had no spirit to answer, as she would have done the day before, when
an oath from any human being would have brought half-a-dozen from her in
return; or a knife, or a plate, or a leg of mutton, if such had been to
her hand. She had no spirit left for such repartees; but in reply to the
above words of Mrs. Score, and a great many more of the same kind--which
are not necessary for our history, but which that lady uttered with
inconceivable shrillness and volubility, the poor wench could say
little,--only sob and shiver, and gather up the clothes again, crying,
"Oh, aunt, don't speak unkind to me! I'm very unhappy, and very ill!"

"Ill, you strumpet! ill, be hanged! Ill is as ill does; and if you are
ill, it's only what you merit. Get out! dress yourself--tramp! Get to
the workhouse, and don't come to cheat me any more! Dress yourself--do
you hear? Satin petticoat forsooth, and lace to her smock!"

Poor, wretched, chattering, burning, shivering Catherine huddled on her
clothes as well she might: she seemed hardly to know or see what she was
doing, and did not reply a single word to the many that the landlady let
fall. Cat tottered down the narrow stairs, and through the kitchen, and
to the door; which she caught hold of, and paused awhile, and looked
into Mrs. Score's face, as for one more chance. "Get out, you nasty
trull!" said that lady, sternly, with arms akimbo; and poor Catherine,
with a most piteous scream and outgush of tears, let go of the door-post
and staggered away into the road.

                    *****

"Why, no--yes--no--it is poor Catherine Hall, as I live!" said somebody,
starting up, shoving aside Mrs. Score very rudely, and running into
the road, wig off and pipe in hand. It was honest Doctor Dobbs; and
the result of his interview with Mrs. Cat was, that he gave up for ever
smoking his pipe at the "Bugle;" and that she lay sick of a fever for
some weeks in his house.

                    *****

Over this part of Mrs. Cat's history we shall be as brief as possible;
for, to tell the truth, nothing immoral occurred during her whole stay
at the good Doctor's house; and we are not going to insult the reader
by offering him silly pictures of piety, cheerfulness, good sense, and
simplicity; which are milk-and-water virtues after all, and have no
relish with them like a good strong vice, highly peppered. Well, to be
short: Doctor Dobbs, though a profound theologian, was a very simple
gentleman; and before Mrs. Cat had been a month in the house, he had
learned to look upon her as one of the most injured and repentant
characters in the world; and had, with Mrs. Dobbs, resolved many plans
for the future welfare of the young Magdalen. "She was but sixteen, my
love, recollect," said the Doctor; "she was carried off, not by her own
wish either. The Count swore he would marry her; and, though she did not
leave him until that monster tried to poison her, yet think what a
fine Christian spirit the poor girl has shown! she forgives him as
heartily--more heartily, I am sure, than I do Mrs. Score for turning her
adrift in that wicked way." The reader will perceive some difference in
the Doctor's statement and ours, which we assure him is the true one;
but the fact is, the honest rector had had his tale from Mrs. Cat, and
it was not in his nature to doubt, if she had told him a history ten
times more wonderful.

The reverend gentleman and his wife then laid their heads together; and,
recollecting something of John Hayes's former attachment to Mrs. Cat,
thought that it might be advantageously renewed, should Hayes be still
constant. Having very adroitly sounded Catherine (so adroitly, indeed,
as to ask her "whether she would like to marry John Hayes?"), that young
woman had replied, "No. She had loved John Hayes--he had been her early,
only love; but she was fallen now, and not good enough for him." And
this made the Dobbs family admire her more and more, and cast about for
means to bring the marriage to pass.

Hayes was away from the village when Mrs. Cat had arrived there; but he
did not fail to hear of her illness, and how her aunt had deserted her,
and the good Doctor taken her in. The worthy Doctor himself met Mr.
Hayes on the green; and, telling him that some repairs were wanting in
his kitchen begged him to step in and examine them. Hayes first said no,
plump, and then no, gently; and then pished, and then psha'd; and then,
trembling very much, went in: and there sat Mrs. Catherine, trembling
very much too.

What passed between them? If your Ladyship is anxious to know, think of
that morning when Sir John himself popped the question. Could there be
anything more stupid than the conversation which took place? Such stuff
is not worth repeating: no, not when uttered by people in the very
genteelest of company; as for the amorous dialogue of a carpenter and
an ex-barmaid, it is worse still. Suffice it to say, that Mr. Hayes, who
had had a year to recover from his passion, and had, to all appearances,
quelled it, was over head and ears again the very moment he saw Mrs.
Cat, and had all his work to do again.

Whether the Doctor knew what was going on, I can't say; but this matter
is certain, that every evening Hayes was now in the rectory kitchen, or
else walking abroad with Mrs. Catherine: and whether she ran away with
him, or he with her, I shall not make it my business to inquire; but
certainly at the end of three months (which must be crowded up into this
one little sentence), another elopement took place in the village. "I
should have prevented it, certainly," said Doctor Dobbs--whereat his
wife smiled; "but the young people kept the matter a secret from me."
And so he would, had he known it; but though Mrs. Dobbs had made
several attempts to acquaint him with the precise hour and method of the
intended elopement, he peremptorily ordered her to hold her tongue. The
fact is, that the matter had been discussed by the rector's lady many
times. "Young Hayes," would she say "has a pretty little fortune and
trade of his own; he is an only son, and may marry as he likes; and,
though not specially handsome, generous, or amiable, has an undeniable
love for Cat (who, you know, must not be particular), and the sooner she
marries him, I think, the better. They can't be married at our
church you know, and--" "Well," said the Doctor, "if they are married
elsewhere, I can't help it, and know nothing about it, look you." And
upon this hint the elopement took place: which, indeed, was peaceably
performed early one Sunday morning about a month after; Mrs. Hall
getting behind Mr. Hayes on a pillion, and all the children of the
parsonage giggling behind the window-blinds to see the pair go off.

During this month Mr. Hayes had caused the banns to be published at the
town of Worcester; judging rightly that in a great town they would cause
no such remark as in a solitary village, and thither he conducted his
lady. O ill-starred John Hayes! whither do the dark Fates lead you? O
foolish Doctor Dobbs, to forget that young people ought to honour their
parents, and to yield to silly Mrs. Dobbs's ardent propensity for making
matches!

                    *****

The London Gazette of the 1st April, 1706, contains a proclamation
by the Queen for putting into execution an Act of Parliament for the
encouragement and increase of seamen, and for the better and speedier
manning of Her Majesty's fleet, which authorises all justices to issue
warrants to constables, petty constables, headboroughs, and tything-men,
to enter and, if need be, to break open the doors of any houses where
they shall believe deserting seamen to be; and for the further increase
and encouragement of the navy, to take able-bodied landsmen when seamen
fail. This Act, which occupies four columns of the Gazette, and another
of similar length and meaning for pressing men into the army, need
not be quoted at length here; but caused a mighty stir throughout the
kingdom at the time when it was in force.

As one has seen or heard, after the march of a great army, a number of
rogues and loose characters bring up the rear; in like manner, at
the tail of a great measure of State, follow many roguish personal
interests, which are protected by the main body. The great measure of
Reform, for instance, carried along with it much private jobbing and
swindling--as could be shown were we not inclined to deal mildly with
the Whigs; and this Enlistment Act, which, in order to maintain the
British glories in Flanders, dealt most cruelly with the British people
in England (it is not the first time that a man has been pinched at home
to make a fine appearance abroad), created a great company of rascals
and informers throughout the land, who lived upon it; or upon extortion
from those who were subject to it, or not being subject to it were
frightened into the belief that they were.

When Mr. Hayes and his lady had gone through the marriage ceremony at
Worcester, the former, concluding that at such a place lodging and food
might be procured at a cheaper rate, looked about carefully for the
meanest public-house in the town, where he might deposit his bride.

In the kitchen of this inn, a party of men were drinking; and, as
Mrs. Hayes declined, with a proper sense of her superiority, to eat in
company with such low fellows, the landlady showed her and her husband
to an inner apartment, where they might be served in private.

The kitchen party seemed, indeed, not such as a lady would choose to
join. There was one huge lanky fellow, that looked like a soldier,
and had a halberd; another was habited in a sailor's costume, with a
fascinating patch over one eye; and a third, who seemed the leader
of the gang, was a stout man in a sailor's frock and a horseman's
jack-boots, whom one might fancy, if he were anything, to be a
horse-marine.

Of one of these worthies, Mrs. Hayes thought she knew the figure and
voice; and she found her conjectures were true, when, all of sudden,
three people, without "With your leave," or "By your leave," burst into
the room, into which she and her spouse had retired. At their head was
no other than her old friend, Mr. Peter Brock; he had his sword drawn,
and his finger to his lips, enjoining silence, as it were, to Mrs.
Catherine. He with the patch on his eye seized incontinently on Mr.
Hayes; the tall man with the halberd kept the door; two or three heroes
supported the one-eyed man; who, with a loud voice, exclaimed, "Down
with your arms--no resistance! you are my prisoner, in the Queen's
name!"

And here, at this lock, we shall leave the whole company until the next
chapter; which may possibly explain what they were.



CHAPTER V. CONTAINS MR. BROCK'S AUTOBIOGRAPHY, AND OTHER MATTERS.


"You don't sure believe these men?" said Mrs. Hayes, as soon as the
first alarm caused by the irruption of Mr. Brock and his companions had
subsided. "These are no magistrate's men: it is but a trick to rob you
of your money, John."

"I will never give up a farthing of it!" screamed Hayes.

"Yonder fellow," continued Mrs. Catherine, "I know, for all his drawn
sword and fierce looks; his name is---"

"Wood, madam, at your service!" said Mr. Brock. "I am follower to Mr.
Justice Gobble, of this town: a'n't I, Tim?" said Mr. Brock to the tall
halberdman who was keeping the door.

"Yes indeed," said Tim, archly; "we're all followers of his honour
Justice Gobble."

"Certainly!" said the one-eyed man.

"Of course!" cried the man in the nightcap.

"I suppose, madam, you're satisfied NOW?" continued Mr. Brock, alias
Wood. "You can't deny the testimony of gentlemen like these; and our
commission is to apprehend all able-bodied male persons who can give
no good account of themselves, and enrol them in the service of Her
Majesty. Look at this Mr. Hayes" (who stood trembling in his shoes).
"Can there be a bolder, properer, straighter gentleman? We'll have him
for a grenadier before the day's over!"

"Take heart, John--don't be frightened. Psha! I tell you I know the man"
cried out Mrs. Hayes: "he is only here to extort money."

"Oh, for that matter, I DO think I recollect the lady. Let me see; where
was it? At Birmingham, I think,--ay, at Birmingham,--about the time when
they tried to murder Count Gal--"

"Oh, sir!" here cried Madam Hayes, dropping her voice at once from a
tone of scorn to one of gentlest entreaty, "what is it you want with my
husband? I know not, indeed, if ever I saw you before. For what do you
seize him? How much will you take to release him, and let us go? Name
the sum; he is rich, and--"

"RICH, Catherine!" cried Hayes. "Rich!--O heavens! Sir, I have nothing
but my hands to support me: I am a poor carpenter, sir, working under my
father!"

"He can give twenty guineas to be free; I know he can!" said Mrs. Cat.

"I have but a guinea to carry me home," sighed out Hayes.

"But you have twenty at home, John," said his wife. "Give these brave
gentlemen a writing to your mother, and she will pay; and you will let
us free then, gentlemen--won't you?"

"When the money's paid, yes," said the leader, Mr. Brock.

"Oh, in course," echoed the tall man with the halberd. "What's a
thrifling detintion, my dear?" continued he, addressing Hayes. "We'll
amuse you in your absence, and drink to the health of your pretty wife
here."

This promise, to do the halberdier justice, he fulfilled. He called upon
the landlady to produce the desired liquor; and when Mr. Hayes flung
himself at that lady's feet, demanding succour from her, and asking
whether there was no law in the land--

"There's no law at the 'Three Rooks' except THIS!" said Mr. Brock
in reply, holding up a horse-pistol. To which the hostess, grinning,
assented, and silently went her way.

After some further solicitations, John Hayes drew out the necessary
letter to his father, stating that he was pressed, and would not be set
free under a sum of twenty guineas; and that it would be of no use
to detain the bearer of the letter, inasmuch as the gentlemen who had
possession of him vowed that they would murder him should any harm
befall their comrade. As a further proof of the authenticity of the
letter, a token was added: a ring that Hayes wore, and that his mother
had given him.

The missives were, after some consultation, entrusted to the care of the
tall halberdier, who seemed to rank as second in command of the
forces that marched under Corporal Brock. This gentleman was called
indifferently Ensign, Mr., or even Captain Macshane; his intimates
occasionally in sport called him Nosey, from the prominence of that
feature in his countenance; or Spindleshins, for the very reason which
brought on the first Edward a similar nickname. Mr. Macshane then
quitted Worcester, mounted on Hayes's horse; leaving all parties at the
"Three Rooks" not a little anxious for his return.

This was not to be expected until the next morning; and a weary nuit de
noces did Mr. Hayes pass. Dinner was served, and, according to promise,
Mr. Brock and his two friends enjoyed the meal along with the bride and
bridegroom. Punch followed, and this was taken in company; then came
supper. Mr. Brock alone partook of this, the other two gentlemen
preferring the society of their pipes and the landlady in the kitchen.

"It is a sorry entertainment, I confess," said the ex-corporal, "and a
dismal way for a gentleman to spend his bridal night; but somebody must
stay with you, my dears: for who knows but you might take a fancy to
scream out of window, and then there would be murder, and the deuce and
all to pay. One of us must stay, and my friends love a pipe, so you must
put up with my company until they can relieve guard."

The reader will not, of course, expect that three people who were to
pass the night, however unwillingly, together in an inn-room, should
sit there dumb and moody, and without any personal communication; on the
contrary, Mr. Brock, as an old soldier, entertained his prisoners with
the utmost courtesy, and did all that lay in his power, by the help
of liquor and conversation, to render their durance tolerable. On
the bridegroom his attentions were a good deal thrown away: Mr. Hayes
consented to drink copiously, but could not be made to talk much; and,
in fact, the fright of the seizure, the fate hanging over him should his
parents refuse a ransom, and the tremendous outlay of money which would
take place should they accede to it, weighed altogether on his mind so
much as utterly to unman it.

As for Mrs. Cat, I don't think she was at all sorry in her heart to see
the old Corporal: for he had been a friend of old times--dear times to
her; she had had from him, too, and felt for him, not a little kindness;
and there was really a very tender, innocent friendship subsisting
between this pair of rascals, who relished much a night's conversation
together.

The Corporal, after treating his prisoners to punch in great quantities,
proposed the amusement of cards: over which Mr. Hayes had not been
occupied more than an hour, when he found himself so excessively sleepy
as to be persuaded to fling himself down on the bed dressed as he was,
and there to snore away until morning.

Mrs. Catherine had no inclination for sleep; and the Corporal, equally
wakeful, plied incessantly the bottle, and held with her a great deal
of conversation. The sleep, which was equivalent to the absence, of John
Hayes took all restraint from their talk. She explained to Brock the
circumstances of her marriage, which we have already described; they
wondered at the chance which had brought them together at the "Three
Rooks;" nor did Brock at all hesitate to tell her at once that his
calling was quite illegal, and that his intention was simply to extort
money. The worthy Corporal had not the slightest shame regarding his
own profession, and cut many jokes with Mrs. Cat about her late one; her
attempt to murder the Count, and her future prospects as a wife.

And here, having brought him upon the scene again, we may as well
shortly narrate some of the principal circumstances which befell him
after his sudden departure from Birmingham; and which he narrated with
much candour to Mrs. Catherine.

He rode the Captain's horse to Oxford (having exchanged his military
dress for a civil costume on the road), and at Oxford he disposed of
"George of Denmark," a great bargain, to one of the heads of colleges.
As soon as Mr. Brock, who took on himself the style and title of Captain
Wood, had sufficiently examined the curiosities of the University, he
proceeded at once to the capital: the only place for a gentleman of his
fortune and figure.

Here he read, with a great deal of philosophical indifference, in the
Daily Post, the Courant, the Observator, the Gazette, and the chief
journals of those days, which he made a point of examining at "Button's"
and "Will's," an accurate description of his person, his clothes, and
the horse he rode, and a promise of fifty guineas' reward to any person
who would give an account of him (so that he might be captured) to
Captain Count Galgenstein at Birmingham, to Mr. Murfey at the "Golden
Ball" in the Savoy, or Mr. Bates at the "Blew Anchor in Pickadilly." But
Captain Wood, in an enormous full-bottomed periwig that cost him sixty
pounds,[*] with high red heels to his shoes, a silver sword, and a
gold snuff-box, and a large wound (obtained, he said, at the siege of
Barcelona), which disfigured much of his countenance, and caused him to
cover one eye, was in small danger, he thought, of being mistaken for
Corporal Brock, the deserter of Cutts's; and strutted along the Mall
with as grave an air as the very best nobleman who appeared there.
He was generally, indeed, voted to be very good company; and as his
expenses were unlimited ("A few convent candlesticks," my dear, he used
to whisper, "melt into a vast number of doubloons"), he commanded as
good society as he chose to ask for: and it was speedily known as a fact
throughout town, that Captain Wood, who had served under His Majesty
Charles III. of Spain, had carried off the diamond petticoat of Our Lady
of Compostella, and lived upon the proceeds of the fraud. People were
good Protestants in those days, and many a one longed to have been his
partner in the pious plunder.

     * In the ingenious contemporary history of Moll Flanders, a
     periwig is mentioned as costing that sum.

All surmises concerning his wealth, Captain Wood, with much discretion,
encouraged. He contradicted no report, but was quite ready to confirm
all; and when two different rumours were positively put to him, he used
only to laugh, and say, "My dear sir, _I_ don't make the stories; but
I'm not called upon to deny them; and I give you fair warning, that I
shall assent to every one of them; so you may believe them or not, as
you please." And so he had the reputation of being a gentleman, not only
wealthy, but discreet. In truth, it was almost a pity that worthy Brock
had not been a gentleman born; in which case, doubtless, he would have
lived and died as became his station; for he spent his money like
a gentleman, he loved women like a gentleman, he would fight like a
gentleman, he gambled and got drunk like a gentleman. What did he want
else? Only a matter of six descents, a little money, and an estate, to
render him the equal of St. John or Harley. "Ah, those were merry days!"
would Mr. Brock say,--for he loved, in a good old age, to recount the
story of his London fashionable campaign;--"and when I think how near
I was to become a great man, and to die perhaps a general, I can't but
marvel at the wicked obstinacy of my ill-luck."

"I will tell you what I did, my dear: I had lodgings in Piccadilly, as
if I were a lord; I had two large periwigs, and three suits of laced
clothes; I kept a little black dressed out like a Turk; I walked daily
in the Mall; I dined at the politest ordinary in Covent Garden; I
frequented the best of coffee-houses, and knew all the pretty fellows of
the town; I cracked a bottle with Mr. Addison, and lent many a piece to
Dick Steele (a sad debauched rogue, my dear); and, above all, I'll tell
you what I did--the noblest stroke that sure ever a gentleman performed
in my situation.

"One day, going into 'Will's,' I saw a crowd of gentlemen gathered
together, and heard one of them say, 'Captain Wood! I don't know the
man; but there was a Captain Wood in Southwell's regiment.' Egad, it was
my Lord Peterborough himself who was talking about me. So, putting off
my hat, I made a most gracious conge to my Lord, and said I knew HIM,
and rode behind him at Barcelona on our entry into that town.

"'No doubt you did, Captain Wood,' says my Lord, taking my hand; 'and
no doubt you know me: for many more know Tom Fool, than Tom Fool knows.'
And with this, at which all of us laughed, my Lord called for a bottle,
and he and I sat down and drank it together.

"Well, he was in disgrace, as you know, but he grew mighty fond of me,
and--would you believe it?--nothing would satisfy him but presenting me
at Court! Yes, to Her Sacred Majesty the Queen, and my Lady Marlborough,
who was in high feather. Ay, truly, the sentinels on duty used to
salute me as if I were Corporal John himself! I was on the high road to
fortune. Charley Mordaunt used to call me Jack, and drink canary at my
chambers; I used to make one at my Lord Treasurer's levee; I had
even got Mr. Army-Secretary Walpole to take a hundred guineas as a
compliment: and he had promised me a majority: when bad luck turned, and
all my fine hopes were overthrown in a twinkling.

"You see, my dear, that after we had left that gaby, Galgenstein,--ha,
ha--with a gag in his mouth, and twopence-halfpenny in his pocket, the
honest Count was in the sorriest plight in the world; owing money here
and there to tradesmen, a cool thousand to the Warwickshire Squire: and
all this on eighty pounds a year! Well, for a little time the tradesmen
held their hands; while the jolly Count moved heaven and earth to
catch hold of his dear Corporal and his dear money-bags over again, and
placarded every town from London to Liverpool with descriptions of my
pretty person. The bird was flown, however,--the money clean gone,--and
when there was no hope of regaining it, what did the creditors do but
clap my gay gentleman into Shrewsbury gaol: where I wish he had rotted,
for my part.

"But no such luck for honest Peter Brock, or Captain Wood, as he was in
those days. One blessed Monday I went to wait on Mr. Secretary, and
he squeezed my hand and whispered to me that I was to be Major of a
regiment in Virginia--the very thing: for you see, my dear, I didn't
care about joining my Lord Duke in Flanders; being pretty well known
to the army there. The Secretary squeezed my hand (it had a fifty-pound
bill in it) and wished me joy, and called me Major, and bowed me out of
his closet into the ante-room; and, as gay as may be, I went off to
the 'Tilt-yard Coffee-house' in Whitehall, which is much frequented by
gentlemen of our profession, where I bragged not a little of my good
luck.

"Amongst the company were several of my acquaintance, and amongst them
a gentleman I did not much care to see, look you! I saw a uniform that
I knew--red and yellow facings--Cutts's, my dear; and the wearer of this
was no other than his Excellency Gustavus Adolphus Maximilian, whom we
all know of!

"He stared me full in the face, right into my eye (t'other one was
patched, you know), and after standing stock-still with his mouth open,
gave a step back, and then a step forward, and then screeched out, 'It's
Brock!'

"'I beg your pardon, sir,' says I; 'did you speak to me?'

"'I'll SWEAR it's Brock,' cries Gal, as soon as he hears my voice, and
laid hold of my cuff (a pretty bit of Mechlin as ever you saw, by the
way).

"'Sirrah!' says I, drawing it back, and giving my Lord a little touch
of the fist (just at the last button of the waistcoat, my dear,--a rare
place if you wish to prevent a man from speaking too much: it sent him
reeling to the other end of the room). 'Ruffian!' says I. 'Dog!' says
I. 'Insolent puppy and coxcomb! what do you mean by laying your hand on
me?'

"'Faith, Major, you giv him his BILLYFUL,' roared out a long Irish
unattached ensign, that I had treated with many a glass of Nantz at the
tavern. And so, indeed, I had; for the wretch could not speak for some
minutes, and all the officers stood laughing at him, as he writhed and
wriggled hideously.

"'Gentlemen, this is a monstrous scandal,' says one officer. 'Men of
rank and honour at fists like a parcel of carters!'

"'Men of honour!' says the Count, who had fetched up his breath by this
time. (I made for the door, but Macshane held me and said, 'Major, you
are not going to shirk him, sure?' Whereupon I gripped his hand and
vowed I would have the dog's life.)

"'Men of honour!' says the Count. 'I tell you the man is a deserter, a
thief, and a swindler! He was my corporal, and ran away with a thou--'

"'Dog, you lie!' I roared out, and made another cut at him with my cane;
but the gentlemen rushed between us.

"'O bluthanowns!' says honest Macshane, 'the lying scounthrel this
fellow is! Gentlemen, I swear be me honour that Captain Wood was wounded
at Barcelona; and that I saw him there; and that he and I ran away
together at the battle of Almanza, and bad luck to us.'

"You see, my dear, that these Irish have the strongest imaginations in
the world; and that I had actually persuaded poor Mac that he and I were
friends in Spain. Everybody knew Mac, who was a character in his way,
and believed him.

"'Strike a gentleman,' says I. 'I'll have your blood, I will.'

"'This instant,' says the Count, who was boiling with fury; 'and where
you like.'

"'Montague House,' says I. 'Good,' says he. And off we went. In
good time too, for the constables came in at the thought of such a
disturbance, and wanted to take us in charge.

"But the gentlemen present, being military men, would not hear of
this. Out came Mac's rapier, and that of half-a-dozen others; and the
constables were then told to do their duty if they liked, or to take a
crown-piece, and leave us to ourselves. Off they went; and presently, in
a couple of coaches, the Count and his friends, I and mine, drove off to
the fields behind Montague House. Oh that vile coffee-house! why did I
enter it?

"We came to the ground. Honest Macshane was my second, and much
disappointed because the second on the other side would not make a fight
of it, and exchange a few passes with him; but he was an old major,
a cool old hand, as brave as steel, and no fool. Well, the swords
are measured, Galgenstein strips off his doublet, and I my handsome
cut-velvet in like fashion. Galgenstein flings off his hat, and I handed
mine over--the lace on it cost me twenty pounds. I longed to be at him,
for--curse him!--I hate him, and know that he has no chance with me at
sword's-play.

"'You'll not fight in that periwig, sure?' says Macshane. 'Of course
not,' says I, and took it off.

"May all barbers be roasted in flames; may all periwigs, bobwigs,
scratchwigs, and Ramillies cocks, frizzle in purgatory from this day
forth to the end of time! Mine was the ruin of me: what might I not have
been now but for that wig!

"I gave it over to Ensign Macshane, and with it went what I had quite
forgotten, the large patch which I wore over one eye, which popped out
fierce, staring, and lively as was ever any eye in the world.

"'Come on!' says I, and made a lunge at my Count; but he sprang back
(the dog was as active as a hare, and knew, from old times, that I was
his master with the small-sword), and his second, wondering, struck up
my blade.

"'I will not fight that man,' says he, looking mighty pale. 'I swear
upon my honour that his name is Peter Brock: he was for two years
my corporal, and deserted, running away with a thousand pounds of my
moneys. Look at the fellow! What is the matter with his eye? why did he
wear a patch over it? But stop!' says he. 'I have more proof. Hand me
my pocket-book.' And from it, sure enough, he produced the infernal
proclamation announcing my desertion! 'See if the fellow has a scar
across his left ear' (and I can't say, my dear, but what I have: it was
done by a cursed Dutchman at the Boyne). 'Tell me if he has not got
C.R. in blue upon his right arm' (and there it is sure enough). 'Yonder
swaggering Irishman may be his accomplice for what I know; but I will
have no dealings with Mr. Brock, save with a constable for a second.'

"'This is an odd story, Captain Wood,' said the old Major who acted for
the Count.

"'A scounthrelly falsehood regarding me and my friend!' shouted out Mr.
Macshane; 'and the Count shall answer for it.'

"'Stop, stop!' says the Major. 'Captain Wood is too gallant a gentleman,
I am sure, not to satisfy the Count; and will show us that he has no
such mark on his arm as only private soldiers put there.'

"'Captain Wood,' says I, 'will do no such thing, Major. I'll fight that
scoundrel Galgenstein, or you, or any of you, like a man of honour; but
I won't submit to be searched like a thief!'

"'No, in coorse,' said Macshane.

"'I must take my man off the ground,' says the Major.

"'Well, take him, sir,' says I, in a rage; 'and just let me have the
pleasure of telling him that he's a coward and a liar; and that my
lodgings are in Piccadilly, where, if ever he finds courage to meet me,
he may hear of me!'

"'Faugh! I shpit on ye all,' cries my gallant ally Macshane. And sure
enough he kept his word, or all but--suiting the action to it at any
rate.

"And so we gathered up our clothes, and went back in our separate
coaches, and no blood spilt.

"'And is it thrue now,' said Mr. Macshane, when we were alone--'is
it thrue now, all these divvles have been saying?' 'Ensign,' says I,
'you're a man of the world?'

"''Deed and I am, and insign these twenty-two years.'

"'Perhaps you'd like a few pieces?' says I.

"'Faith and I should; for to tell you the secred thrut, I've not tasted
mate these four days.'

"'Well then, Ensign, it IS true,' says I; 'and as for meat, you shall
have some at the first cook-shop.' I bade the coach stop until he bought
a plateful, which he ate in the carriage, for my time was precious. I
just told him the whole story: at which he laughed, and swore that it
was the best piece of GENERALSHIP he ever heard on. When his belly was
full, I took out a couple of guineas and gave them to him. Mr. Macshane
began to cry at this, and kissed me, and swore he never would desert me:
as, indeed, my dear, I don't think he will; for we have been the best of
friends ever since, and he's the only man I ever could trust, I think.

"I don't know what put it into my head, but I had a scent of some
mischief in the wind; so stopped the coach a little before I got home,
and, turning into a tavern, begged Macshane to go before me to my
lodging, and see if the coast was clear: which he did; and came back to
me as pale as death, saying that the house was full of constables. The
cursed quarrel at the Tilt-yard had, I suppose, set the beaks upon me;
and a pretty sweep they made of it. Ah, my dear! five hundred pounds
in money, five suits of laced clothes, three periwigs, besides laced
shirts, swords, canes, and snuff-boxes; and all to go back to that
scoundrel Count.

"It was all over with me, I saw--no more being a gentleman for me; and
if I remained to be caught, only a choice between Tyburn and a file
of grenadiers. My love, under such circumstances, a gentleman can't be
particular, and must be prompt; the livery-stable was hard by where I
used to hire my coach to go to Court,--ha! ha!--and was known as a man
of substance. Thither I went immediately. 'Mr. Warmmash,' says I,
'my gallant friend here and I have a mind for a ride and a supper at
Twickenham, so you must lend us a pair of your best horses.' Which he
did in a twinkling, and off we rode.

"We did not go into the Park, but turned off and cantered smartly up
towards Kilburn; and, when we got into the country, galloped as if
the devil were at our heels. Bless you, my love, it was all done in
a minute: and the Ensign and I found ourselves regular knights of the
road, before we knew where we were almost. Only think of our finding you
and your new husband at the 'Three Rooks'! There's not a greater fence
than the landlady in all the country. It was she that put us on seizing
your husband, and introduced us to the other two gentlemen, whose names
I don't know any more than the dead."

"And what became of the horses?" said Mrs. Catherine to Mr. Brock, when
his tale was finished.

"Rips, madam," said he; "mere rips. We sold them at Stourbridge fair,
and got but thirteen guineas for the two."

"And--and--the Count, Max; where is he, Brock?" sighed she.

"Whew!" whistled Mr. Brock. "What, hankering after him still? My dear,
he is off to Flanders with his regiment; and, I make no doubt, there
have been twenty Countesses of Galgenstein since your time."

"I don't believe any such thing, sir," said Mrs. Catherine, starting up
very angrily.

"If you did, I suppose you'd laudanum him; wouldn't you?"

"Leave the room, fellow," said the lady. But she recollected herself
speedily again; and, clasping her hands, and looking very wretched
at Brock, at the ceiling, at the floor, at her husband (from whom she
violently turned away her head), she began to cry piteously: to which
tears the Corporal set up a gentle accompaniment of whistling, as they
trickled one after another down her nose.

I don't think they were tears of repentance; but of regret for the time
when she had her first love, and her fine clothes, and her white hat and
blue feather. Of the two, the Corporal's whistle was much more innocent
than the girl's sobbing: he was a rogue; but a good-natured old fellow
when his humour was not crossed. Surely our novel-writers make a great
mistake in divesting their rascals of all gentle human qualities:
they have such--and the only sad point to think of is, in all private
concerns of life, abstract feelings, and dealings with friends, and
so on, how dreadfully like a rascal is to an honest man. The man who
murdered the Italian boy, set him first to play with his children whom
he loved, and who doubtless deplored his loss.



CHAPTER VI. ADVENTURES OF THE AMBASSADOR, MR. MACSHANE.


If we had not been obliged to follow history in all respects, it
is probable that we should have left out the last adventure of Mrs.
Catherine and her husband, at the inn at Worcester, altogether; for, in
truth, very little came of it, and it is not very romantic or striking.
But we are bound to stick closely, above all, by THE TRUTH--the truth,
though it be not particularly pleasant to read of or to tell. As anybody
may read in the "Newgate Calendar," Mr. and Mrs. Hayes were taken at
an inn at Worcester; were confined there; were swindled by persons who
pretended to impress the bridegroom for military service. What is one
to do after that? Had we been writing novels instead of authentic
histories, we might have carried them anywhere else we chose: and we
had a great mind to make Hayes philosophising with Bolingbroke, like a
certain Devereux; and Mrs. Catherine maitresse en titre to Mr. Alexander
Pope, Doctor Sacheverel, Sir John Reade the oculist, Dean Swift,
or Marshal Tallard; as the very commonest romancer would under such
circumstances. But alas and alas! truth must be spoken, whatever else
is in the wind; and the excellent "Newgate Calendar," which contains the
biographies and thanatographies of Hayes and his wife, does not say a
word of their connections with any of the leading literary or military
heroes of the time of Her Majesty Queen Anne. The "Calendar" says, in so
many words, that Hayes was obliged to send to his father in Warwickshire
for money to get him out of the scrape, and that the old gentleman came
down to his aid. By this truth must we stick; and not for the sake of
the most brilliant episode,--no, not for a bribe of twenty extra guineas
per sheet, would we depart from it.

Mr. Brock's account of his adventure in London has given the reader
some short notice of his friend, Mr Macshane. Neither the wits nor the
principles of that worthy Ensign were particularly firm: for drink,
poverty, and a crack on the skull at the battle of Steenkirk had served
to injure the former; and the Ensign was not in his best days possessed
of any share of the latter. He had really, at one period, held such a
rank in the army, but pawned his half-pay for drink and play; and for
many years past had lived, one of the hundred thousand miracles of our
city, upon nothing that anybody knew of, or of which he himself could
give any account. Who has not a catalogue of these men in his list?
who can tell whence comes the occasional clean shirt, who supplies
the continual means of drunkenness, who wards off the daily-impending
starvation? Their life is a wonder from day to day: their breakfast
a wonder; their dinner a miracle; their bed an interposition of
Providence. If you and I, my dear sir, want a shilling tomorrow, who
will give it us? Will OUR butchers give us mutton-chops? will OUR
laundresses clothe us in clean linen?--not a bone or a rag. Standing as
we do (may it be ever so) somewhat removed from want,[*] is there one of
us who does not shudder at the thought of descending into the lists to
combat with it, and expect anything but to be utterly crushed in the
encounter?

     * The author, it must be remembered, has his lodgings and
     food provided for him by the government of his country.

Not a bit of it, my dear sir. It takes much more than you think for to
starve a man. Starvation is very little when you are used to it. Some
people I know even, who live on it quite comfortably, and make their
daily bread by it. It had been our friend Macshane's sole profession for
many years; and he did not fail to draw from it such a livelihood as was
sufficient, and perhaps too good, for him. He managed to dine upon it
a certain or rather uncertain number of days in the week, to sleep
somewhere, and to get drunk at least three hundred times a year. He
was known to one or two noblemen who occasionally helped him with a
few pieces, and whom he helped in turn--never mind how. He had
other acquaintances whom he pestered undauntedly; and from whom he
occasionally extracted a dinner, or a crown, or mayhap, by mistake, a
goldheaded cane, which found its way to the pawnbroker's. When flush of
cash, he would appear at the coffee-house; when low in funds, the deuce
knows into what mystic caves and dens he slunk for food and lodging. He
was perfectly ready with his sword, and when sober, or better still, a
very little tipsy, was a complete master of it; in the art of boasting
and lying he had hardly any equals; in shoes he stood six feet five
inches; and here is his complete signalement. It was a fact that he had
been in Spain as a volunteer, where he had shown some gallantry, had had
a brain-fever, and was sent home to starve as before.

Mr. Macshane had, however, like Mr. Conrad, the Corsair, one virtue in
the midst of a thousand crimes,--he was faithful to his employer for the
time being: and a story is told of him, which may or may not be to
his credit, viz. that being hired on one occasion by a certain lord to
inflict a punishment upon a roturier who had crossed his lordship in
his amours, he, Macshane, did actually refuse from the person to be
belaboured, and who entreated his forbearance, a larger sum of
money than the nobleman gave him for the beating; which he performed
punctually, as bound in honour and friendship. This tale would the
Ensign himself relate, with much self-satisfaction; and when, after the
sudden flight from London, he and Brock took to their roving occupation,
he cheerfully submitted to the latter as his commanding officer, called
him always Major, and, bating blunders and drunkenness, was perfectly
true to his leader. He had a notion--and, indeed, I don't know that
it was a wrong one--that his profession was now, as before, strictly
military, and according to the rules of honour. Robbing he called
plundering the enemy; and hanging was, in his idea, a dastardly and
cruel advantage that the latter took, and that called for the sternest
reprisals.

The other gentlemen concerned were strangers to Mr. Brock, who felt
little inclined to trust either of them upon such a message, or with
such a large sum to bring back. They had, strange to say, a similar
mistrust on their side; but Mr. Brock lugged out five guineas, which he
placed in the landlady's hand as security for his comrade's return; and
Ensign Macshane, being mounted on poor Hayes's own horse, set off to
visit the parents of that unhappy young man. It was a gallant sight to
behold our thieves' ambassador, in a faded sky-blue suit with orange
facings, in a pair of huge jack-boots unconscious of blacking, with
a mighty basket-hilted sword by his side, and a little shabby beaver
cocked over a large tow-periwig, ride out from the inn of the "Three
Rooks" on his mission to Hayes's paternal village.

It was eighteen miles distant from Worcester; but Mr. Macshane performed
the distance in safety, and in sobriety moreover (for such had been his
instructions), and had no difficulty in discovering the house of old
Hayes: towards which, indeed, John's horse trotted incontinently. Mrs.
Hayes, who was knitting at the house-door, was not a little surprised
at the appearance of the well-known grey gelding, and of the stranger
mounted upon it.

Flinging himself off the steed with much agility, Mr. Macshane, as soon
as his feet reached the ground, brought them rapidly together, in order
to make a profound and elegant bow to Mrs. Hayes; and slapping his
greasy beaver against his heart, and poking his periwig almost into the
nose of the old lady, demanded whether he had the "shooprame honour of
adthressing Misthriss Hees?"

Having been answered in the affirmative, he then proceeded to ask
whether there was a blackguard boy in the house who would take "the
horse to the steeble;" whether "he could have a dthrink of small-beer
or buthermilk, being, faith, uncommon dthry;" and whether, finally, "he
could be feevored with a few minutes' private conversation with her
and Mr. Hees, on a matther of consitherable impartance." All these
preliminaries were to be complied with before Mr. Macshane would enter
at all into the subject of his visit. The horse and man were cared for;
Mr. Hayes was called in; and not a little anxious did Mrs. Hayes grow,
in the meanwhile, with regard to the fate of her darling son. "Where is
he? How is he? Is he dead?" said the old lady. "Oh yes, I'm sure he's
dead!"

"Indeed, madam, and you're misteeken intirely: the young man is
perfectly well in health."

"Oh, praised be Heaven!"

"But mighty cast down in sperrits. To misfortunes, madam, look you, the
best of us are subject; and a trifling one has fell upon your son."

And herewith Mr. Macshane produced a letter in the handwriting of young
Hayes, of which we have had the good luck to procure a copy. It ran
thus:--

"HONORED FATHER AND MOTHER,--The bearer of this is a kind gentleman, who
has left me in a great deal of trouble. Yesterday, at this towne, I fell
in with some gentlemen of the queene's servas; after drinking with
whom, I accepted her Majesty's mony to enliste. Repenting thereof, I did
endeavour to escape; and, in so doing, had the misfortune to strike my
superior officer, whereby I made myself liable to Death, according to
the rules of warr. If, however, I pay twenty ginnys, all will be wel.
You must give the same to the barer, els I shall be shott without fail
on Tewsday morning. And so no more from your loving son,

"JOHN HAYES.

"From my prison at Bristol, this unhappy Monday."


When Mrs. Hayes read this pathetic missive, its success with her
was complete, and she was for going immediately to the cupboard, and
producing the money necessary for her darling son's release. But the
carpenter Hayes was much more suspicious. "I don't know you, sir," said
he to the ambassador.

"Do you doubt my honour, sir?" said the Ensign, very fiercely.

"Why, sir," replied Mr. Hayes "I know little about it one way or other,
but shall take it for granted, if you will explain a little more of this
business."

"I sildom condescind to explean," said Mr. Macshane, "for it's not the
custom in my rank; but I'll explean anything in reason."

"Pray, will you tell me in what regiment my son is enlisted?"

"In coorse. In Colonel Wood's fut, my dear; and a gallant corps it is as
any in the army."

"And you left him?"

"On me soul, only three hours ago, having rid like a horse-jockey ever
since; as in the sacred cause of humanity, curse me, every man should."

As Hayes's house was seventy miles from Bristol, the old gentleman
thought this was marvellous quick riding, and so, cut the conversation
short. "You have said quite enough, sir," said he, "to show me there
is some roguery in the matter, and that the whole story is false from
beginning to end."

At this abrupt charge the Ensign looked somewhat puzzled, and then spoke
with much gravity. "Roguery," said he, "Misthur Hees, is a sthrong term;
and which, in consideration of my friendship for your family, I shall
pass over. You doubt your son's honour, as there wrote by him in black
and white?"

"You have forced him to write," said Mr. Hayes.

"The sly old divvle's right," muttered Mr. Macshane, aside. "Well, sir,
to make a clean breast of it, he HAS been forced to write it. The story
about the enlistment is a pretty fib, if you will, from beginning to
end. And what then, my dear? Do you think your son's any better off for
that?"

"Oh, where is he?" screamed Mrs. Hayes, plumping down on her knees. "We
WILL give him the money, won't we, John?"

"I know you will, madam, when I tell you where he is. He is in the hands
of some gentlemen of my acquaintance, who are at war with the present
government, and no more care about cutting a man's throat than they do
a chicken's. He is a prisoner, madam, of our sword and spear. If you
choose to ransom him, well and good; if not, peace be with him! for
never more shall you see him."

"And how do I know you won't come back to-morrow for more money?" asked
Mr. Hayes.

"Sir, you have my honour; and I'd as lieve break my neck as my word,"
said Mr. Macshane, gravely. "Twenty guineas is the bargain. Take ten
minutes to talk of it--take it then, or leave it; it's all the same
to me, my dear." And it must be said of our friend the Ensign, that he
meant every word he said, and that he considered the embassy on which he
had come as perfectly honourable and regular.

"And pray, what prevents us," said Mr. Hayes, starting up in a rage,
"from taking hold of you, as a surety for him?"

"You wouldn't fire on a flag of truce, would ye, you dishonourable
ould civilian?" replied Mr. Macshane. "Besides," says he, "there's more
reasons to prevent you: the first is this," pointing to his sword; "here
are two more"--and these were pistols; "and the last and the best of all
is, that you might hang me and dthraw me and quarther me, an yet never
see so much as the tip of your son's nose again. Look you, sir, we run
mighty risks in our profession--it's not all play, I can tell you.
We're obliged to be punctual, too, or it's all up with the thrade. If I
promise that your son will die as sure as fate to-morrow morning, unless
I return home safe, our people MUST keep my promise; or else what chance
is there for me? You would be down upon me in a moment with a posse of
constables, and have me swinging before Warwick gaol. Pooh, my dear! you
never would sacrifice a darling boy like John Hayes, let alone his lady,
for the sake of my long carcass. One or two of our gentlemen have been
taken that way already, because parents and guardians would not believe
them."

"AND WHAT BECAME OF THE POOR CHILDREN?" said Mrs. Hayes, who began to
perceive the gist of the argument, and to grow dreadfully frightened.

"Don't let's talk of them, ma'am: humanity shudthers at the thought!"
And herewith Mr. Macshane drew his finger across his throat in such a
dreadful way as to make the two parents tremble. "It's the way of war,
madam, look you. The service I have the honour to belong to is not paid
by the Queen; and so we're obliged to make our prisoners pay, according
to established military practice."

No lawyer could have argued his case better than Mr. Macshane so far;
and he completely succeeded in convincing Mr. and Mrs. Hayes of the
necessity of ransoming their son. Promising that the young man should
be restored to them next morning, along with his beautiful lady, he
courteously took leave of the old couple, and made the best of his way
back to Worcester again. The elder Hayes wondered who the lady could
be of whom the ambassador had spoken, for their son's elopement was
altogether unknown to them; but anger or doubt about this subject was
overwhelmed by their fears for their darling John's safety. Away rode
the gallant Macshane with the money necessary to effect this; and it
must be mentioned, as highly to his credit, that he never once thought
of appropriating the sum to himself, or of deserting his comrades in any
way.

His ride from Worcester had been a long one. He had left that city
at noon, but before his return thither the sun had gone down; and the
landscape, which had been dressed like a prodigal, in purple and
gold, now appeared like a Quaker, in dusky grey; and the trees by the
road-side grew black as undertakers or physicians, and, bending their
solemn heads to each other, whispered ominously among themselves; and
the mists hung on the common; and the cottage lights went out one by
one; and the earth and heaven grew black, but for some twinkling useless
stars, which freckled the ebon countenance of the latter; and the
air grew colder; and about two o'clock the moon appeared, a dismal
pale-faced rake, walking solitary through the deserted sky; and about
four, mayhap, the Dawn (wretched 'prentice-boy!) opened in the east
the shutters of the Day:--in other words, more than a dozen hours had
passed. Corporal Brock had been relieved by Mr. Redcap, the latter by
Mr. Sicklop, the one-eyed gentleman; Mrs. John Hayes, in spite of her
sorrows and bashfulness, had followed the example of her husband, and
fallen asleep by his side--slept for many hours--and awakened still
under the guardianship of Mr. Brock's troop; and all parties began
anxiously to expect the return of the ambassador, Mr. Macshane.

That officer, who had performed the first part of his journey with such
distinguished prudence and success, found the night, on his journey
homewards, was growing mighty cold and dark; and as he was thirsty and
hungry, had money in his purse, and saw no cause to hurry, he determined
to take refuge at an alehouse for the night, and to make for Worcester
by dawn the next morning. He accordingly alighted at the first inn on
his road, consigned his horse to the stable, and, entering the kitchen,
called for the best liquor in the house.

A small company was assembled at the inn, among whom Mr. Macshane took
his place with a great deal of dignity; and, having a considerable sum
of money in his pocket, felt a mighty contempt for his society, and soon
let them know the contempt he felt for them. After a third flagon of
ale, he discovered that the liquor was sour, and emptied, with much
spluttering and grimaces, the remainder of the beer into the fire. This
process so offended the parson of the parish (who in those good old
times did not disdain to take the post of honour in the chimney-nook),
that he left his corner, looking wrathfully at the offender; who without
any more ado instantly occupied it. It was a fine thing to hear
the jingling of the twenty pieces in his pocket, the oaths which he
distributed between the landlord, the guests, and the liquor--to remark
the sprawl of his mighty jack-boots, before the sweep of which the timid
guests edged farther and farther away; and the languishing leers which
he cast on the landlady, as with wide-spread arms he attempted to seize
upon her.

When the ostler had done his duties in the stable, he entered the inn,
and whispered the landlord that "the stranger was riding John Hayes's
horse:" of which fact the host soon convinced himself, and did not fail
to have some suspicions of his guest. Had he not thought that times
were unquiet, horses might be sold, and one man's money was as good as
another's, he probably would have arrested the Ensign immediately, and
so lost all the profit of the score which the latter was causing every
moment to be enlarged.

In a couple of hours, with that happy facility which one may have
often remarked in men of the gallant Ensign's nation, he had managed to
disgust every one of the landlord's other guests, and scare them from
the kitchen. Frightened by his addresses, the landlady too had taken
flight; and the host was the only person left in the apartment; who
there stayed for interest's sake merely, and listened moodily to
his tipsy guest's conversation. In an hour more, the whole house was
awakened by a violent noise of howling, curses, and pots clattering to
and fro. Forth issued Mrs. Landlady in her night-gear, out came John
Ostler with his pitchfork, downstairs tumbled Mrs. Cook and one or two
guests, and found the landlord and ensign on the kitchen-floor--the wig
of the latter lying, much singed and emitting strange odours, in the
fireplace, his face hideously distorted, and a great quantity of his
natural hair in the partial occupation of the landlord; who had drawn it
and the head down towards him, in order that he might have the benefit
of pummelling the latter more at his ease. In revenge, the landlord was
undermost, and the Ensign's arms were working up and down his face and
body like the flaps of a paddle-wheel: the man of war had clearly the
best of it.

The combatants were separated as soon as possible; but, as soon as the
excitement of the fight was over, Ensign Macshane was found to have no
further powers of speech, sense, or locomotion, and was carried by his
late antagonist to bed. His sword and pistols, which had been placed at
his side at the commencement of the evening, were carefully put by,
and his pocket visited. Twenty guineas in gold, a large knife--used,
probably, for the cutting of bread-and-cheese--some crumbs of those
delicacies and a paper of tobacco found in the breeches-pockets, and in
the bosom of the sky-blue coat, the leg of a cold fowl and half of a raw
onion, constituted his whole property.

These articles were not very suspicious; but the beating which the
landlord had received tended greatly to confirm his own and his wife's
doubts about their guest; and it was determined to send off in the early
morning to Mr. Hayes, informing him how a person had lain at their inn
who had ridden thither mounted upon young Hayes's horse. Off set John
Ostler at earliest dawn; but on his way he woke up Mr. Justice's clerk,
and communicated his suspicions to him; and Mr. Clerk consulted with the
village baker, who was always up early; and the clerk, the baker, the
butcher with his cleaver, and two gentlemen who were going to work, all
adjourned to the inn.

Accordingly, when Ensign Macshane was in a truckle-bed, plunged in that
deep slumber which only innocence and drunkenness enjoy in this world,
and charming the ears of morn by the regular and melodious music of
his nose, a vile plot was laid against him; and when about seven of the
clock he woke, he found, on sitting up in his bed, three gentlemen on
each side of it, armed, and looking ominous. One held a constable's
staff, and albeit unprovided with a warrant, would take upon himself the
responsibility of seizing Mr. Macshane and of carrying him before his
worship at the hall.

"Taranouns, man!" said the Ensign, springing up in bed, and abruptly
breaking off a loud sonorous yawn, with which he had opened the business
of the day, "you won't deteen a gentleman who's on life and death? I
give ye my word, an affair of honour."

"How came you by that there horse?" said the baker.

"How came you by these here fifteen guineas?" said the landlord, in
whose hands, by some process, five of the gold pieces had disappeared.

"What is this here idolatrous string of beads?" said the clerk.

Mr. Macshane, the fact is, was a Catholic, but did not care to own it:
for in those days his religion was not popular.

"Baids? Holy Mother of saints! give me back them baids," said Mr.
Macshane, clasping his hands. "They were blest, I tell you, by his
holiness the po--psha! I mane they belong to a darling little daughter
I had that's in heaven now: and as for the money and the horse, I should
like to know how a gentleman is to travel in this counthry without
them."

"Why, you see, he may travel in the country to GIT 'em," here shrewdly
remarked the constable; "and it's our belief that neither horse nor
money is honestly come by. If his worship is satisfied, why so, in
course, shall we be; but there is highwaymen abroad, look you; and, to
our notion, you have very much the cut of one."

Further remonstrances or threats on the part of Mr. Macshane were
useless. Although he vowed that he was first cousin to the Duke of
Leinster, an officer in Her Majesty's service, and the dearest friend
Lord Marlborough had, his impudent captors would not believe a word of
his statement (which, further, was garnished with a tremendous number
of oaths); and he was, about eight o'clock, carried up to the house of
Squire Ballance, the neighbouring justice of the peace.

When the worthy magistrate asked the crime of which the prisoner had
been guilty, the captors looked somewhat puzzled for the moment; since,
in truth, it could not be shown that the Ensign had committed any crime
at all; and if he had confined himself to simple silence, and thrown
upon them the onus of proving his misdemeanours, Justice Ballance must
have let him loose, and soundly rated his clerk and the landlord for
detaining an honest gentleman on so frivolous a charge.

But this caution was not in the Ensign's disposition; and though his
accusers produced no satisfactory charge against him, his own words were
quite enough to show how suspicious his character was. When asked his
name, he gave it in as Captain Geraldine, on his way to Ireland,
by Bristol, on a visit to his cousin the Duke of Leinster. He
swore solemnly that his friends, the Duke of Marlborough and Lord
Peterborough, under both of whom he had served, should hear of the
manner in which he had been treated; and when the justice,--a sly old
gentleman, and one that read the Gazettes, asked him at what battles he
had been present, the gallant Ensign pitched on a couple in Spain and in
Flanders, which had been fought within a week of each other, and vowed
that he had been desperately wounded at both; so that, at the end of his
examination, which had been taken down by the clerk, he had been made
to acknowledge as follows:--Captain Geraldine, six feet four inches in
height; thin, with a very long red nose, and red hair; grey eyes, and
speaks with a strong Irish accent; is the first-cousin of the Duke of
Leinster, and in constant communication with him: does not know whether
his Grace has any children; does not know whereabouts he lives
in London; cannot say what sort of a looking man his Grace is: is
acquainted with the Duke of Marlborough, and served in the dragoons at
the battle of Ramillies; at which time he was with my Lord Peterborough
before Barcelona. Borrowed the horse which he rides from a friend in
London, three weeks since. Peter Hobbs, ostler, swears that it was in
his master's stable four days ago, and is the property of John Hayes,
carpenter. Cannot account for the fifteen guineas found on him by the
landlord; says there were twenty; says he won them at cards, a fortnight
since, at Edinburgh; says he is riding about the country for his
amusement: afterwards says he is on a matter of life and death, and
going to Bristol; declared last night, in the hearing of several
witnesses, that he was going to York; says he is a man of independent
property, and has large estates in Ireland, and a hundred thousand
pounds in the Bank of England. Has no shirt or stockings, and the coat
he wears is marked "S.S." In his boots is written "Thomas Rodgers," and
in his hat is the name of the "Rev. Doctor Snoffler."

Doctor Snoffler lived at Worcester, and had lately advertised in the Hue
and Cry a number of articles taken from his house. Mr. Macshane said,
in reply to this, that his hat had been changed at the inn, and he was
ready to take his oath that he came thither in a gold-laced one. But
this fact was disproved by the oaths of many persons who had seen him at
the inn. And he was about to be imprisoned for the thefts which he had
not committed (the fact about the hat being, that he had purchased it
from a gentleman at the "Three Rooks" for two pints of beer)--he was
about to be remanded, when, behold, Mrs. Hayes the elder made her
appearance; and to her it was that the Ensign was indebted for his
freedom.

Old Hayes had gone to work before the ostler arrived; but when his wife
heard the lad's message, she instantly caused her pillion to be placed
behind the saddle, and mounting the grey horse, urged the stable-boy to
gallop as hard as ever he could to the justice's house.

She entered panting and alarmed. "Oh, what is your honour going to do
to this honest gentleman?" said she. "In the name of Heaven, let him go!
His time is precious--he has important business--business of life and
death."

"I tould the jidge so," said the Ensign, "but he refused to take my
word--the sacred wurrd of honour of Captain Geraldine."

Macshane was good at a single lie, though easily flustered on an
examination; and this was a very creditable stratagem to acquaint Mrs.
Hayes with the name that he bore.

"What! you know Captain Geraldine?" said Mr. Ballance, who was perfectly
well acquainted with the carpenter's wife.

"In coorse she does. Hasn't she known me these tin years? Are we not
related? Didn't she give me the very horse which I rode, and, to make
belave, tould you I'd bought in London?"

"Let her tell her own story. Are you related to Captain Geraldine, Mrs.
Hayes?"

"Yes--oh, yes!"

"A very elegant connection! And you gave him the horse, did you, of your
own free-will?"

"Oh yes! of my own will--I would give him anything. Do, do, your honour,
let him go! His child is dying," said the old lady, bursting into
tears. "It may be dead before he gets to--before he gets there. Oh, your
honour, your honour, pray, pray, don't detain him!"

The justice did not seem to understand this excessive sympathy on the
part of Mrs. Hayes; nor did the father himself appear to be nearly so
affected by his child's probable fate as the honest woman who interested
herself for him. On the contrary, when she made this passionate speech,
Captain Geraldine only grinned, and said, "Niver mind, my dear. If
his honour will keep an honest gentleman for doing nothing, why, let
him--the law must settle between us; and as for the child, poor thing,
the Lord deliver it!"

At this, Mrs. Hayes fell to entreating more loudly than ever; and as
there was really no charge against him, Mr. Ballance was constrained to
let him go.

The landlord and his friends were making off, rather confused, when
Ensign Macshane called upon the former in a thundering voice to stop,
and refund the five guineas which he had stolen from him. Again the host
swore there were but fifteen in his pocket. But when, on the Bible, the
Ensign solemnly vowed that he had twenty, and called upon Mrs. Hayes to
say whether yesterday, half-an-hour before he entered the inn, she had
not seen him with twenty guineas, and that lady expressed herself ready
to swear that she had, Mr. Landlord looked more crestfallen than ever,
and said that he had not counted the money when he took it; and though
he did in his soul believe that there were only fifteen guineas, rather
than be suspected of a shabby action, he would pay the five guineas out
of his own pocket: which he did, and with the Ensign's, or rather Mrs.
Hayes's, own coin.

As soon as they were out of the justice's house, Mr. Macshane, in the
fulness of his gratitude, could not help bestowing an embrace upon
Mrs. Hayes. And when she implored him to let her ride behind him to her
darling son, he yielded with a very good grace, and off the pair set on
John Hayes's grey.

"Who has Nosey brought with him now?" said Mr. Sicklop, Brock's one-eyed
confederate, who, about three hours after the above adventure, was
lolling in the yard of the "Three Rooks." It was our Ensign, with the
mother of his captive. They had not met with any accident in their ride.

"I shall now have the shooprame bliss," said Mr. Macshane, with much
feeling, as he lifted Mrs. Hayes from the saddle---"the shooprame bliss
of intwining two harrts that are mead for one another. Ours, my dear,
is a dismal profession; but ah! don't moments like this make aminds
for years of pain? This way, my dear. Turn to your right, then to your
left--mind the stip--and the third door round the corner."

All these precautions were attended to; and after giving his concerted
knock, Mr. Macshane was admitted into an apartment, which he entered
holding his gold pieces in the one hand, and a lady by the other.

We shall not describe the meeting which took place between mother and
son. The old lady wept copiously; the young man was really glad to see
his relative, for he deemed that his troubles were over. Mrs. Cat bit
her lips, and stood aside, looking somewhat foolish; Mr. Brock counted
the money; and Mr. Macshane took a large dose of strong waters, as a
pleasing solace for his labours, dangers, and fatigue.

When the maternal feelings were somewhat calmed, the old lady had
leisure to look about her, and really felt a kind of friendship and
goodwill for the company of thieves in which she found herself. It
seemed to her that they had conferred an actual favour on her, in
robbing her of twenty guineas, threatening her son's life, and finally
letting him go.

"Who is that droll old gentleman?" said she; and being told that it was
Captain Wood, she dropped him a curtsey, and said, with much respect,
"Captain, your very humble servant;" which compliment Mr. Brock
acknowledged by a gracious smile and bow. "And who is this pretty young
lady?" continued Mrs. Hayes.

"Why--hum--oh--mother, you must give her your blessing. She is Mrs. John
Hayes." And herewith Mr. Hayes brought forward his interesting lady, to
introduce her to his mamma.

The news did not at all please the old lady; who received Mrs.
Catherine's embrace with a very sour face indeed. However, the mischief
was done; and she was too glad to get back her son to be, on such an
occasion, very angry with him. So, after a proper rebuke, she told Mrs.
John Hayes that though she never approved of her son's attachment, and
thought he married below his condition, yet as the evil was done, it was
their duty to make the best of it; and she, for her part, would receive
her into her house, and make her as comfortable there as she could.

"I wonder whether she has any more money in that house?" whispered Mr.
Sicklop to Mr. Redcap; who, with the landlady, had come to the door of
the room, and had been amusing themselves by the contemplation of this
sentimental scene.

"What a fool that wild Hirishman was not to bleed her for more!" said
the landlady; "but he's a poor ignorant Papist. I'm sure my man"
(this gentleman had been hanged), "wouldn't have come away with such a
beggarly sum."

"Suppose we have some more out of 'em?" said Mr. Redcap. "What prevents
us? We have got the old mare, and the colt too,--ha! ha!--and the pair
of 'em ought to be worth at least a hundred to us."

This conversation was carried on sotto voce; and I don't know whether
Mr. Brock had any notion of the plot which was arranged by the three
worthies. The landlady began it. "Which punch, madam, will you take?"
says she. "You must have something for the good of the house, now you
are in it."

"In coorse," said the Ensign.

"Certainly," said the other three. But the old lady said she was anxious
to leave the place; and putting down a crown-piece, requested the
hostess to treat the gentlemen in her absence. "Good-bye, Captain," said
the old lady.

"Ajew!" cried the Ensign, "and long life to you, my dear. You got me out
of a scrape at the justice's yonder; and, split me! but Insign Macshane
will remimber it as long as he lives."

And now Hayes and the two ladies made for the door; but the landlady
placed herself against it, and Mr. Sicklop said, "No, no, my pretty
madams, you ain't a-going off so cheap as that neither; you are not
going out for a beggarly twenty guineas, look you,--we must have more."

Mr. Hayes starting back, and cursing his fate, fairly burst into tears;
the two women screamed; and Mr. Brock looked as if the proposition both
amused and had been expected by him: but not so Ensign Macshane.

"Major!" said he, clawing fiercely hold of Brock's arms.

"Ensign," said Mr. Brock, smiling.

"Arr we, or arr we not, men of honour?"

"Oh, in coorse," said Brock, laughing, and using Macshane's favourite
expression.

"If we ARR men of honour, we are bound to stick to our word; and, hark
ye, you dirty one-eyed scoundrel, if you don't immadiately make way for
these leedies, and this lily-livered young jontleman who's crying so,
the Meejor here and I will lug out and force you." And so saying,
he drew his great sword and made a pass at Mr. Sicklop; which that
gentleman avoided, and which caused him and his companion to retreat
from the door. The landlady still kept her position at it, and with a
storm of oaths against the Ensign, and against two Englishmen who ran
away from a wild Hirishman, swore she would not budge a foot, and would
stand there until her dying day.

"Faith, then, needs must," said the Ensign, and made a lunge at the
hostess, which passed so near the wretch's throat, that she screamed,
sank on her knees, and at last opened the door.

Down the stairs, then, with great state, Mr. Macshane led the elder
lady, the married couple following; and having seen them to the street,
took an affectionate farewell of the party, whom he vowed that he would
come and see. "You can walk the eighteen miles aisy, between this and
nightfall," said he.

"WALK!" exclaimed Mr. Hayes. "Why, haven't we got Ball, and shall ride
and tie all the way?"

"Madam!" cried Macshane, in a stern voice, "honour before everything.
Did you not, in the presence of his worship, vow and declare that you
gave me that horse, and now d'ye talk of taking it back again? Let me
tell you, madam, that such paltry thricks ill become a person of your
years and respectability, and ought never to be played with Insign
Timothy Macshane."

He waved his hat and strutted down the street; and Mrs. Catherine Hayes,
along with her bridegroom and mother-in-law, made the best of their way
homeward on foot.



CHAPTER VII. WHICH EMBRACES A PERIOD OF SEVEN YEARS.


The recovery of so considerable a portion of his property from the
clutches of Brock was, as may be imagined, no trifling source of joy to
that excellent young man, Count Gustavus Adolphus de Galgenstein; and
he was often known to say, with much archness, and a proper feeling of
gratitude to the Fate which had ordained things so, that the robbery
was, in reality, one of the best things that could have happened to him:
for, in event of Mr. Brock's NOT stealing the money, his Excellency the
Count would have had to pay the whole to the Warwickshire Squire, who
had won it from him at play. He was enabled, in the present instance, to
plead his notorious poverty as an excuse; and the Warwickshire conqueror
got off with nothing, except a very badly written autograph of the
Count's, simply acknowledging the debt.

This point his Excellency conceded with the greatest candour; but (as,
doubtless, the reader may have remarked in the course of his experience)
to owe is not quite the same thing as to pay; and from the day of his
winning the money until the day of his death the Warwickshire Squire
did never, by any chance, touch a single bob, tizzy, tester, moidore,
maravedi, doubloon, tomaun, or rupee, of the sum which Monsieur de
Galgenstein had lost to him.

That young nobleman was, as Mr. Brock hinted in the little
autobiographical sketch which we gave in a former chapter, incarcerated
for a certain period, and for certain other debts, in the donjons
of Shrewsbury; but he released himself from them by that noble and
consolatory method of whitewashing which the law has provided for
gentlemen in his oppressed condition; and he had not been a week in
London, when he fell in with, and overcame, or put to flight, Captain
Wood, alias Brock, and immediately seized upon the remainder of his
property. After receiving this, the Count, with commendable discretion,
disappeared from England altogether for a while; nor are we at all
authorised to state that any of his debts to his tradesmen were
discharged, any more than his debts of honour, as they are pleasantly
called.

Having thus settled with his creditors, the gallant Count had interest
enough with some of the great folk to procure for himself a post abroad,
and was absent in Holland for some time. It was here that he became
acquainted with the lovely Madam Silverkoop, the widow of a deceased
gentleman of Leyden; and although the lady was not at that age at which
tender passions are usually inspired--being sixty--and though she could
not, like Mademoiselle Ninon de l'Enclos, then at Paris, boast of charms
which defied the progress of time,--for Mrs. Silverkoop was as red as a
boiled lobster, and as unwieldy as a porpoise; and although her mental
attractions did by no means make up for her personal deficiencies,--for
she was jealous, violent, vulgar, drunken, and stingy to a miracle:
yet her charms had an immediate effect on Monsieur de Galgenstein; and
hence, perhaps, the reader (the rogue! how well he knows the world!)
will be led to conclude that the honest widow was RICH.

Such, indeed, she was; and Count Gustavus, despising the difference
between his twenty quarterings and her twenty thousand pounds, laid the
most desperate siege to her, and finished by causing her to capitulate;
as I do believe, after a reasonable degree of pressing, any woman will
do to any man: such, at least, has been MY experience in the matter.

The Count then married; and it was curious to see how he--who, as
we have seen in the case of Mrs. Cat, had been as great a tiger and
domestic bully as any extant--now, by degrees, fell into a quiet
submission towards his enormous Countess; who ordered him up and down as
a lady orders her footman, who permitted him speedily not to have a will
of his own, and who did not allow him a shilling of her money without
receiving for the same an accurate account.

How was it that he, the abject slave of Madam Silverkoop, had been
victorious over Mrs. Cat? The first blow is, I believe, the decisive
one in these cases, and the Countess had stricken it a week after their
marriage;--establishing a supremacy which the Count never afterwards
attempted to question.

We have alluded to his Excellency's marriage, as in duty bound, because
it will be necessary to account for his appearance hereafter in a more
splendid fashion than that under which he has hitherto been known to us;
and just comforting the reader by the knowledge that the union, though
prosperous in a worldly point of view, was, in reality, extremely
unhappy, we must say no more from this time forth of the fat and
legitimate Madam de Galgenstein. Our darling is Mrs. Catherine, who had
formerly acted in her stead; and only in so much as the fat Countess
did influence in any way the destinies of our heroine, or those wise
and virtuous persons who have appeared and are to follow her to her end,
shall we in any degree allow her name to figure here. It is an awful
thing to get a glimpse, as one sometimes does, when the time is past, of
some little little wheel which works the whole mighty machinery of FATE,
and see how our destinies turn on a minute's delay or advance, or on the
turning of a street, or on somebody else's turning of a street, or
on somebody else's doing of something else in Downing Street or in
Timbuctoo, now or a thousand years ago. Thus, for instance, if Miss
Poots, in the year 1695, had never been the lovely inmate of a Spielhaus
at Amsterdam, Mr. Van Silverkoop would never have seen her; if the day
had not been extraordinarily hot, the worthy merchant would never have
gone thither; if he had not been fond of Rhenish wine and sugar, he
never would have called for any such delicacies; if he had not called
for them, Miss Ottilia Poots would never have brought them, and partaken
of them; if he had not been rich, she would certainly have rejected all
the advances made to her by Silverkoop; if he had not been so fond of
Rhenish and sugar, he never would have died; and Mrs. Silverkoop would
have been neither rich nor a widow, nor a wife to Count von Galgenstein.
Nay, nor would this history have ever been written; for if Count
Galgenstein had not married the rich widow, Mrs. Catherine would never
have--

Oh, my dear madam! you thought we were going to tell you. Pooh!
nonsense!--no such thing! not for two or three and seventy pages or
so,--when, perhaps, you MAY know what Mrs. Catherine never would have
done.

The reader will remember, in the second chapter of these Memoirs, the
announcement that Mrs. Catherine had given to the world a child, who
might bear, if he chose, the arms of Galgenstein, with the further
adornment of a bar-sinister. This child had been put out to nurse some
time before its mother's elopement from the Count; and as that nobleman
was in funds at the time (having had that success at play which we duly
chronicled), he paid a sum of no less than twenty guineas, which was to
be the yearly reward of the nurse into whose charge the boy was put. The
woman grew fond of the brat; and when, after the first year, she had no
further news or remittances from father or mother, she determined, for
a while at least, to maintain the infant at her own expense; for, when
rebuked by her neighbours on this score, she stoutly swore that no
parents could ever desert their children, and that some day or other she
should not fail to be rewarded for her trouble with this one.

Under this strange mental hallucination poor Goody Billings, who had
five children and a husband of her own, continued to give food and
shelter to little Tom for a period of no less than seven years; and
though it must be acknowledged that the young gentleman did not in the
slightest degree merit the kindnesses shown to him, Goody Billings, who
was of a very soft and pitiful disposition, continued to bestow them
upon him: because, she said, he was lonely and unprotected, and deserved
them more than other children who had fathers and mothers to look after
them. If, then, any difference was made between Tom's treatment and that
of her own brood, it was considerably in favour of the former; to whom
the largest proportions of treacle were allotted for his bread, and
the handsomest supplies of hasty pudding. Besides, to do Mrs. Billings
justice, there WAS a party against him; and that consisted not only of
her husband and her five children, but of every single person in the
neighbourhood who had an opportunity of seeing and becoming acquainted
with Master Tom.

A celebrated philosopher--I think Miss Edgeworth--has broached the
consolatory doctrine, that in intellect and disposition all human beings
are entirely equal, and that circumstance and education are the causes
of the distinctions and divisions which afterwards unhappily take place
among them. Not to argue this question, which places Jack Howard and
Jack Thurtell on an exact level,--which would have us to believe that
Lord Melbourne is by natural gifts and excellences a man as honest,
brave, and far-sighted as the Duke of Wellington,--which would make out
that Lord Lyndhurst is, in point of principle, eloquence, and political
honesty, no better than Mr. O'Connell,--not, I say, arguing this
doctrine, let us simply state that Master Thomas Billings (for, having
no other, he took the name of the worthy people who adopted him) was in
his long-coats fearfully passionate, screaming and roaring perpetually,
and showing all the ill that he COULD show. At the age of two, when
his strength enabled him to toddle abroad, his favourite resort was
the coal-hole or the dung-heap: his roarings had not diminished in the
least, and he had added to his former virtues two new ones,--a love
of fighting and stealing; both which amiable qualities he had many
opportunities of exercising every day. He fought his little adoptive
brothers and sisters; he kicked and cuffed his father and mother; he
fought the cat, stamped upon the kittens, was worsted in a severe battle
with the hen in the backyard; but, in revenge, nearly beat a little
sucking-pig to death, whom he caught alone and rambling near his
favourite haunt, the dung-hill. As for stealing, he stole the eggs,
which he perforated and emptied; the butter, which he ate with or
without bread, as he could find it; the sugar, which he cunningly
secreted in the leaves of a "Baker's Chronicle," that nobody in the
establishment could read; and thus from the pages of history he used to
suck in all he knew--thieving and lying namely; in which, for his years,
he made wonderful progress. If any followers of Miss Edgeworth and the
philosophers are inclined to disbelieve this statement, or to set it
down as overcharged and distorted, let them be assured that just this
very picture was, of all the pictures in the world, taken from nature.
I, Ikey Solomons, once had a dear little brother who could steal before
he could walk (and this not from encouragement,--for, if you know the
world, you must know that in families of our profession the point of
honour is sacred at home,--but from pure nature)--who could steal, I
say, before he could walk, and lie before he could speak; and who, at
four and a half years of age, having attacked my sister Rebecca on some
question of lollipops, had smitten her on the elbow with a fire-shovel,
apologising to us by saying simply, "---- her, I wish it had been her
head!" Dear, dear Aminadab! I think of you, and laugh these philosophers
to scorn. Nature made you for that career which you fulfilled: you
were from your birth to your dying a scoundrel; you COULDN'T have been
anything else, however your lot was cast; and blessed it was that you
were born among the prigs,--for had you been of any other profession,
alas! alas! what ills might you have done! As I have heard the author of
"Richelieu," "Siamese Twins," etc. say "Poeta nascitur non fit," which
means that though he had tried ever so much to be a poet, it was all
moonshine: in the like manner, I say, "ROAGUS nascitur, non fit." We
have it from nature, and so a fig for Miss Edgeworth.

In this manner, then, while his father, blessed with a wealthy wife, was
leading, in a fine house, the life of a galley-slave; while his mother,
married to Mr. Hayes, and made an honest women of, as the saying is, was
passing her time respectably in Warwickshire, Mr. Thomas Billings
was inhabiting the same county, not cared for by either of them; but
ordained by Fate to join them one day, and have a mighty influence upon
the fortunes of both. For, as it has often happened to the traveller in
the York or the Exeter coach to fall snugly asleep in his corner, and on
awaking suddenly to find himself sixty or seventy miles from the place
where Somnus first visited him: as, we say, although you sit still,
Time, poor wretch, keeps perpetually running on, and so must run day
and night, with never a pause or a halt of five minutes to get a drink,
until his dying day; let the reader imagine that since he left Mrs.
Hayes and all the other worthy personages of this history, in the last
chapter, seven years have sped away; during which, all our heroes and
heroines have been accomplishing their destinies.

Seven years of country carpentering, or rather trading, on the part of a
husband, of ceaseless scolding, violence, and discontent on the part of
a wife, are not pleasant to describe: so we shall omit altogether
any account of the early married life of Mr. and Mrs. John Hayes. The
"Newgate Calendar" (to which excellent compilation we and the OTHER
popular novelists of the day can never be sufficiently grateful) states
that Hayes left his house three or four times during this period, and,
urged by the restless humours of his wife, tried several professions:
returning, however, as he grew weary of each, to his wife and his
paternal home. After a certain time his parents died, and by their
demise he succeeded to a small property, and the carpentering business,
which he for some time followed.

What, then, in the meanwhile, had become of Captain Wood, or Brock,
and Ensign Macshane?--the only persons now to be accounted for in our
catalogue. For about six months after their capture and release of
Mr. Hayes, those noble gentlemen had followed, with much prudence and
success, that trade which the celebrated and polite Duval, the ingenious
Sheppard, the dauntless Turpin, and indeed many other heroes of our most
popular novels, had pursued,--or were pursuing, in their time. And so
considerable were said to be Captain Wood's gains, that reports were
abroad of his having somewhere a buried treasure; to which he might have
added more, had not Fate suddenly cut short his career as a prig. He
and the Ensign were--shame to say--transported for stealing three
pewter-pots off a railing at Exeter; and not being known in the town,
which they had only reached that morning, they were detained by
no further charges, but simply condemned on this one. For this
misdemeanour, Her Majesty's Government vindictively sent them for seven
years beyond the sea; and, as the fashion then was, sold the use of
their bodies to Virginian planters during that space of time. It is
thus, alas! that the strong are always used to deal with the weak, and
many an honest fellow has been led to rue his unfortunate difference
with the law.

Thus, then, we have settled all scores. The Count is in Holland with his
wife; Mrs. Cat in Warwickshire along with her excellent husband; Master
Thomas Billings with his adoptive parents in the same county; and the
two military gentlemen watching the progress and cultivation of the
tobacco and cotton plant in the New World. All these things having
passed between the acts, dingaring-a-dingaring-a-dingledingleding, the
drop draws up, and the next act begins. By the way, the play ENDS with a
drop: but that is neither here nor there.

                    *****

(Here, as in a theatre, the orchestra is supposed to play something
melodious. The people get up, shake themselves, yawn, and settle down
in their seats again. "Porter, ale, ginger-beer, cider," comes round,
squeezing through the legs of the gentlemen in the pit. Nobody takes
anything, as usual; and lo! the curtain rises again. "Sh, 'shsh,
'shshshhh! Hats off!" says everybody.)

                    *****

Mrs. Hayes had now been for six years the adored wife of Mr. Hayes, and
no offspring had arisen to bless their loves and perpetuate their name.
She had obtained a complete mastery over her lord and master; and
having had, as far as was in that gentleman's power, every single wish
gratified that she could demand, in the way of dress, treats to Coventry
and Birmingham, drink, and what not--for, though a hard man, John Hayes
had learned to spend his money pretty freely on himself and her--having
had all her wishes gratified, it was natural that she should begin to
find out some more; and the next whim she hit upon was to be restored
to her child. It may be as well to state that she had never informed her
husband of the existence of that phenomenon, although he was aware
of his wife's former connection with the Count,--Mrs. Hayes, in their
matrimonial quarrels, invariably taunting him with accounts of her
former splendour and happiness, and with his own meanness of taste in
condescending to take up with his Excellency's leavings.

She determined, then (but as yet had not confided her determination
to her husband), she would have her boy; although in her seven years'
residence within twenty miles of him she had never once thought of
seeing him: and the kind reader knows that when his excellent lady
determines on a thing--a shawl, or an opera-box, or a new carriage, or
twenty-four singing-lessons from Tamburini, or a night at the "Eagle
Tavern," City Road, or a ride in a 'bus to Richmond and tea and
brandy-and-water at "Rose Cottage Hotel"--the reader, high or low, knows
that when Mrs. Reader desires a thing have it she will; you may just as
well talk of avoiding her as of avoiding gout, bills, or grey hairs--and
that, you know, is impossible. I, for my part, have had all three--ay,
and a wife too.

I say that when a woman is resolved on a thing, happen it will; if
husbands refuse, Fate will interfere (flectere si nequeo, etc.; but
quotations are odious). And some hidden power was working in the case of
Mrs. Hayes, and, for its own awful purposes, lending her its aid.

Who has not felt how he works--the dreadful conquering Spirit of
Ill? Who cannot see, in the circle of his own society, the fated and
foredoomed to woe and evil? Some call the doctrine of destiny a dark
creed; but, for me, I would fain try and think it a consolatory one. It
is better, with all one's sins upon one's head, to deem oneself in
the hands of Fate, than to think--with our fierce passions and weak
repentances; with our resolves so loud, so vain, so ludicrously,
despicably weak and frail; with our dim, wavering, wretched conceits
about virtue, and our irresistible propensity to wrong,--that we are the
workers of our future sorrow or happiness. If we depend on our strength,
what is it against mighty circumstance? If we look to ourselves, what
hope have we? Look back at the whole of your life, and see how Fate has
mastered you and it. Think of your disappointments and your successes.
Has YOUR striving influenced one or the other? A fit of indigestion puts
itself between you and honours and reputation; an apple plops on your
nose and makes you a world's wonder and glory; a fit of poverty makes a
rascal of you, who were, and are still, an honest man; clubs, trumps,
or six lucky mains at dice, make an honest man for life of you, who ever
were, will be, and are a rascal. Who sends the illness? who causes the
apple to fall? who deprives you of your worldly goods? or who shuffles
the cards, and brings trumps, honour, virtue, and prosperity back again?
You call it chance; ay, and so it is chance that when the floor
gives way, and the rope stretches tight, the poor wretch before St.
Sepulchre's clock dies. Only with us, clear-sighted mortals as we are,
we can't SEE the rope by which we hang, and know not when or how the
drop may fall.

But revenons a nos moutons: let us return to that sweet lamb Master
Thomas, and the milk-white ewe Mrs. Cat. Seven years had passed away,
and she began to think that she should very much like to see her child
once more. It was written that she should; and you shall hear how, soon
after, without any great exertions of hers, back he came to her.

In the month of July, in the year 1715, there came down a road about
ten miles from the city of Worcester, two gentlemen; not mounted,
Templar-like, upon one horse, but having a horse between them--a sorry
bay, with a sorry saddle, and a large pack behind it; on which each by
turn took a ride. Of the two, one was a man of excessive stature, with
red hair, a very prominent nose, and a faded military dress; while the
other, an old weather-beaten, sober-looking personage, wore the
costume of a civilian--both man and dress appearing to have reached the
autumnal, or seedy state. However, the pair seemed, in spite of their
apparent poverty, to be passably merry. The old gentleman rode the
horse; and had, in the course of their journey, ridden him two miles at
least in every three. The tall one walked with immense strides by his
side; and seemed, indeed, as if he could have quickly outstripped
the four-footed animal, had he chosen to exert his speed, or had not
affection for his comrade retained him at his stirrup.

A short time previously the horse had cast a shoe; and this the tall
man on foot had gathered up, and was holding in his hand: it having been
voted that the first blacksmith to whose shop they should come should be
called upon to fit it again upon the bay horse.

"Do you remimber this counthry, Meejor?" said the tall man, who was
looking about him very much pleased, and sucking a flower. "I think
thim green cornfields is prettier looking at than the d----- tobacky out
yondther, and bad lack to it!"

"I recollect the place right well, and some queer pranks we played here
seven years agone," responded the gentleman addressed as Major. "You
remember that man and his wife, whom we took in pawn at the 'Three
Rooks'?"

"And the landlady only hung last Michaelmas?" said the tall man,
parenthetically.

"Hang the landlady!--we've got all we ever would out of HER, you know.
But about the man and woman. You went after the chap's mother, and, like
a jackass, as you are, let him loose. Well, the woman was that Catherine
that you've often heard me talk about. I like the wench, ---- her, for
I almost brought her up; and she was for a year or two along with that
scoundrel Galgenstein, who has been the cause of my ruin."

"The infernal blackguard and ruffian!" said the tall man; who, with his
companion, has no doubt been recognised by the reader.

"Well, this Catherine had a child by Galgenstein; and somewhere here
hard by the woman lived to whom we carried the brat to nurse. She was
the wife of a blacksmith, one Billings: it won't be out of the way to
get our horse shod at his house, if he is alive still, and we may learn
something about the little beast. I should be glad to see the mother
well enough."

"Do I remimber her?" said the Ensign. "Do I remimber whisky? Sure I
do, and the snivelling sneak her husband, and the stout old lady her
mother-in-law, and the dirty one-eyed ruffian who sold me the parson's
hat that had so nearly brought me into trouble. Oh but it was a rare
rise we got out of them chaps, and the old landlady that's hanged too!"
And here both Ensign Macshane and Major Brock, or Wood, grinned, and
showed much satisfaction.

It will be necessary to explain the reason of it. We gave the British
public to understand that the landlady of the "Three Rooks," at
Worcester, was a notorious fence, or banker of thieves; that is, a
purchaser of their merchandise. In her hands Mr. Brock and his companion
had left property to the amount of sixty or seventy pounds, which was
secreted in a cunning recess in a chamber of the "Three Rooks" known
only to the landlady and the gentlemen who banked with her; and in
this place, Mr. Sicklop, the one-eyed man who had joined in the Hayes
adventure, his comrade, and one or two of the topping prigs of the
county, were free. Mr. Sicklop had been shot dead in a night attack near
Bath: the landlady had been suddenly hanged, as an accomplice in another
case of robbery; and when, on their return from Virginia, our two
heroes, whose hopes of livelihood depended upon it, had bent their steps
towards Worcester, they were not a little frightened to hear of the
cruel fate of the hostess and many of the amiable frequenters of the
"Three Rooks." All the goodly company were separated; the house was no
longer an inn. Was the money gone too? At least it was worth while to
look--which Messrs. Brock and Macshane determined to do.

The house being now a private one, Mr. Brock, with a genius that was
above his station, visited its owner, with a huge portfolio under his
arm, and, in the character of a painter, requested permission to take a
particular sketch from a particular window. The Ensign followed with the
artist's materials (consisting simply of a screwdriver and a crowbar);
and it is hardly necessary to say that, when admission was granted
to them, they opened the well-known door, and to their inexpressible
satisfaction discovered, not their own peculiar savings exactly,
for these had been appropriated instantly, on hearing of their
transportation, but stores of money and goods to the amount of near
three hundred pounds: to which Mr. Macshane said they had as just and
honourable a right as anybody else. And so they had as just a right as
anybody--except the original owners: but who was to discover them?

With this booty they set out on their journey--anywhere, for they knew
not whither; and it so chanced that when their horse's shoe came off,
they were within a few furlongs of the cottage of Mr. Billings, the
blacksmith. As they came near, they were saluted by tremendous roars
issuing from the smithy. A small boy was held across the bellows, two or
three children of smaller and larger growth were holding him down, and
many others of the village were gazing in at the window, while a man,
half-naked, was lashing the little boy with a whip, and occasioning the
cries heard by the travellers. As the horse drew up, the operator looked
at the new-comers for a moment, and then proceeded incontinently with
his work; belabouring the child more fiercely than ever.

When he had done, he turned round to the new-comers and asked how he
could serve them? whereupon Mr. Wood (for such was the name he adopted,
and by such we shall call him to the end) wittily remarked that however
he might wish to serve THEM, he seemed mightily inclined to serve that
young gentleman first.

"It's no joking matter," said the blacksmith: "if I don't serve him so
now, he'll be worse off in his old age. He'll come to the gallows, as
sure as his name is Bill---never mind what his name is." And so saying,
he gave the urchin another cut; which elicited, of course, another
scream.

"Oh! his name is Bill?" said Captain Wood.

"His name's NOT Bill!" said the blacksmith, sulkily. "He's no name; and
no heart, neither. My wife took the brat in, seven years ago, from a
beggarly French chap to nurse, and she kept him, for she was a good
soul" (here his eyes began to wink), "and she's--she's gone now" (here
he began fairly to blubber). "And d--- him, out of love for her, I kept
him too, and the scoundrel is a liar and a thief. This blessed day,
merely to vex me and my boys here, he spoke ill of her, he did, and
I'll--cut--his--life--out--I--will!" and with each word honest Mulciber
applied a whack on the body of little Tom Billings; who, by shrill
shrieks, and oaths in treble, acknowledged the receipt of the blows.

"Come, come," said Mr. Wood, "set the boy down, and the bellows a-going;
my horse wants shoeing, and the poor lad has had strapping enough."

The blacksmith obeyed, and cast poor Master Thomas loose. As he
staggered away and looked back at his tormentor, his countenance assumed
an expression which made Mr. Wood say, grasping hold of Macshane's
arm, "It's the boy, it's the boy! When his mother gave Galgenstein the
laudanum, she had the self-same look with her!"

"Had she really now?" said Mr. Macshane. "And pree, Meejor, who WAS his
mother?"

"Mrs. Cat, you fool!" answered Wood.

"Then, upon my secred word of honour, she has a mighty fine KITTEN
anyhow, my dear. Aha!"

"They don't DROWN such kittens," said Mr. Wood, archly; and Macshane,
taking the allusion, clapped his finger to his nose in token of perfect
approbation of his commander's sentiment.

While the blacksmith was shoeing the horse, Mr. Wood asked him many
questions concerning the lad whom he had just been chastising, and
succeeded, beyond a doubt, in establishing his identity with the child
whom Catherine Hall had brought into the world seven years since.
Billings told him of all the virtues of his wife, and the manifold
crimes of the lad: how he stole, and fought, and lied, and swore; and
though the youngest under his roof, exercised the most baneful influence
over all the rest of his family. He was determined at last, he said, to
put him to the parish, for he did not dare to keep him.

"He's a fine whelp, and would fetch ten pieces in Virginny," sighed the
Ensign.

"Crimp, of Bristol, would give five for him," said Mr. Wood, ruminating.

"Why not take him?" said the Ensign.

"Faith, why not?" said Mr. Wood. "His keep, meanwhile, will not be
sixpence a day." Then turning round to the blacksmith, "Mr. Billings,"
said he, "you will be surprised, perhaps, to hear that I know everything
regarding that poor lad's history. His mother was an unfortunate lady
of high family, now no more; his father a German nobleman, Count de
Galgenstein by name."

"The very man!" said Billings: "a young, fair-haired man, who came here
with the child, and a dragoon sergeant."

"Count de Galgenstein by name, who, on the point of death, recommended
the infant to me."

"And did he pay you seven years' boarding?" said Mr. Billings, who was
quite alive at the very idea.

"Alas, sir, not a jot! He died, sir, six hundred pounds in my debt;
didn't he, Ensign?"

"Six hundred, upon my secred honour! I remember when he got into the
house along with the poli--"

"Psha! what matters it?" here broke out Mr. Wood, looking fiercely at
the Ensign. "Six hundred pounds he owes me: how was he to pay you? But
he told me to take charge of this boy, if I found him; and found him I
have, and WILL take charge of him, if you will hand him over."

"Send our Tom!" cried Billings. And when that youth appeared, scowling,
and yet trembling, and prepared, as it seemed, for another castigation,
his father, to his surprise, asked him if he was willing to go along
with those gentlemen, or whether he would be a good lad and stay with
him.

Mr. Tom replied immediately, "I won't be a good lad, and I'd rather go
to ---- than stay with you!"

"Will you leave your brothers and sisters?" said Billings, looking very
dismal.

"Hang my brothers and sisters--I hate 'em; and, besides, I haven't got
any!"

"But you had a good mother, hadn't you, Tom?"

Tom paused for a moment.

"Mother's gone," said he, "and you flog me, and I'll go with these men."

"Well, then, go thy ways," said Billings, starting up in a passion: "go
thy ways for a graceless reprobate; and if this gentleman will take you,
he may do so."

After some further parley, the conversation ended, and the next morning
Mr. Wood's party consisted of three: a little boy being mounted upon the
bay horse, in addition to the Ensign or himself; and the whole company
went journeying towards Bristol.

                    *****

We have said that Mrs. Hayes had, on a sudden, taken a fit of maternal
affection, and was bent upon being restored to her child; and that
benign destiny which watched over the life of this lucky lady instantly
set about gratifying her wish, and, without cost to herself of
coach-hire or saddle-horse, sent the young gentleman very quickly to her
arms. The village in which the Hayeses dwelt was but a very few miles
out of the road from Bristol; whither, on the benevolent mission above,
hinted at, our party of worthies were bound: and coming, towards the
afternoon, in sight of the house of that very Justice Ballance who had
been so nearly the ruin of Ensign Macshane, that officer narrated, for
the hundredth time, and with much glee, the circumstances which had
then befallen him, and the manner in which Mrs. Hayes the elder had come
forward to his rescue.

"Suppose we go and see the old girl?" suggested Mr. Wood. "No harm can
come to us now." And his comrade always assenting, they wound their
way towards the village, and reached it as the evening came on. In the
public-house where they rested, Wood made inquiries concerning the
Hayes family; was informed of the death of the old couple, of the
establishment of John Hayes and his wife in their place, and of the kind
of life that these latter led together. When all these points had been
imparted to him, he ruminated much: an expression of sublime triumph and
exultation at length lighted up his features. "I think, Tim," said he at
last, "that we can make more than five pieces of that boy."

"Oh, in coorse!" said Timothy Macshane, Esquire; who always agreed with
his "Meejor."

"In coorse, you fool! and how? I'll tell you how. This Hayes is well to
do in the world, and--"

"And we'll nab him again--ha, ha!" roared out Macshane. "By my secred
honour, Meejor, there never was a gineral like you at a strathyjam!"

"Peace, you bellowing donkey, and don't wake the child. The man is well
to do, his wife rules him, and they have no children. Now, either she
will be very glad to have the boy back again, and pay for the finding of
him, or else she has said nothing about him, and will pay us for being
silent too: or, at any rate, Hayes himself will be ashamed at finding
his wife the mother of a child a year older than his marriage, and will
pay for the keeping of the brat away. There's profit, my dear, in any
one of the cases, or my name's not Peter Brock."

When the Ensign understood this wondrous argument, he would fain have
fallen on his knees and worshipped his friend and guide. They began
operations, almost immediately, by an attack on Mrs. Hayes. On hearing,
as she did in private interview with the ex-corporal the next morning,
that her son was found, she was agitated by both of the passions which
Wood attributed to her. She longed to have the boy back, and would give
any reasonable sum to see him; but she dreaded exposure, and would pay
equally to avoid that. How could she gain the one point and escape the
other?

Mrs. Hayes hit upon an expedient which, I am given to understand, is not
uncommon nowadays. She suddenly discovered that she had a dear brother,
who had been obliged to fly the country in consequence of having joined
the Pretender, and had died in France, leaving behind him an only son.
This boy her brother had, with his last breath, recommended to her
protection, and had confided him to the charge of a brother officer who
was now in the country, and would speedily make his appearance; and, to
put the story beyond a doubt, Mr. Wood wrote the letter from her
brother stating all these particulars, and Ensign Macshane received
full instructions how to perform the part of the "brother officer." What
consideration Mr. Wood received for his services, we cannot say; only
it is well known that Mr. Hayes caused to be committed to gaol a young
apprentice in his service, charged with having broken open a cupboard in
which Mr. Hayes had forty guineas in gold and silver, and to which none
but he and his wife had access.

Having made these arrangements, the Corporal and his little party
decamped to a short distance, and Mrs. Catherine was left to prepare
her husband for a speedy addition to his family, in the shape of this
darling nephew. John Hayes received the news with anything but pleasure.
He had never heard of any brother of Catherine's; she had been bred at
the workhouse, and nobody ever hinted that she had relatives: but it
is easy for a lady of moderate genius to invent circumstances; and with
lies, tears, threats, coaxings, oaths, and other blandishments, she
compelled him to submit.

Two days afterwards, as Mr. Hayes was working in his shop with his lady
seated beside him, the trampling of a horse was heard in his courtyard,
and a gentleman, of huge stature, descended from it, and strode into the
shop. His figure was wrapped in a large cloak; but Mr. Hayes could not
help fancying that he had somewhere seen his face before.

"This, I preshoom," said the gentleman, "is Misther Hayes, that I have
come so many miles to see, and this is his amiable lady? I was the
most intimate frind, madam, of your laminted brother, who died in King
Lewis's service, and whose last touching letthers I despatched to you
two days ago. I have with me a further precious token of my dear friend,
Captain Hall--it is HERE."

And so saying, the military gentleman, with one arm, removed his cloak,
and stretching forward the other into Hayes's face almost, stretched
likewise forward a little boy, grinning and sprawling in the air, and
prevented only from falling to the ground by the hold which the Ensign
kept of the waistband of his little coat and breeches.

"Isn't he a pretty boy?" said Mrs. Hayes, sidling up to her husband
tenderly, and pressing one of Mr. Hayes's hands.

                    *****

About the lad's beauty it is needless to say what the carpenter thought;
but that night, and for many many nights after, the lad stayed at Mr.
Hayes's.



CHAPTER VIII. ENUMERATES THE ACCOMPLISHMENTS OF MASTER THOMAS
BILLINGS--INTRODUCES BROCK AS DOCTOR WOOD--AND ANNOUNCES THE EXECUTION
OF ENSIGN MACSHANE.


We are obliged, in recording this history, to follow accurately that
great authority, the "Calendarium Newgaticum Roagorumque Registerium,"
of which every lover of literature, in the present day knows the value;
and as that remarkable work totally discards all the unities in its
narratives, and reckons the life of its heroes only by their actions,
and not by periods of time, we must follow in the wake of this mighty
ark--a humble cock-boat. When it pauses, we pause; when it runs ten
knots an hour, we run with the same celerity; and as, in order to carry
the reader from the penultimate chapter of this work unto the last
chapter, we were compelled to make him leap over a gap of seven blank
years, ten years more must likewise be granted to us before we are at
liberty to resume our history.

During that period, Master Thomas Billings had been under the especial
care of his mother; and, as may be imagined, he rather increased than
diminished the accomplishments for which he had been remarkable while
under the roof of his foster-father. And with this advantage, that while
at the blacksmith's, and only three or four years of age, his virtues
were necessarily appreciated only in his family circle and among those
few acquaintances of his own time of life whom a youth of three can be
expected to meet in the alleys or over the gutters of a small country
hamlet,--in his mothers residence, his circle extended with his own
growth, and he began to give proofs of those powers of which in
infancy there had been only encouraging indications. Thus it was nowise
remarkable that a child of four years should not know his letters, and
should have had a great disinclination to learn them; but when a
young man of fifteen showed the same creditable ignorance, the
same undeviating dislike, it was easy to see that he possessed much
resolution and perseverance. When it was remarked, too, that, in case of
any difference, he not only beat the usher, but by no means disdained to
torment and bully the very smallest boys of the school, it was easy to
see that his mind was comprehensive and careful, as well as courageous
and grasping. As it was said of the Duke of Wellington, in the
Peninsula, that he had a thought for everybody--from Lord Hill to the
smallest drummer in the army--in like manner Tom Billings bestowed HIS
attention on high and low; but in the shape of blows: he would fight the
strongest and kick the smallest, and was always at work with one or the
other. At thirteen, when he was removed from the establishment whither
he had been sent, he was the cock of the school out of doors, and the
very last boy in. He used to let the little boys and new-comers pass him
by, and laugh; but he always belaboured them unmercifully afterwards;
and then it was, he said, HIS turn to laugh. With such a pugnacious
turn, Tom Billings ought to have been made a soldier, and might have
died a marshal; but, by an unlucky ordinance of fate, he was made a
tailor, and died a--never mind what for the present; suffice it to say,
that he was suddenly cut off, at a very early period of his existence,
by a disease which has exercised considerable ravages among the British
youth.

By consulting the authority above mentioned, we find that Hayes did
not confine himself to the profession of a carpenter, or remain long
established in the country; but was induced, by the eager spirit of Mrs.
Catherine most probably, to try his fortune in the metropolis; where he
lived, flourished, and died. Oxford Road, Saint Giles's, and Tottenham
Court were, at various periods of his residence in town, inhabited
by him. At one place he carried on the business of greengrocer and
small-coalman; in another, he was carpenter, undertaker, and lender of
money to the poor; finally, he was a lodging-house keeper in the Oxford
or Tyburn Road; but continued to exercise the last-named charitable
profession.

Lending as he did upon pledges, and carrying on a pretty large trade,
it was not for him, of course, to inquire into the pedigree of all
the pieces of plate, the bales of cloth, swords, watches, wigs,
shoe-buckles, etc. that were confided by his friends to his keeping; but
it is clear that his friends had the requisite confidence in him, and
that he enjoyed the esteem of a class of characters who still live in
history, and are admired unto this very day. The mind loves to think
that, perhaps, in Mr. Hayes's back parlour the gallant Turpin might
have hob-and-nobbed with Mrs. Catherine; that here, perhaps, the noble
Sheppard might have cracked his joke, or quaffed his pint of rum. Who
knows but that Macheath and Paul Clifford may have crossed legs under
Hayes's dinner-table? But why pause to speculate on things that might
have been? why desert reality for fond imagination, or call up from
their honoured graves the sacred dead? I know not: and yet, in sooth, I
can never pass Cumberland Gate without a sigh, as I think of the gallant
cavaliers who traversed that road in old time. Pious priests accompanied
their triumphs; their chariots were surrounded by hosts of glittering
javelin-men. As the slave at the car of the Roman conqueror shouted,
"Remember thou art mortal!", before the eyes of the British warrior rode
the undertaker and his coffin, telling him that he too must die! Mark
well the spot! A hundred years ago Albion Street (where comic Power
dwelt, Milesia's darling son)--Albion Street was a desert. The square of
Connaught was without its penultimate, and, strictly speaking, NAUGHT.
The Edgware Road was then a road, 'tis true; with tinkling waggons
passing now and then, and fragrant walls of snowy hawthorn blossoms.
The ploughman whistled over Nutford Place; down the green solitudes of
Sovereign Street the merry milkmaid led the lowing kine. Here, then, in
the midst of green fields and sweet air--before ever omnibuses were,
and when Pineapple Turnpike and Terrace were alike unknown--here stood
Tyburn: and on the road towards it, perhaps to enjoy the prospect,
stood, in the year 1725, the habitation of Mr. John Hayes.

One fine morning in the year 1725, Mrs. Hayes, who had been abroad
in her best hat and riding-hood; Mr. Hayes, who for a wonder had
accompanied her; and Mrs. Springatt, a lodger, who for a remuneration
had the honour of sharing Mrs. Hayes's friendship and table: all
returned, smiling and rosy, at about half-past ten o'clock, from a
walk which they had taken to Bayswater. Many thousands of people were
likewise seen flocking down the Oxford Road; and you would rather
have thought, from the smartness of their appearance and the pleasure
depicted in their countenances, that they were just issuing from a
sermon, than quitting the ceremony which they had been to attend.

The fact is, that they had just been to see a gentleman hanged,--a
cheap pleasure, which the Hayes family never denied themselves; and they
returned home with a good appetite to breakfast, braced by the walk, and
tickled into hunger, as it were, by the spectacle. I can recollect, when
I was a gyp at Cambridge, that the "men" used to have breakfast-parties
for the very same purpose; and the exhibition of the morning acted
infallibly upon the stomach, and caused the young students to eat with
much voracity.

Well, Mrs. Catherine, a handsome, well-dressed, plump, rosy woman of
three or four and thirty (and when, my dear, is a woman handsomer than
at that age?), came in quite merrily from her walk, and entered the
back-parlour, which looked into a pleasant yard, or garden, whereon the
sun was shining very gaily; and where, at a table covered with a nice
white cloth, laid out with some silver mugs, too, and knives, all with
different crests and patterns, sat an old gentleman reading in an old
book.

"Here we are at last, Doctor," said Mrs. Hayes, "and here's his speech."
She produced the little halfpenny tract, which to this day is sold at
the gallows-foot upon the death of every offender. "I've seen a many men
turned off, to be sure; but I never did see one who bore it more like a
man than he did."

"My dear," said the gentleman addressed as Doctor, "he was as cool and
as brave as steel, and no more minded hanging than tooth-drawing."

"It was the drink that ruined him," said Mrs. Cat.

"Drink, and bad company. I warned him, my dear,--I warned him years ago:
and directly he got into Wild's gang, I knew that he had not a year
to run. Ah, why, my love, will men continue such dangerous courses,"
continued the Doctor, with a sigh, "and jeopardy their lives for a
miserable watch or a snuff-box, of which Mr. Wild takes three-fourths of
the produce? But here comes the breakfast; and, egad, I am as hungry as
a lad of twenty."

Indeed, at this moment Mrs. Hayes's servant appeared with a smoking dish
of bacon and greens; and Mr. Hayes himself ascended from the cellar
(of which he kept the key), bearing with him a tolerably large jug
of small-beer. To this repast the Doctor, Mrs. Springatt (the other
lodger), and Mr. and Mrs. Hayes, proceeded with great alacrity. A fifth
cover was laid, but not used; the company remarking that "Tom had very
likely found some acquaintances at Tyburn, with whom he might choose to
pass the morning."

Tom was Master Thomas Billings, now of the age of sixteen: slim,
smart, five feet ten inches in height, handsome, sallow in complexion,
black-eyed and black-haired. Mr. Billings was apprentice to a tailor, of
tolerable practice, who was to take him into partnership at the end of
his term. It was supposed, and with reason, that Tom would not fail
to make a fortune in this business; of which the present head was one
Beinkleider, a German. Beinkleider was skilful in his trade (after
the manner of his nation, which in breeches and metaphysics--in
inexpressibles and incomprehensibles--may instruct all Europe), but too
fond of his pleasure. Some promissory notes of his had found their way
into Hayes's hands, and had given him the means not only of providing
Master Billings with a cheap apprenticeship, and a cheap partnership
afterwards; but would empower him, in one or two years after the young
partner had joined the firm, to eject the old one altogether. So that
there was every prospect that, when Mr. Billings was twenty-one years
of age, poor Beinkleider would have to act, not as his master, but his
journeyman.

Tom was a very precocious youth; was supplied by a doting mother with
plenty of pocket-money, and spent it with a number of lively companions
of both sexes, at plays, bull-baitings, fairs, jolly parties on the
river, and such-like innocent amusements. He could throw a main, too, as
well as his elders; had pinked his man, in a row at Madam King's in the
Piazza; and was much respected at the Roundhouse.

Mr. Hayes was not very fond of this promising young gentleman; indeed,
he had the baseness to bear malice, because, in a quarrel which occurred
about two years previously, he, Hayes, being desirous to chastise Mr.
Billings, had found himself not only quite incompetent, but actually at
the mercy of the boy; who struck him over the head with a joint-stool,
felled him to the ground, and swore he would have his life. The Doctor,
who was then also a lodger at Mr. Hayes's, interposed, and restored
the combatants, not to friendship, but to peace. Hayes never afterwards
attempted to lift his hand to the young man, but contented himself
with hating him profoundly. In this sentiment Mr. Billings participated
cordially; and, quite unlike Mr. Hayes, who never dared to show his
dislike, used on every occasion when they met, by actions, looks, words,
sneers, and curses, to let his stepfather know the opinion which he had
of him. Why did not Hayes discard the boy altogether? Because, if he
did so, he was really afraid of his life, and because he trembled
before Mrs. Hayes, his lady, as the leaf trembles before the tempest in
October. His breath was not his own, but hers; his money, too, had been
chiefly of her getting,--for though he was as stingy and mean as mortal
man can be, and so likely to save much, he had not the genius for
GETTING which Mrs. Hayes possessed. She kept his books (for she had
learned to read and write by this time), she made his bargains, and she
directed the operations of the poor-spirited little capitalist. When
bills became due, and debtors pressed for time, then she brought Hayes's
own professional merits into play. The man was as deaf and cold as a
rock; never did poor tradesmen gain a penny from him; never were the
bailiffs delayed one single minute from their prey. The Beinkleider
business, for instance, showed pretty well the genius of the two. Hayes
was for closing with him at once; but his wife saw the vast profits
which might be drawn out of him, and arranged the apprenticeship and the
partnership before alluded to. The woman heartily scorned and spit upon
her husband, who fawned upon her like a spaniel. She loved good cheer;
she did not want for a certain kind of generosity. The only feeling that
Hayes had for anyone except himself was for his wife, whom he held in
a cowardly awe and attachment: he liked drink, too, which made
him chirping and merry, and accepted willingly any treats that his
acquaintances might offer him; but he would suffer agonies when his wife
brought or ordered from the cellar a bottle of wine.

And now for the Doctor. He was about seventy years of age. He had been
much abroad; he was of a sober, cheerful aspect; he dressed handsomely
and quietly in a broad hat and cassock; but saw no company except the
few friends whom he met at the coffee-house. He had an income of about
one hundred pounds, which he promised to leave to young Billings. He was
amused with the lad, and fond of his mother, and had boarded with them
for some years past. The Doctor, in fact, was our old friend Corporal
Brock, the Reverend Doctor Wood now, as he had been Major Wood fifteen
years back.

Anyone who has read the former part of this history must have seen that
we have spoken throughout with invariable respect of Mr. Brock; and that
in every circumstance in which he has appeared, he has acted not only
with prudence, but often with genius. The early obstacle to Mr. Brock's
success was want of conduct simply. Drink, women, play--how many a brave
fellow have they ruined!--had pulled Brock down as often as his merit
had carried him up. When a man's passion for play has brought him to be
a scoundrel, it at once ceases to be hurtful to him in a worldly point
of view; he cheats, and wins. It is only for the idle and luxurious
that women retain their fascinations to a very late period; and Brock's
passions had been whipped out of him in Virginia; where much ill-health,
ill-treatment, hard labour, and hard food, speedily put an end to them.
He forgot there even how to drink; rum or wine made this poor declining
gentleman so ill that he could indulge in them no longer; and so his
three vices were cured.

Had he been ambitious, there is little doubt but that Mr. Brock, on his
return from transportation, might have risen in the world; but he was
old and a philosopher: he did not care about rising. Living was cheaper
in those days, and interest for money higher: when he had amassed about
six hundred pounds, he purchased an annuity of seventy-two pounds, and
gave out--why should he not?--that he had the capital as well as the
interest. After leaving the Hayes family in the country, he found them
again in London: he took up his abode with them, and was attached to the
mother and the son. Do you suppose that rascals have not affections
like other people? hearts, madam--ay, hearts--and family ties which they
cherish? As the Doctor lived on with this charming family he began to
regret that he had sunk all his money in annuities, and could not, as he
repeatedly vowed he would, leave his savings to his adopted children.

He felt an indescribable pleasure ("suave mari magno," etc.) in watching
the storms and tempests of the Hayes menage. He used to encourage Mrs.
Catherine into anger when, haply, that lady's fits of calm would last
too long; he used to warm up the disputes between wife and husband,
mother and son, and enjoy them beyond expression: they served him for
daily amusement; and he used to laugh until the tears ran down his
venerable cheeks at the accounts which young Tom continually brought
him of his pranks abroad, among watchmen and constables, at taverns or
elsewhere.

When, therefore, as the party were discussing their bacon and cabbage,
before which the Reverend Doctor with much gravity said grace, Master
Tom entered. Doctor Wood, who had before been rather gloomy, immediately
brightened up, and made a place for Billings between himself and Mrs.
Catherine.

"How do, old cock?" said that young gentleman familiarly. "How goes it,
mother?" And so saying, he seized eagerly upon the jug of beer which Mr.
Hayes had drawn, and from which the latter was about to help himself,
and poured down his throat exactly one quart.

"Ah!" said Mr. Billings, drawing breath after a draught which he had
learned accurately to gauge from the habit of drinking out of pewter
measures which held precisely that quantity.--"Ah!" said Mr. Billings,
drawing breath, and wiping his mouth with his sleeves, "this is very
thin stuff, old Squaretoes; but my coppers have been red-hot since last
night, and they wanted a sluicing."

"Should you like some ale, dear?" said Mrs. Hayes, that fond and
judicious parent.

"A quart of brandy, Tom?" said Doctor Wood. "Your papa will run down to
the cellar for it in a minute."

"I'll see him hanged first!" cried Mr. Hayes, quite frightened.

"Oh, fie, now, you unnatural father!" said the Doctor.

The very name of father used to put Mr. Hayes in a fury. "I'm not his
father, thank Heaven!" said he.

"No, nor nobody else's," said Tom.

Mr. Hayes only muttered "Base-born brat!"

"His father was a gentleman,--that's more than you ever were!" screamed
Mrs. Hayes. "His father was a man of spirit; no cowardly sneak of a
carpenter, Mr Hayes! Tom has noble blood in his veins, for all he has a
tailor's appearance; and if his mother had had her right, she would be
now in a coach-and-six."

"I wish I could find my father," said Tom; "for I think Polly Briggs and
I would look mighty well in a coach-and-six." Tom fancied that if his
father was a count at the time of his birth, he must be a prince now;
and, indeed, went among his companions by the latter august title.

"Ay, Tom, that you would," cried his mother, looking at him fondly.

"With a sword by my side, and a hat and feather there's never a lord at
St. James's would cut a finer figure."

After a little more of this talk, in which Mrs. Hayes let the company
know her high opinion of her son--who, as usual, took care to show
his extreme contempt for his stepfather--the latter retired to his
occupations; the lodger, Mrs. Springatt, who had never said a word all
this time, retired to her apartment on the second floor; and, pulling
out their pipes and tobacco, the old gentleman and the young one solaced
themselves with half-an-hour's more talk and smoking; while the thrifty
Mrs. Hayes, opposite to them, was busy with her books.

"What's in the confessions?" said Mr. Billings to Doctor Wood. "There
were six of 'em besides Mac: two for sheep, four housebreakers; but
nothing of consequence, I fancy."

"There's the paper," said Wood, archly. "Read for yourself, Tom."

Mr. Tom looked at the same time very fierce and very foolish; for,
though he could drink, swear, and fight as well as any lad of his inches
in England, reading was not among his accomplishments. "I tell you what,
Doctor," said he, "---- you! have no bantering with me,--for I'm not the
man that will bear it, ---- me!" and he threw a tremendous swaggering look
across the table.

"I want you to learn to read, Tommy dear. Look at your mother there over
her books: she keeps them as neat as a scrivener now, and at twenty she
could make never a stroke."

"Your godfather speaks for your good, child; and for me, thou knowest
that I have promised thee a gold-headed cane and periwig on the first
day that thou canst read me a column of the Flying Post."

"Hang the periwig!" said Mr. Tom, testily. "Let my godfather read the
paper himself, if he has a liking for it."

Whereupon the old gentleman put on his spectacles, and glanced over
the sheet of whity-brown paper, which, ornamented with a picture of
a gallows at the top, contained the biographies of the seven unlucky
individuals who had that morning suffered the penalty of the law. With
the six heroes who came first in the list we have nothing to do; but
have before us a copy of the paper containing the life of No. 7, and
which the Doctor read in an audible voice.

                     "CAPTAIN MACSHANE.

"The seventh victim to his own crimes was the famous highwayman, Captain
Macshane, so well known as the Irish Fire-eater.

"The Captain came to the ground in a fine white lawn shirt and nightcap;
and, being a Papist in his religion, was attended by Father O'Flaherty,
Popish priest, and chaplain to the Bavarian Envoy.

"Captain Macshane was born of respectable parents, in the town of
Clonakilty, in Ireland, being descended from most of the kings in that
country. He had the honour of serving their Majesties King William
and Queen Mary, and Her Majesty Queen Anne, in Flanders and Spain, and
obtained much credit from my Lords Marlborough and Peterborough for his
valour.

"But being placed on half-pay at the end of the war, Ensign Macshane
took to evil courses; and, frequenting the bagnios and dice-houses, was
speedily brought to ruin.

"Being at this pass, he fell in with the notorious Captain Wood, and
they two together committed many atrocious robberies in the inland
counties; but these being too hot to hold them, they went into the west,
where they were unknown. Here, however, the day of retribution arrived;
for, having stolen three pewter-pots from a public-house, they, under
false names, were tried at Exeter, and transported for seven years
beyond the sea. Thus it is seen that Justice never sleeps; but, sooner
or latter, is sure to overtake the criminal.

"On their return from Virginia, a quarrel about booty arose between
these two, and Macshane killed Wood in a combat that took place between
them near to the town of Bristol; but a waggon coming up, Macshane
was obliged to fly without the ill-gotten wealth: so true is it, that
wickedness never prospers.

"Two days afterwards, Macshane met the coach of Miss Macraw, a Scotch
lady and heiress, going, for lumbago and gout, to the Bath. He at first
would have robbed this lady; but such were his arts, that he induced
her to marry him; and they lived together for seven years in the town of
Eddenboro, in Scotland,--he passing under the name of Colonel Geraldine.
The lady dying, and Macshane having expended all her wealth, he was
obliged to resume his former evil courses, in order to save himself
from starvation; whereupon he robbed a Scotch lord, by name the Lord of
Whistlebinkie, of a mull of snuff; for which crime he was condemned to
the Tolbooth prison at Eddenboro, in Scotland, and whipped many times in
publick.

"These deserved punishments did not at all alter Captain Macshane's
disposition; and on the 17th of February last, he stopped the Bavarian
Envoy's coach on Blackheath, coming from Dover, and robbed his
Excellency and his chaplain; taking from the former his money, watches,
star, a fur-cloak, his sword (a very valuable one); and from the latter
a Romish missal, out of which he was then reading, and a case-bottle."

"The Bavarian Envoy!" said Tom parenthetically. "My master, Beinkleider,
was his Lordship's regimental tailor in Germany, and is now making a
Court suit for him. It will be a matter of a hundred pounds to him, I
warrant."

Doctor Wood resumed his reading. "Hum--hum! A Romish missal, out of
which he was reading, and a case-bottle.

"By means of the famous Mr. Wild, this notorious criminal was brought
to justice, and the case-bottle and missal have been restored to Father
O'Flaherty.

"During his confinement in Newgate, Mr. Macshane could not be brought to
express any contrition for his crimes, except that of having killed his
commanding officer. For this Wood he pretended an excessive sorrow,
and vowed that usquebaugh had been the cause of his death,--indeed, in
prison he partook of no other liquor, and drunk a bottle of it on the
day before his death.

"He was visited by several of the clergy and gentry in his cell; among
others, by the Popish priest whom he had robbed, Father O'Flaherty,
before mentioned, who attended him likewise in his last moments (if
that idolatrous worship may be called attention), and likewise by
the Father's patron, the Bavarian Ambassador, his Excellency Count
Maximilian de Galgenstein."

As old Wood came to these words, he paused to give them utterance.

"What! Max?" screamed Mrs. Hayes, letting her ink-bottle fall over her
ledgers.

"Why, be hanged if it ben't my father!" said Mr. Billings.

"Your father, sure enough, unless there be others of his name, and
unless the scoundrel is hanged," said the Doctor--sinking his voice,
however, at the end of the sentence.

Mr. Billings broke his pipe in an agony of joy. "I think we'll have the
coach now, Mother," says he; "and I'm blessed if Polly Briggs shall not
look as fine as a duchess."

"Polly Briggs is a low slut, Tom, and not fit for the likes of you, his
Excellency's son. Oh, fie! You must be a gentleman now, sirrah; and
I doubt whether I shan't take you away from that odious tailor's shop
altogether."

To this proposition Mr. Billings objected altogether; for, besides Mrs.
Briggs before alluded to, the young gentleman was much attached to his
master's daughter, Mrs. Margaret Gretel, or Gretchen Beinkleider.

"No," says he. "There will be time to think of that hereafter, ma'am. If
my pa makes a man of me, why, of course, the shop may go to the deuce,
for what I care; but we had better wait, look you, for something certain
before we give up such a pretty bird in the hand as this."

"He speaks like Solomon," said the Doctor.

"I always said he would be a credit to his old mother, didn't I, Brock?"
cried Mrs. Cat, embracing her son very affectionately. "A credit to her;
ay, I warrant, a real blessing! And dost thou want any money, Tom? for
a lord's son must not go about without a few pieces in his pocket. And I
tell thee, Tommy, thou must go and see his Lordship; and thou shalt
have a piece of brocade for a waistcoat, thou shalt; ay, and the
silver-hilted sword I told thee of; but oh, Tommy, Tommy! have a care,
and don't be a-drawing of it in naughty company at the gaming-houses, or
at the--"

"A drawing of fiddlesticks, Mother! If I go to see my father, I must
have a reason for it; and instead of going with a sword in my hand, I
shall take something else in it."

"The lad IS a lad of nous," cried Doctor Wood, "although his mother does
spoil him so cruelly. Look you, Madam Cat: did you not hear what he said
about Beinkleider and the clothes? Tommy will just wait on the Count
with his Lordship's breeches. A man may learn a deal of news in the
trying on of a pair of breeches."

And so it was agreed that in this manner the son should at first
make his appearance before his father. Mrs. Cat gave him the piece of
brocade, which, in the course of the day, was fashioned into a smart
waistcoat (for Beinkleider's shop was close by, in Cavendish Square).
Mrs. Gretel, with many blushes, tied a fine blue riband round his neck;
and, in a pair of silk stockings, with gold buckles to his shoes, Master
Billings looked a very proper young gentleman.

"And, Tommy," said his mother, blushing and hesitating, "should
Max--should his Lordship ask after your--want to know if your mother is
alive, you can say she is, and well, and often talks of old times. And,
Tommy" (after another pause), "you needn't say anything about Mr. Hayes;
only say I'm quite well."

Mrs. Hayes looked at him as he marched down the street, a long long way.
Tom was proud and gay in his new costume, and was not unlike his father.
As she looked, lo! Oxford Street disappeared, and she saw a green
common, and a village, and a little inn. There was a soldier leading a
pair of horses about on the green common; and in the inn sat a cavalier,
so young, so merry, so beautiful! Oh, what slim white hands he had; and
winning words, and tender, gentle blue eyes! Was it not an honour to
a country lass that such a noble gentleman should look at her for a
moment? Had he not some charm about him that she must needs obey when he
whispered in her ear, "Come, follow me!" As she walked towards the lane
that morning, how well she remembered each spot as she passed it, and
the look it wore for the last time! How the smoke was rising from the
pastures, how the fish were jumping and plashing in the mill-stream!
There was the church, with all its windows lighted up with gold, and
yonder were the reapers sweeping down the brown corn. She tried to sing
as she went up the hill--what was it? She could not remember; but oh,
how well she remembered the sound of the horse's hoofs, as they came
quicker, quicker--nearer, nearer! How noble he looked on his great
horse! Was he thinking of her, or were they all silly words which he
spoke last night, merely to pass away the time and deceive poor girls
with? Would he remember them,--would he?

"Cat my dear," here cried Mr. Brock, alias Captain, alias Doctor Wood,
"here's the meat a-getting cold, and I am longing for my breakfast."

As they went in he looked her hard in the face. "What, still at it,
you silly girl? I've been watching you these five minutes, Cat; and be
hanged but I think a word from Galgenstein, and you would follow him as
a fly does a treacle-pot!"

They went in to breakfast; but though there was a hot shoulder of mutton
and onion-sauce--Mrs. Catherine's favourite dish--she never touched a
morsel of it.

In the meanwhile Mr. Thomas Billings, in his new clothes which his mamma
had given him, in his new riband which the fair Miss Beinkleider had
tied round his neck, and having his Excellency's breeches wrapped in
a silk handkerchief in his right hand, turned down in the direction of
Whitehall, where the Bavarian Envoy lodged. But, before he waited
on him, Mr. Billings, being excessively pleased with his personal
appearance, made an early visit to Mrs. Briggs, who lived in the
neighbourhood of Swallow Street; and who, after expressing herself with
much enthusiasm regarding her Tommy's good looks, immediately asked him
what he would stand to drink? Raspberry gin being suggested, a pint of
that liquor was sent for; and so great was the confidence and intimacy
subsisting between these two young people, that the reader will be glad
to hear that Mrs. Polly accepted every shilling of the money which Tom
Billings had received from his mamma the day before; nay, could with
difficulty be prevented from seizing upon the cut-velvet breeches which
he was carrying to the nobleman for whom they were made. Having paid his
adieux to Mrs. Polly, Mr. Billings departed to visit his father.



CHAPTER IX. INTERVIEW BETWEEN COUNT GALGENSTEIN AND MASTER THOMAS
BILLINGS, WHEN HE INFORMS THE COUNT OF HIS PARENTAGE.


I don't know in all this miserable world a more miserable spectacle than
that of a young fellow of five or six and forty. The British army, that
nursery of valour, turns out many of the young fellows I mean: who,
having flaunted in dragoon uniforms from seventeen to six-and-thirty;
having bought, sold, or swapped during that period some two hundred
horses; having played, say, fifteen thousand games at billiards; having
drunk some six thousand bottles of wine; having consumed a reasonable
number of Nugee coats, split many dozen pairs of high-heeled Hoby boots,
and read the newspaper and the army-list duly, retire from the service
when they have attained their eighth lustre, and saunter through the
world, trailing from London to Cheltenham, and from Boulogne to Paris,
and from Paris to Baden, their idleness, their ill-health, and their
ennui. "In the morning of youth," and when seen along with whole troops
of their companions, these flowers look gaudy and brilliant enough;
but there is no object more dismal than one of them alone, and in its
autumnal, or seedy state. My friend, Captain Popjoy, is one who has
arrived at this condition, and whom everybody knows by his title of
Father Pop. A kinder, simpler, more empty-headed fellow does not exist.
He is forty-seven years old, and appears a young, good-looking man
of sixty. At the time of the Army of Occupation he really was as
good-looking a man as any in the Dragoons. He now uses all sorts of
stratagems to cover the bald place on his head, by combing certain
thin grey sidelocks over it. He has, in revenge, a pair of enormous
moustaches, which he dyes of the richest blue-black. His nose is a good
deal larger and redder than it used to be; his eyelids have grown flat
and heavy; and a little pair of red, watery eyeballs float in the midst
of them: it seems as if the light which was once in those sickly green
pupils had extravasated into the white part of the eye. If Pop's legs
are not so firm and muscular as they used to be in those days when he
took such leaps into White's buckskins, in revenge his waist is much
larger. He wears a very good coat, however, and a waistband, which he
lets out after dinner. Before ladies he blushes, and is as silent as a
schoolboy. He calls them "modest women." His society is chiefly among
young lads belonging to his former profession. He knows the best wine
to be had at each tavern or cafe, and the waiters treat him with much
respectful familiarity. He knows the names of every one of them; and
shouts out, "Send Markwell here!" or, "Tell Cuttriss to give us a bottle
of the yellow seal!" or, "Dizzy voo, Monsure Borrel, noo donny shampang
frappy," etc. He always makes the salad or the punch, and dines
out three hundred days in the year: the other days you see him in a
two-franc eating-house at Paris, or prowling about Rupert Street, or St.
Martin's Court, where you get a capital cut of meat for eightpence. He
has decent lodgings and scrupulously clean linen; his animal functions
are still tolerably well preserved, his spiritual have evaporated long
since; he sleeps well, has no conscience, believes himself to be a
respectable fellow, and is tolerably happy on the days when he is asked
out to dinner.

Poor Pop is not very high in the scale of created beings; but, if you
fancy there is none lower, you are in egregious error. There was once
a man who had a mysterious exhibition of an animal, quite unknown to
naturalists, called "the wusser." Those curious individuals who desired
to see the wusser were introduced into an apartment where appeared
before them nothing more than a little lean shrivelled hideous
blear-eyed mangy pig. Everyone cried out "Swindle!" and "Shame!"
"Patience, gentlemen, be heasy," said the showman: "look at that there
hanimal; it's a perfect phenomaly of hugliness: I engage you never see
such a pig." Nobody ever had seen. "Now, gentlemen," said he, "I'll keep
my promise, has per bill; and bad as that there pig is, look at this
here" (he showed another). "Look at this here, and you'll see at once
that it's A WUSSER." In like manner the Popjoy breed is bad enough, but
it serves only to show off the Galgenstein race; which is WUSSER.

Galgenstein had led a very gay life, as the saying is, for the last
fifteen years; such a gay one, that he had lost all capacity of
enjoyment by this time, and only possessed inclinations without
powers of gratifying them. He had grown to be exquisitely curious and
fastidious about meat and drink, for instance, and all that he wanted
was an appetite. He carried about with him a French cook, who could not
make him eat; a doctor, who could not make him well; a mistress, of whom
he was heartily sick after two days; a priest, who had been a favourite
of the exemplary Dubois, and by turns used to tickle him by the
imposition of penance, or by the repetition of a tale from the recueil
of Noce, or La Fare. All his appetites were wasted and worn; only some
monstrosity would galvanise them into momentary action. He was in that
effete state to which many noblemen of his time had arrived; who were
ready to believe in ghost-raising or in gold-making, or to retire into
monasteries and wear hair-shirts, or to dabble in conspiracies, or to
die in love with little cook-maids of fifteen, or to pine for the smiles
or at the frowns of a prince of the blood, or to go mad at the refusal
of a chamberlain's key. The last gratification he remembered to have
enjoyed was that of riding bareheaded in a soaking rain for three hours
by the side of his Grand Duke's mistress's coach; taking the pas of
Count Krahwinkel, who challenged him, and was run through the body for
this very dispute. Galgenstein gained a rheumatic gout by it, which put
him to tortures for many months; and was further gratified with the post
of English Envoy. He had a fortune, he asked no salary, and could
look the envoy very well. Father O'Flaherty did all the duties, and
furthermore acted as a spy over the ambassador--a sinecure post, for the
man had no feelings, wishes, or opinions--absolutely none.

"Upon my life, father," said this worthy man, "I care for nothing. You
have been talking for an hour about the Regent's death, and the Duchess
of Phalaris, and sly old Fleury, and what not; and I care just as much
as if you told me that one of my bauers at Galgenstein had killed a pig;
or as if my lacquey, La Rose yonder, had made love to my mistress."

"He does!" said the reverend gentleman.

"Ah, Monsieur l'Abbe!" said La Rose, who was arranging his master's
enormous Court periwig, "you are, helas! wrong. Monsieur le Comte will
not be angry at my saying that I wish the accusation were true."

The Count did not take the slightest notice of La Rose's wit, but
continued his own complaints.

"I tell you, Abbe, I care for nothing. I lost a thousand guineas t'other
night at basset; I wish to my heart I could have been vexed about it.
Egad! I remember the day when to lose a hundred made me half mad for
a month. Well, next day I had my revenge at dice, and threw thirteen
mains. There was some delay; a call for fresh bones, I think; and would
you believe it?--I fell asleep with the box in my hand!"

"A desperate case, indeed," said the Abbe.

"If it had not been for Krahwinkel, I should have been a dead man,
that's positive. That pinking him saved me."

"I make no doubt of it," said the Abbe. "Had your Excellency not run him
through, he, without a doubt, would have done the same for you."

"Psha! you mistake my words, Monsieur l'Abbe" (yawning). "I mean--what
cursed chocolate!--that I was dying for want of excitement. Not that I
cared for dying; no, d---- me if I do!"

"WHEN you do, your Excellency means," said the Abbe, a fat grey-haired
Irishman, from the Irlandois College at Paris.

His Excellency did not laugh, nor understand jokes of any kind; he was
of an undeviating stupidity, and only replied, "Sir, I mean what I say.
I don't care for living: no, nor for dying either; but I can speak as
well as another, and I'll thank you not to be correcting my phrases as
if I were one of your cursed schoolboys, and not a gentleman of fortune
and blood."

Herewith the Count, who had uttered four sentences about himself (he
never spoke of anything else), sunk back on his pillows again, quite
exhausted by his eloquence. The Abbe, who had a seat and a table by the
bedside, resumed the labours which had brought him into the room in the
morning, and busied himself with papers, which occasionally he handed
over to his superior for approval.

Presently Monsieur la Rose appeared.

"Here is a person with clothes from Mr. Beinkleider's. Will your
Excellency see him, or shall I bid him leave the clothes?"

The Count was very much fatigued by this time; he had signed three
papers, and read the first half-a-dozen lines of a pair of them.

"Bid the fellow come in, La Rose; and, hark ye, give me my wig: one
must show one's self to be a gentleman before these scoundrels." And he
therefore mounted a large chestnut-coloured, orange-scented pyramid of
horsehair, which was to awe the new-comer.

He was a lad of about seventeen, in a smart waistcoat and a blue riband:
our friend Tom Billings, indeed. He carried under his arm the Count's
destined breeches. He did not seem in the least awed, however, by
his Excellency's appearance, but looked at him with a great degree of
curiosity and boldness. In the same manner he surveyed the chaplain, and
then nodded to him with a kind look of recognition.

"Where have I seen the lad?" said the father. "Oh, I have it! My good
friend, you were at the hanging yesterday, I think?"

Mr. Billings gave a very significant nod with his head. "I never miss,"
said he.

"What a young Turk! And pray, sir, do you go for pleasure, or for
business?"

"Business! what do you mean by business?"

"Oh, I did not know whether you might be brought up to the trade, or
your relations be undergoing the operation."

"My relations," said Mr. Billings, proudly, and staring the Count full
in the face, "was not made for no such thing. I'm a tailor now, but I'm
a gentleman's son: as good a man, ay, as his lordship there: for YOU
a'n't his lordship--you're the Popish priest you are; and we were very
near giving you a touch of a few Protestant stones, master."

The Count began to be a little amused: he was pleased to see the Abbe
look alarmed, or even foolish.

"Egad, Abbe," said he, "you turn as white as a sheet."

"I don't fancy being murdered, my Lord," said the Abbe, hastily;
"and murdered for a good work. It was but to be useful to yonder poor
Irishman, who saved me as a prisoner in Flanders, when Marlborough would
have hung me up like poor Macshane himself was yesterday."

"Ah!" said the Count, bursting out with some energy, "I was thinking who
the fellow could be, ever since he robbed me on the Heath. I recollect
the scoundrel now: he was a second in a duel I had here in the year
six."

"Along with Major Wood, behind Montague House," said Mr. Billings. "I'VE
heard on it." And here he looked more knowing than ever.

"YOU!" cried the Count, more and more surprised. "And pray who the devil
ARE you?"

"My name's Billings."

"Billings?" said the Count.

"I come out of Warwickshire," said Mr. Billings.

"Indeed!"

"I was born at Birmingham town."

"Were you, really!"

"My mother's name was Hayes," continued Billings, in a solemn voice. "I
was put out to a nurse along with John Billings, a blacksmith; and my
father run away. NOW do you know who I am?"

"Why, upon honour, now," said the Count, who was amused,--"upon honour,
Mr. Billings, I have not that advantage."

"Well, then, my Lord, YOU'RE MY FATHER!"

Mr. Billings when he said this came forward to the Count with a
theatrical air; and, flinging down the breeches of which he was the
bearer, held out his arms and stared, having very little doubt but that
his Lordship would forthwith spring out of bed and hug him to his heart.
A similar piece of naivete many fathers of families have, I have no
doubt, remarked in their children; who, not caring for their parents a
single doit, conceive, nevertheless, that the latter are bound to show
all sorts of affection for them. His lordship did move, but backwards
towards the wall, and began pulling at the bell-rope with an expression
of the most intense alarm.

"Keep back, sirrah!--keep back! Suppose I AM your father, do you want
to murder me? Good heavens! how the boy smells of gin and tobacco! Don't
turn away, my lad; sit down there at a proper distance. And, La Rose,
give him some eau-de-Cologne, and get a cup of coffee. Well, now, go on
with your story. Egad, my dear Abbe, I think it is very likely that what
the lad says is true."

"If it is a family conversation," said the Abbe, "I had better leave
you."

"Oh, for Heaven's sake, no! I could not stand the boy alone. Now, Mister
ah!--What's-your-name? Have the goodness to tell your story."

Mr. Billings was woefully disconcerted; for his mother and he had agreed
that as soon as his father saw him he would be recognised at once, and,
mayhap, made heir to the estates and title; in which being disappointed,
he very sulkily went on with his narrative, and detailed many of those
events with which the reader has already been made acquainted. The Count
asked the boy's mother's Christian name, and being told it, his memory
at once returned to him.

"What! are you little Cat's son?" said his Excellency. "By heavens, mon
cher Abbe, a charming creature, but a tigress--positively a tigress. I
recollect the whole affair now. She's a little fresh black-haired woman,
a'n't she? with a sharp nose and thick eyebrows, ay? Ah yes, yes!" went
on my Lord, "I recollect her, I recollect her. It was at Birmingham I
first met her: she was my Lady Trippet's woman, wasn't she?"

"She was no such thing," said Mr. Billings, hotly. "Her aunt kept the
'Bugle Inn' on Waltham Green, and your Lordship seduced her."

"Seduced her! Oh, 'gad, so I did. Stap me, now, I did. Yes, I made her
jump on my black horse, and bore her off like--like Aeneas bore his wife
away from the siege of Rome! hey, l'Abbe?"

"The events were precisely similar," said the Abbe. "It is wonderful
what a memory you have!"

"I was always remarkable for it," continued his Excellency. "Well, where
was I,--at the black horse? Yes, at the black horse. Well, I mounted
her on the black horse, and rode her en croupe, egad--ha, ha!--to
Birmingham; and there we billed and cooed together like a pair of
turtle-doves: yes--ha!--that we did!"

"And this, I suppose, is the end of some of the BILLINGS?" said the
Abbe, pointing to Mr. Tom.

"Billings! what do you mean? Yes--oh--ah--a pun, a calembourg. Fi
donc, M. l'Abbe." And then, after the wont of very stupid people, M. de
Galgenstein went on to explain to the Abbe his own pun. "Well, but to
proceed," cries he. "We lived together at Birmingham, and I was going to
be married to a rich heiress, egad! when what do you think this little
Cat does? She murders me, egad! and makes me manquer the marriage.
Twenty thousand, I think it was; and I wanted the money in those days.
Now, wasn't she an abominable monster, that mother of yours, hey, Mr.
a--What's-your-name?"

"She served you right!" said Mr. Billings, with a great oath, starting
up out of all patience.

"Fellow!" said his Excellency, quite aghast, "do you know to whom you
speak?--to a nobleman of seventy-eight descents; a count of the Holy
Roman Empire; a representative of a sovereign? Ha, egad! Don't stamp,
fellow, if you hope for my protection."

"D--n your protection!" said Mr. Billings, in a fury. "Curse you and
your protection too! I'm a free-born Briton, and no ---- French Papist!
And any man who insults my mother--ay, or calls me feller--had better
look to himself and the two eyes in his head, I can tell him!" And with
this Mr. Billings put himself into the most approved attitude of the
Cockpit, and invited his father, the reverend gentleman, and Monsieur
la Rose the valet, to engage with him in a pugilistic encounter. The two
latter, the Abbe especially, seemed dreadfully frightened; but the Count
now looked on with much interest; and, giving utterance to a feeble kind
of chuckle, which lasted for about half a minute, said,--

"Paws off, Pompey! You young hangdog, you--egad, yes, aha! 'pon honour,
you're a lad of spirit; some of your father's spunk in you, hey? I know
him by that oath. Why, sir, when I was sixteen, I used to swear--to
swear, egad, like a Thames waterman, and exactly in this fellow's way!
Buss me, my lad; no, kiss my hand. That will do"--and he held out a very
lean yellow hand, peering from a pair of yellow ruffles. It shook very
much, and the shaking made all the rings upon it shine only the more.

"Well," says Mr. Billings, "if you wasn't a-going to abuse me nor
mother, I don't care if I shake hands with you. I ain't proud!"

The Abbe laughed with great glee; and that very evening sent off to his
Court a most ludicrous spicy description of the whole scene of meeting
between this amiable father and child; in which he said that young
Billings was the eleve favori of M. Kitch, Ecuyer, le bourreau de
Londres, and which made the Duke's mistress laugh so much that she vowed
that the Abbe should have a bishopric on his return: for, with such
store of wisdom, look you, my son, was the world governed in those days.

The Count and his offspring meanwhile conversed with some cordiality.
The former informed the latter of all the diseases to which he
was subject, his manner of curing them, his great consideration as
chamberlain to the Duke of Bavaria; how he wore his Court suits, and of
a particular powder which he had invented for the hair; how, when he
was seventeen, he had run away with a canoness, egad! who was afterwards
locked up in a convent, and grew to be sixteen stone in weight; how
he remembered the time when ladies did not wear patches; and how the
Duchess of Marlborough boxed his ears when he was so high, because he
wanted to kiss her.

All these important anecdotes took some time in the telling, and were
accompanied by many profound moral remarks; such as, "I can't abide
garlic, nor white-wine, stap me! nor Sauerkraut, though his Highness
eats half a bushel per day. I ate it the first time at Court; but when
they brought it me a second time, I refused--refused, split me and grill
me if I didn't! Everybody stared; his Highness looked as fierce as
a Turk; and that infernal Krahwinkel (my dear, I did for him
afterwards)--that cursed Krahwinkel, I say, looked as pleased as
possible, and whispered to Countess Fritsch, 'Blitzchen, Frau Grafinn,'
says he, 'it's all over with Galgenstein.' What did I do? I had the
entree, and demanded it. 'Altesse,' says I, falling on one knee, 'I ate
no kraut at dinner to-day. You remarked it: I saw your Highness remark
it.'

"'I did, M. le Comte,' said his Highness, gravely.

"I had almost tears in my eyes; but it was necessary to come to a
resolution, you know. 'Sir,' said I, 'I speak with deep grief to your
Highness, who are my benefactor, my friend, my father; but of this I
am resolved, I WILL NEVER EAT SAUERKRAUT MORE: it don't agree with me.
After being laid up for four weeks by the last dish of Sauerkraut of
which I partook, I may say with confidence--IT DON'T agree with me. By
impairing my health, it impairs my intellect, and weakens my strength;
and both I would keep for your Highness's service.'

"'Tut, tut!' said his Highness. 'Tut, tut, tut!' Those were his very
words.

"'Give me my sword or my pen,' said I. 'Give me my sword or my pen,
and with these Maximilian de Galgenstein is ready to serve you; but
sure,--sure, a great prince will pity the weak health of a faithful
subject, who does not know how to eat Sauerkraut?' His Highness was
walking about the room: I was still on my knees, and stretched forward
my hand to seize his coat.

"'GEHT ZUM TEUFEL, Sir!' said he, in a loud voice (it means 'Go to the
deuce,' my dear),--'Geht zum Teufel, and eat what you like!' With this
he went out of the room abruptly; leaving in my hand one of his buttons,
which I keep to this day. As soon as I was alone, amazed by his great
goodness and bounty, I sobbed aloud--cried like a child" (the Count's
eyes filled and winked at the very recollection), "and when I went back
into the card-room, stepping up to Krahwinkel, 'Count,' says I, 'who
looks foolish now?'--Hey there, La Rose, give me the diamond--Yes, that
was the very pun I made, and very good it was thought. 'Krahwinkel,'
says I, 'WHO LOOKS FOOLISH NOW?' and from that day to this I was never
at a Court-day asked to eat Sauerkraut--NEVER!"

"Hey there, La Rose! Bring me that diamond snuff-box in the drawer of my
secretaire;" and the snuff-box was brought. "Look at it, my dear," said
the Count, "for I saw you seemed to doubt. There is the button--the very
one that came off his Grace's coat."

Mr. Billings received it, and twisted it about with a stupid air. The
story had quite mystified him; for he did not dare yet to think his
father was a fool--his respect for the aristocracy prevented him.

When the Count's communications had ceased, which they did as soon as
the story of the Sauerkraut was finished, a silence of some minutes
ensued. Mr. Billings was trying to comprehend the circumstances above
narrated; his Lordship was exhausted; the chaplain had quitted the room
directly the word Sauerkraut was mentioned--he knew what was coming. His
Lordship looked for some time at his son; who returned the gaze with
his mouth wide open. "Well," said the Count--"well, sir? What are you
sitting there for? If you have nothing to say, sir, you had better go. I
had you here to amuse me--split me--and not to sit there staring!"

Mr. Billings rose in a fury.

"Hark ye, my lad," said the Count, "tell La Rose to give thee five
guineas, and, ah--come again some morning. A nice well-grown young lad,"
mused the Count, as Master Tommy walked wondering out of the apartment;
"a pretty fellow enough, and intelligent too."

"Well, he IS an odd fellow, my father," thought Mr. Billings, as he
walked out, having received the sum offered to him. And he immediately
went to call upon his friend Polly Briggs, from whom he had separated in
the morning.

What was the result of their interview is not at all necessary to the
progress of this history. Having made her, however, acquainted with the
particulars of his visit to his father, he went to his mother's, and
related to her all that had occurred.

Poor thing, she was very differently interested in the issue of it!



CHAPTER X. SHOWING HOW GALGENSTEIN AND MRS. CAT RECOGNISE EACH OTHER IN
MARYLEBONE GARDENS--AND HOW THE COUNT DRIVES HER HOME IN HIS CARRIAGE.


About a month after the touching conversation above related, there was
given, at Marylebone Gardens, a grand concert and entertainment, at
which the celebrated Madame Amenaide, a dancer of the theatre at Paris,
was to perform, under the patronage of several English and foreign
noblemen; among whom was his Excellency the Bavarian Envoy. Madame
Amenaide was, in fact, no other than the maitresse en titre of the
Monsieur de Galgenstein, who had her a great bargain from the Duke de
Rohan-Chabot at Paris.

It is not our purpose to make a great and learned display here,
otherwise the costumes of the company assembled at this fete might
afford scope for at least half-a-dozen pages of fine writing; and we
might give, if need were, specimens of the very songs and music sung on
the occasion. Does not the Burney collection of music, at the British
Museum, afford one an ample store of songs from which to choose?
Are there not the memoirs of Colley Cibber? those of Mrs. Clark, the
daughter of Colley? Is there not Congreve, and Farquhar--nay, and at a
pinch, the "Dramatic Biography," or even the Spectator, from which the
observant genius might borrow passages, and construct pretty antiquarian
figments? Leave we these trifles to meaner souls! Our business is not
with the breeches and periwigs, with the hoops and patches, but with the
divine hearts of men, and the passions which agitate them. What need,
therefore, have we to say that on this evening, after the dancing, the
music, and the fireworks, Monsieur de Galgenstein felt the strange and
welcome pangs of appetite, and was picking a cold chicken, along with
some other friends in an arbour--a cold chicken, with an accompaniment
of a bottle of champagne--when he was led to remark that a very handsome
plump little person, in a gorgeous stiff damask gown and petticoat, was
sauntering up and down the walk running opposite his supping-place, and
bestowing continual glances towards his Excellency. The lady, whoever
she was, was in a mask, such as ladies of high and low fashion wore at
public places in those days, and had a male companion. He was a lad of
only seventeen, marvellously well dressed--indeed, no other than the
Count's own son, Mr. Thomas Billings; who had at length received from
his mother the silver-hilted sword, and the wig, which that affectionate
parent had promised to him.

In the course of the month which had elapsed since the interview that
has been described in the former chapter, Mr. Billings had several times
had occasion to wait on his father; but though he had, according to her
wishes, frequently alluded to the existence of his mother, the Count had
never at any time expressed the slightest wish to renew his acquaintance
with that lady; who, if she had seen him, had only seen him by stealth.

The fact is, that after Billings had related to her the particulars of
his first meeting with his Excellency; which ended, like many of the
latter visits, in nothing at all; Mrs. Hayes had found some pressing
business, which continually took her to Whitehall, and had been prowling
from day to day about Monsieur de Galgenstein's lodgings. Four or five
times in the week, as his Excellency stepped into his coach, he might
have remarked, had he chosen, a woman in a black hood, who was looking
most eagerly into his eyes: but those eyes had long since left off the
practice of observing; and Madam Catherine's visits had so far gone for
nothing.

On this night, however, inspired by gaiety and drink, the Count had been
amazingly stricken by the gait and ogling of the lady in the mask. The
Reverend O'Flaherty, who was with him, and had observed the figure in
the black cloak, recognised, or thought he recognised, her. "It is the
woman who dogs your Excellency every day," said he. "She is with that
tailor lad who loves to see people hanged--your Excellency's son, I
mean." And he was just about to warn the Count of a conspiracy evidently
made against him, and that the son had brought, most likely, the mother
to play her arts upon him--he was just about, I say, to show to the
Count the folly and danger of renewing an old liaison with a woman such
as he had described Mrs. Cat to be, when his Excellency, starting
up, and interrupting his ghostly adviser at the very beginning of his
sentence, said, "Egad, l'Abbe, you are right--it IS my son, and a mighty
smart-looking creature with him. Hey! Mr. What's-your-name--Tom, you
rogue, don't you know your own father?" And so saying, and cocking his
beaver on one side, Monsieur de Galgenstein strutted jauntily after Mr.
Billings and the lady.

It was the first time that the Count had formally recognised his son.

"Tom, you rogue," stopped at this, and the Count came up. He had a white
velvet suit, covered over with stars and orders, a neat modest wig and
bag, and peach-coloured silk-stockings with silver clasps. The lady
in the mask gave a start as his Excellency came forward. "Law, mother,
don't squeege so," said Tom. The poor woman was trembling in every limb,
but she had presence of mind to "squeege" Tom a great deal harder; and
the latter took the hint, I suppose, and was silent.

The splendid Count came up. Ye gods, how his embroidery glittered in the
lamps! What a royal exhalation of musk and bergamot came from his wig,
his handkerchief, and his grand lace ruffles and frills! A broad yellow
riband passed across his breast, and ended at his hip in a shining
diamond cross--a diamond cross, and a diamond sword-hilt! Was anything
ever seen so beautiful? And might not a poor woman tremble when such
a noble creature drew near to her, and deigned, from the height of his
rank and splendour, to look down upon her? As Jove came down to Semele
in state, in his habits of ceremony, with all the grand cordons of his
orders blazing about his imperial person--thus dazzling, magnificent,
triumphant, the great Galgenstein descended towards Mrs. Catherine.
Her cheeks glowed red-hot under her coy velvet mask, her heart thumped
against the whalebone prison of her stays. What a delicious storm of
vanity was raging in her bosom! What a rush of long-pent recollections
burst forth at the sound of that enchanting voice!

As you wind up a hundred-guinea chronometer with a twopenny
watch-key--as by means of a dirty wooden plug you set all the waters of
Versailles a-raging, and splashing, and storming--in like manner, and by
like humble agents, were Mrs. Catherine's tumultuous passions set going.
The Count, we have said, slipped up to his son, and merely saying, "How
do, Tom?" cut the young gentleman altogether, and passing round to the
lady's side, said, "Madam, 'tis a charming evening--egad it is!" She
almost fainted: it was the old voice. There he was, after seventeen
years, once more at her side!

Now I know what I could have done. I can turn out a quotation from
Sophocles (by looking to the index) as well as another: I can throw off
a bit of fine writing too, with passion, similes, and a moral at the
end. What, pray, is the last sentence but one but the very finest
writing? Suppose, for example, I had made Maximilian, as he stood by the
side of Catherine, look up towards the clouds, and exclaim, in the words
of the voluptuous Cornelius Nepos,

     'Aenaoi nephelai
     'Arthoomen phanerai
      Droseran phusin euageetoi, k.t.l. [*]

     * Anglicised version of the author's original Greek text.

Or suppose, again, I had said, in a style still more popular:--

The Count advanced towards the maiden. They both were mute for a
while; and only the beating of her heart interrupted that thrilling and
passionate silence. Ah, what years of buried joys and fears, hopes and
disappointments, arose from their graves in the far past, and in those
brief moments flitted before the united ones! How sad was that delicious
retrospect, and oh, how sweet! The tears that rolled down the cheek of
each were bubbles from the choked and moss-grown wells of youth; the
sigh that heaved each bosom had some lurking odours in it--memories of
the fragrance of boyhood, echoes of the hymns of the young heart! Thus
is it ever--for these blessed recollections the soul always has a place;
and while crime perishes, and sorrow is forgotten, the beautiful alone
is eternal.

"O golden legends, written in the skies!" mused De Galgenstein, "ye
shine as ye did in the olden days! WE change, but YE speak ever the same
language. Gazing in your abysmal depths, the feeble ratioci--"

                           *****

There, now, are six columns[*] of the best writing to be found in this
or any other book. Galgenstein has quoted Euripides thrice, Plato once,
Lycophron nine times, besides extracts from the Latin syntax and the
minor Greek poets. Catherine's passionate embreathings are of the most
fashionable order; and I call upon the ingenious critic of the X----
newspaper to say whether they do not possess the real impress of the
giants of the olden time--the real Platonic smack, in a word? Not that I
want in the least to show off; but it is as well, every now and then, to
show the public what one CAN do.

     (* There WERE six columns, as mentioned by the accurate Mr.
     Solomons; but we have withdrawn two pages and three-
     quarters, because, although our correspondent has been
     excessively eloquent, according to custom, we were anxious
     to come to the facts of the story.

     Mr. Solomons, by sending to our office, may have the
     cancelled passages.--O.Y.)

Instead, however, of all this rant and nonsense, how much finer is the
speech that the Count really did make! "It is a very fine evening,--egad
it is!" The "egad" did the whole business: Mrs. Cat was as much in love
with him now as ever she had been; and, gathering up all her energies,
she said, "It is dreadful hot too, I think;" and with this she made a
curtsey.

"Stifling, split me!" added his Excellency. "What do you say, madam, to
a rest in an arbour, and a drink of something cool?"

"Sir!" said the lady, drawing back.

"Oh, a drink--a drink by all means," exclaimed Mr. Billings, who was
troubled with a perpetual thirst. "Come, mo--, Mrs. Jones, I mean.
you're fond of a glass of cold punch, you know; and the rum here is
prime, I can tell you."

The lady in the mask consented with some difficulty to the proposal of
Mr. Billings, and was led by the two gentlemen into an arbour, where she
was seated between them; and some wax-candles being lighted, punch was
brought.

She drank one or two glasses very eagerly, and so did her two
companions; although it was evident to see, from the flushed looks of
both of them, that they had little need of any such stimulus. The Count,
in the midst of his champagne, it must be said, had been amazingly
stricken and scandalised by the appearance of such a youth as Billings
in a public place with a lady under his arm. He was, the reader will
therefore understand, in the moral stage of liquor; and when he issued
out, it was not merely with the intention of examining Mr. Billings's
female companion, but of administering to him some sound correction for
venturing, at his early period of life, to form any such acquaintances.
On joining Billings, his Excellency's first step was naturally to
examine the lady. After they had been sitting for a while over their
punch, he bethought him of his original purpose, and began to address a
number of moral remarks to his son.

We have already given some specimens of Monsieur de Galgenstein's sober
conversation; and it is hardly necessary to trouble the reader with any
further reports of his speeches. They were intolerably stupid and dull;
as egotistical as his morning lecture had been, and a hundred times
more rambling and prosy. If Cat had been in the possession of her sober
senses, she would have seen in five minutes that her ancient lover was a
ninny, and have left him with scorn; but she was under the charm of old
recollections, and the sound of that silly voice was to her magical.
As for Mr. Billings, he allowed his Excellency to continue his prattle;
only frowning, yawning, cursing occasionally, but drinking continually.

So the Count descanted at length upon the enormity of young Billings's
early liaisons; and then he told his own, in the year four, with a
burgomaster's daughter at Ratisbon, when he was in the Elector of
Bavaria's service--then, after Blenheim, when he had come over to the
Duke of Marlborough, when a physician's wife at Bonn poisoned herself
for him, etc. etc.; of a piece with the story of the canoness, which has
been recorded before. All the tales were true. A clever, ugly man every
now and then is successful with the ladies; but a handsome fool is
irresistible. Mrs. Cat listened and listened. Good heavens! she
had heard all these tales before, and recollected the place and the
time--how she was hemming a handkerchief for Max; who came round and
kissed her, vowing that the physician's wife was nothing compared
to her--how he was tired, and lying on the sofa, just come home from
shooting. How handsome he looked! Cat thought he was only the handsomer
now; and looked more grave and thoughtful, the dear fellow!

The garden was filled with a vast deal of company of all kinds, and
parties were passing every moment before the arbour where our trio sat.
About half-an-hour after his Excellency had quitted his own box and
party, the Rev. Mr. O'Flaherty came discreetly round, to examine the
proceedings of his diplomatical chef. The lady in the mask was listening
with all her might; Mr. Billings was drawing figures on the table with
punch; and the Count talking incessantly. The Father Confessor listened
for a moment; and then, with something resembling an oath, walked away
to the entry of the gardens, where his Excellency's gilt coach, with
three footmen, was waiting to carry him back to London. "Get me a chair,
Joseph," said his Reverence, who infinitely preferred a seat gratis in
the coach. "That fool," muttered he, "will not move for this hour." The
reverend gentleman knew that, when the Count was on the subject of the
physician's wife, his discourses were intolerably long; and took upon
himself, therefore, to disappear, along with the rest of the Count's
party; who procured other conveyances, and returned to their homes.

After this quiet shadow had passed before the Count's box, many groups
of persons passed and repassed; and among them was no other than Mrs.
Polly Briggs, to whom we have been already introduced. Mrs. Polly was
in company with one or two other ladies, and leaning on the arm of a
gentleman with large shoulders and calves, a fierce cock to his hat,
and a shabby genteel air. His name was Mr. Moffat, and his present
occupation was that of doorkeeper at a gambling-house in Covent Garden;
where, though he saw many thousands pass daily under his eyes, his own
salary amounted to no more than four-and-sixpence weekly,--a sum quite
insufficient to maintain him in the rank which he held.

Mr. Moffat had, however, received some funds--amounting indeed, to a
matter of twelve guineas--within the last month, and was treating Mrs.
Briggs very generously to the concert. It may be as well to say that
every one of the twelve guineas had come out of Mrs. Polly's own pocket;
who, in return, had received them from Mr. Billings. And as the reader
may remember that, on the day of Tommy's first interview with his
father, he had previously paid a visit to Mrs. Briggs, having under
his arm a pair of breeches, which Mrs. Briggs coveted--he should now be
informed that she desired these breeches, not for pincushions, but for
Mr. Moffat, who had long been in want of a pair.

Having thus episodically narrated Mr. Moffat's history, let us state
that he, his lady, and their friends, passed before the Count's arbour,
joining in a melodious chorus to a song which one of the society, an
actor of Betterton's, was singing:

     "'Tis my will, when I'm dead, that no tear shall be shed,
        No 'Hic jacet' be graved on my stone;
      But pour o'er my ashes a bottle of red,
        And say a good fellow is gone,
            My brave boys!
        And say a good fellow is gone."

"My brave boys" was given with vast emphasis by the party; Mr. Moffat
growling it in a rich bass, and Mrs. Briggs in a soaring treble. As to
the notes, when quavering up to the skies, they excited various emotions
among the people in the gardens. "Silence them blackguards!" shouted a
barber, who was taking a pint of small beer along with his lady. "Stop
that there infernal screeching!" said a couple of ladies, who were
sipping ratafia in company with two pretty fellows.

"Dang it, it's Polly!" said Mr. Tom Billings, bolting out of the box,
and rushing towards the sweet-voiced Mrs. Briggs. When he reached her,
which he did quickly, and made his arrival known by tipping Mrs. Briggs
slightly on the waist, and suddenly bouncing down before her and her
friend, both of the latter drew back somewhat startled.

"Law, Mr. Billings!" says Mrs. Polly, rather coolly, "is it you? Who
thought of seeing you here?"

"Who's this here young feller?" says towering Mr. Moffat, with his bass
voice.

"It's Mr. Billings, cousin, a friend of mine," said Mrs. Polly,
beseechingly.

"Oh, cousin, if it's a friend of yours, he should know better how to
conduct himself, that's all. Har you a dancing-master, young feller,
that you cut them there capers before gentlemen?" growled Mr. Moffat;
who hated Mr. Billings, for the excellent reason that he lived upon him.

"Dancing-master be hanged!" said Mr. Billings, with becoming spirit: "if
you call me dancing-master, I'll pull your nose."

"What!" roared Mr. Moffat, "pull my nose? MY NOSE! I'll tell you what,
my lad, if you durst move me, I'll cut your throat, curse me!"

"Oh, Moffy--cousin, I mean--'tis a shame to treat the poor boy so. Go
away, Tommy; do go away; my cousin's in liquor," whimpered Madam Briggs,
who really thought that the great doorkeeper would put his threat into
execution.

"Tommy!" said Mr. Moffat, frowning horribly; "Tommy to me too? Dog,
get out of my ssss---" SIGHT was the word which Mr. Moffat intended to
utter; but he was interrupted; for, to the astonishment of his friends
and himself, Mr. Billings did actually make a spring at the monster's
nose, and caught it so firmly, that the latter could not finish his
sentence.

The operation was performed with amazing celerity; and, having concluded
it, Mr. Billings sprang back, and whisked from out its sheath that new
silver-hilted sword which his mamma had given him. "Now," said he, with
a fierce kind of calmness, "now for the throat-cutting, cousin: I'm your
man!"

How the brawl might have ended, no one can say, had the two gentlemen
actually crossed swords; but Mrs. Polly, with a wonderful presence of
mind, restored peace by exclaiming, "Hush, hush! the beaks, the beaks!"
Upon which, with one common instinct, the whole party made a rush for
the garden gates, and disappeared into the fields. Mrs. Briggs knew her
company: there was something in the very name of a constable which sent
them all a-flying.

After running a reasonable time, Mr. Billings stopped. But the great
Moffat was nowhere to be seen, and Polly Briggs had likewise vanished.
Then Tom bethought him that he would go back to his mother; but,
arriving at the gate of the gardens, was refused admittance, as he had
not a shilling in his pocket. "I've left," says Tommy, giving himself
the airs of a gentleman, "some friends in the gardens. I'm with his
Excellency the Bavarian henvy."

"Then you had better go away with him," said the gate people.

"But I tell you I left him there, in the grand circle, with a lady; and,
what's more, in the dark walk, I have left a silver-hilted sword."

"Oh, my Lord, I'll go and tell him then," cried one of the porters, "if
you will wait."

Mr. Billings seated himself on a post near the gate, and there consented
to remain until the return of his messenger. The latter went straight
to the dark walk, and found the sword, sure enough. But, instead of
returning it to its owner this discourteous knight broke the trenchant
blade at the hilt; and flinging the steel away, pocketed the baser
silver metal, and lurked off by the private door consecrated to the
waiters and fiddlers.

In the meantime, Mr. Billings waited and waited. And what was the
conversation of his worthy parents inside the garden? I cannot say; but
one of the waiters declared that he had served the great foreign Count
with two bowls of rack-punch, and some biscuits, in No. 3: that in the
box with him were first a young gentleman, who went away, and a lady,
splendidly dressed and masked: that when the lady and his Lordship were
alone, she edged away to the further end of the table, and they had much
talk: that at last, when his Grace had pressed her very much, she took
off her mask and said, "Don't you know me now, Max?" that he cried out,
"My own Catherine, thou art more beautiful than ever!" and wanted to
kneel down and vow eternal love to her; but she begged him not to do so
in a place where all the world would see: that then his Highness paid,
and they left the gardens, the lady putting on her mask again.

When they issued from the gardens, "Ho! Joseph la Rose, my coach!"
shouted his Excellency, in rather a husky voice; and the men who had
been waiting came up with the carriage. A young gentleman, who was
dosing on one of the posts at the entry, woke up suddenly at the blaze
of the torches and the noise of the footmen. The Count gave his arm to
the lady in the mask, who slipped in; and he was whispering La Rose,
when the lad who had been sleeping hit his Excellency on the shoulder,
and said, "I say, Count, you can give ME a cast home too," and jumped
into the coach.

When Catherine saw her son, she threw herself into his arms, and kissed
him with a burst of hysterical tears; of which Mr. Billings was at a
loss to understand the meaning. The Count joined them, looking not a
little disconcerted; and the pair were landed at their own door, where
stood Mr. Hayes, in his nightcap, ready to receive them, and astounded
at the splendour of the equipage in which his wife returned to him.



CHAPTER XI. OF SOME DOMESTIC QUARRELS, AND THE CONSEQUENCE THEREOF.


An ingenious magazine-writer, who lived in the time of Mr. Brock and the
Duke of Marlborough, compared the latter gentleman's conduct in battle,
when he

      "In peaceful thought the field of death surveyed,
       To fainting squadrons lent the timely aid;
       Inspired repulsed battalions to engage,
       And taught the doubtful battle where to rage"--

Mr. Joseph Addison, I say, compared the Duke of Marlborough to an angel,
who is sent by Divine command to chastise a guilty people--

      "And pleased his Master's orders to perform,
       Rides on the whirlwind, and directs the storm."

The first four of these novel lines touch off the Duke's disposition
and genius to a tittle. He had a love for such scenes of strife: in the
midst of them his spirit rose calm and supreme, soaring (like an
angel or not, but anyway the compliment is a very pretty one) on the
battle-clouds majestic, and causing to ebb or to flow the mighty tide of
war.

But as this famous simile might apply with equal propriety--to a bad
angel as to a good one, it may in like manner be employed to illustrate
small quarrels as well as great--a little family squabble, in which two
or three people are engaged, as well as a vast national dispute, argued
on each side by the roaring throats of five hundred angry cannon. The
poet means, in fact, that the Duke of Marlborough had an immense genius
for mischief.

Our friend Brock, or Wood (whose actions we love to illustrate by the
very handsomest similes), possessed this genius in common with his
Grace; and was never so happy, or seen to so much advantage, as when he
was employed in setting people by the ears. His spirits, usually dull,
then rose into the utmost gaiety and good-humour. When the doubtful
battle flagged, he by his art would instantly restore it. When, for
instance, Tom's repulsed battalions of rhetoric fled from his mamma's
fire, a few words of apt sneer or encouragement on Wood's part would
bring the fight round again; or when Mr. Hayes's fainting squadrons of
abuse broke upon the stubborn squares of Tom's bristling obstinacy, it
was Wood's delight to rally the former, and bring him once more to the
charge. A great share had this man in making those bad people worse.
Many fierce words and bad passions, many falsehoods and knaveries on
Tom's part, much bitterness, scorn, and jealousy on the part of Hayes
and Catherine, might be attributed to this hoary old tempter, whose
joy and occupation it was to raise and direct the domestic storms and
whirlwinds of the family of which he was a member. And do not let us be
accused of an undue propensity to use sounding words, because we compare
three scoundrels in the Tyburn Road to so many armies, and Mr. Wood to
a mighty field-marshal. My dear sir, when you have well studied the
world--how supremely great the meanest thing in this world is, and how
infinitely mean the greatest--I am mistaken if you do not make a strange
and proper jumble of the sublime and the ridiculous, the lofty and the
low. I have looked at the world, for my part, and come to the conclusion
that I know not which is which.

Well, then, on the night when Mrs Hayes, as recorded by us, had been to
the Marylebone Gardens, Mr. Wood had found the sincerest enjoyment in
plying her husband with drink; so that, when Catherine arrived at home,
Mr. Hayes came forward to meet her in a manner which showed he was not
only surly, but drunk. Tom stepped out of the coach first; and Hayes
asked him, with an oath, where he had been? The oath Mr. Billings
sternly flung back again (with another in its company), and at the same
time refused to give his stepfather any sort of answer to his query.

"The old man is drunk, mother," said he to Mrs. Hayes, as he handed that
lady out of the coach (before leaving which she had to withdraw her hand
rather violently from the grasp of the Count, who was inside). Hayes
instantly showed the correctness of his surmise by slamming the door
courageously in Tom's face, when he attempted to enter the house with
his mother. And when Mrs. Catherine remonstrated, according to her wont,
in a very angry and supercilious tone, Mr. Hayes replied with equal
haughtiness, and a regular quarrel ensued.

People were accustomed in those days to use much more simple and
expressive terms of language than are now thought polite; and it would
be dangerous to give, in this present year 1840, the exact words of
reproach which passed between Hayes and his wife in 1726. Mr. Wood sat
near, laughing his sides out. Mr. Hayes swore that his wife should not
go abroad to tea-gardens in search of vile Popish noblemen; to which
Mrs. Hayes replied, that Mr. Hayes was a pitiful, lying, sneaking cur,
and that she would go where she pleased. Mr. Hayes rejoined that if she
said much more he would take a stick to her. Mr. Wood whispered, "And
serve her right." Mrs. Hayes thereupon swore she had stood his cowardly
blows once or twice before, but that if ever he did so again, as sure as
she was born, she would stab him. Mr. Wood said, "Curse me, but I like
her spirit."

Mr. Hayes took another line of argument, and said, "The neighbours would
talk, madam."

"Ay, that they will, no doubt," said Mr. Wood.

"Then let them," said Catherine. "What do we care about the neighbours?
Didn't the neighbours talk when you sent Widow Wilkins to gaol? Didn't
the neighbours talk when you levied on poor old Thomson? You didn't mind
THEN, Mr. Hayes."

"Business, ma'am, is business; and if I did distrain on Thomson, and
lock up Wilkins, I think you knew about it as much as I."

"I'faith, I believe you're a pair," said Mr. Wood.

"Pray, sir, keep your tongue to yourself. Your opinion isn't asked
anyhow--no, nor your company wanted neither," cried Mrs. Catherine, with
proper spirit.

At which remark Mr. Wood only whistled.

"I have asked this here gentleman to pass this evening along with me.
We've been drinking together, ma'am."

"That we have", said Mr. Wood, looking at Mrs. Cat with the most perfect
good-humour.

"I say, ma'am, that we've been a-drinking together; and when we've been
a-drinking together, I say that a man is my friend. Doctor Wood is my
friend, madam--the Reverend Doctor Wood. We've passed the evening in
company, talking about politics, madam--politics and riddle-iddle-igion.
We've not been flaunting in tea-gardens, and ogling the men."

"It's a lie!" shrieked Mrs. Hayes. "I went with Tom--you know I did: the
boy wouldn't let me rest till I promised to go."

"Hang him, I hate him," said Mr. Hayes: "he's always in my way."

"He's the only friend I have in the world, and the only being I care a
pin for," said Catherine.

"He's an impudent idle good-for-nothing scoundrel, and I hope to see him
hanged!" shouted Mr. Hayes. "And pray, madam, whose carriage was that as
you came home in? I warrant you paid something for the ride--ha, ha!"

"Another lie!" screamed Cat, and clutched hold of a supper-knife. "Say
it again, John Hayes, and, by ------ I'll do for you."

"Do for me? Hang me," said Mr. Hayes, flourishing a stick, and perfectly
pot-valiant, "do you think I care for a bastard and a--?"

He did not finish the sentence, for the woman ran at him like a savage,
knife in hand. He bounded back, flinging his arms about wildly, and
struck her with his staff sharply across the forehead. The woman went
down instantly. A lucky blow was it for Hayes and her: it saved him from
death, perhaps, and her from murder.

All this scene--a very important one of our drama--might have been
described at much greater length; but, in truth, the author has a
natural horror of dwelling too long upon such hideous spectacles: nor
would the reader be much edified by a full and accurate knowledge of
what took place. The quarrel, however, though not more violent than many
that had previously taken place between Hayes and his wife, was about to
cause vast changes in the condition of this unhappy pair.

Hayes was at the first moment of his victory very much alarmed;
he feared that he had killed the woman; and Wood started up rather
anxiously too, with the same fancy. But she soon began to recover. Water
was brought; her head was raised and bound up; and in a short time
Mrs. Catherine gave vent to a copious fit of tears, which relieved her
somewhat. These did not affect Hayes much--they rather pleased him, for
he saw he had got the better; and although Cat fiercely turned upon him
when he made some small attempt towards reconciliation, he did not heed
her anger, but smiled and winked in a self-satisfied way at Wood. The
coward was quite proud of his victory; and finding Catherine asleep, or
apparently so, when he followed her to bed, speedily gave himself up to
slumber too, and had some pleasant dreams to his portion.

Mr. Wood also went sniggering and happy upstairs to his chamber. The
quarrel had been a real treat to him; it excited the old man--tickled
him into good-humour; and he promised himself a rare continuation of
the fun when Tom should be made acquainted with the circumstances of
the dispute. As for his Excellency the Count, the ride from Marylebone
Gardens, and a tender squeeze of the hand, which Catherine permitted
to him on parting, had so inflamed the passions of the nobleman, that,
after sleeping for nine hours, and taking his chocolate as usual the
next morning, he actually delayed to read the newspaper, and kept
waiting a toy-shop lady from Cornhill (with the sweetest bargain of
Mechlin lace), in order to discourse to his chaplain on the charms of
Mrs. Hayes.

She, poor thing, never closed her lids, except when she would have had
Mr. Hayes imagine that she slumbered; but lay beside him, tossing and
tumbling, with hot eyes wide open and heart thumping, and pulse of a
hundred and ten, and heard the heavy hours tolling; and at last the day
came peering, haggard, through the window-curtains, and found her still
wakeful and wretched.

Mrs. Hayes had never been, as we have seen, especially fond of her
lord; but now, as the day made visible to her the sleeping figure and
countenance of that gentleman, she looked at him with a contempt and
loathing such as she had never felt even in all the years of her wedded
life. Mr. Hayes was snoring profoundly: by his bedside, on his ledger,
stood a large greasy tin candlestick, containing a lank tallow-candle,
turned down in the shaft; and in the lower part, his keys, purse, and
tobacco-pipe; his feet were huddled up in his greasy threadbare clothes;
his head and half his sallow face muffled up in a red woollen nightcap;
his beard was of several days' growth; his mouth was wide open, and he
was snoring profoundly: on a more despicable little creature the sun
never shone. And to this sordid wretch was Catherine united for ever.
What a pretty rascal history might be read in yonder greasy day-book,
which never left the miser!--he never read in any other. Of what a
treasure were yonder keys and purse the keepers! not a shilling they
guarded but was picked from the pocket of necessity, plundered from
needy wantonness, or pitilessly squeezed from starvation. "A fool, a
miser, and a coward! Why was I bound to this wretch?" thought Catherine:
"I, who am high-spirited and beautiful (did not HE tell me so?); I
who, born a beggar, have raised myself to competence, and might have
mounted--who knows whither?--if cursed Fortune had not baulked me!"

As Mrs. Cat did not utter these sentiments, but only thought them, we
have a right to clothe her thoughts in the genteelest possible language;
and, to the best of our power, have done so. If the reader examines
Mrs. Hayes's train of reasoning, he will not, we should think, fail
to perceive how ingeniously she managed to fix all the wrong upon her
husband, and yet to twist out some consolatory arguments for her
own vanity. This perverse argumentation we have all of us, no doubt,
employed in our time. How often have we,--we poets, politicians,
philosophers, family-men,--found charming excuses for our own
rascalities in the monstrous wickedness of the world about us; how
loudly have we abused the times and our neighbours! All this devil's
logic did Mrs. Catherine, lying wakeful in her bed on the night of the
Marylebone fete, exert in gloomy triumph.

It must, however, be confessed, that nothing could be more just than
Mrs. Hayes's sense of her husband's scoundrelism and meanness; for if
we have not proved these in the course of this history, we have proved
nothing. Mrs. Cat had a shrewd observing mind; and if she wanted for
proofs against Hayes, she had but to look before and about her to find
them. This amiable pair were lying in a large walnut-bed, with faded
silk furniture, which had been taken from under a respectable old
invalid widow, who had become security for a prodigal son; the room was
hung round with an antique tapestry (representing Rebecca at the Well,
Bathsheba Bathing, Judith and Holofernes, and other subjects from Holy
Writ), which had been many score times sold for fifty pounds, and bought
back by Mr. Hayes for two, in those accommodating bargains which he made
with young gentlemen, who received fifty pounds of money and fifty of
tapestry in consideration of their hundred-pound bills. Against this
tapestry, and just cutting off Holofernes's head, stood an enormous
ominous black clock, the spoil of some other usurious transaction. Some
chairs, and a dismal old black cabinet, completed the furniture of this
apartment: it wanted but a ghost to render its gloom complete.

Mrs. Hayes sat up in the bed sternly regarding her husband. There is,
be sure, a strong magnetic influence in wakeful eyes so examining a
sleeping person (do not you, as a boy, remember waking of bright summer
mornings and finding your mother looking over you? had not the gaze of
her tender eyes stolen into your senses long before you woke, and cast
over your slumbering spirit a sweet spell of peace, and love, and fresh
springing joy?) Some such influence had Catherine's looks upon her
husband: for, as he slept under them, the man began to writhe about
uneasily, and to burrow his head in the pillow, and to utter quick,
strange moans and cries, such as have often jarred one's ear while
watching at the bed of the feverish sleeper. It was just upon six, and
presently the clock began to utter those dismal grinding sounds, which
issue from clocks at such periods, and which sound like the death-rattle
of the departing hour. Then the bell struck the knell of it; and with
this Mr. Hayes awoke, and looked up, and saw Catherine gazing at him.

Their eyes met for an instant, and Catherine turned away, burning red,
and looking as if she had been caught in the commission of a crime.

A kind of blank terror seized upon old Hayes's soul: a horrible icy
fear, and presentiment of coming evil; and yet the woman had but looked
at him. He thought rapidly over the occurrences of the last night, the
quarrel, and the end of it. He had often struck her before when angry,
and heaped all kinds of bitter words upon her; but, in the morning, she
bore no malice, and the previous quarrel was forgotten, or, at least,
passed over. Why should the last night's dispute not have the same end?
Hayes calculated all this, and tried to smile.

"I hope we're friends, Cat?" said he. "You know I was in liquor last
night, and sadly put out by the loss of that fifty pound. They'll ruin
me, dear--I know they will."

Mrs. Hayes did not answer.

"I should like to see the country again, dear," said he, in his most
wheedling way. "I've a mind, do you know, to call in all our money? It's
you who've made every farthing of it, that's sure; and it's a matter of
two thousand pound by this time. Suppose we go into Warwickshire, Cat,
and buy a farm, and live genteel. Shouldn't you like to live a lady in
your own county again? How they'd stare at Birmingham! hey, Cat?"

And with this Mr. Hayes made a motion as if he would seize his wife's
hand, but she flung his back again.

"Coward!" said she, "you want liquor to give you courage, and then
you've only heart enough to strike women."

"It was only in self-defence, my dear," said Hayes, whose courage had
all gone. "You tried, you know, to--to--"

"To STAB you, and I wish I had!" said Mrs. Hayes, setting her teeth, and
glaring at him like a demon; and so saying she sprung out of bed. There
was a great stain of blood on her pillow. "Look at it," said she. "That
blood's of your shedding!" and at this Hayes fairly began to weep, so
utterly downcast and frightened was the miserable man. The wretch's
tears only inspired his wife with a still greater rage and loathing; she
cared not so much for the blow, but she hated the man: the man to
whom she was tied for ever--for ever! The bar between her and wealth,
happiness, love, rank perhaps. "If I were free," thought Mrs. Hayes
(the thought had been sitting at her pillow all night, and whispering
ceaselessly into her ear)--, "If I were free, Max would marry me; I know
he would:--he said so yesterday!"

                    *****

As if by a kind of intuition, old Wood seemed to read all this woman's
thoughts; for he said that day with a sneer, that he would wager she was
thinking how much better it would be to be a Count's lady than a poor
miser's wife. "And faith," said he, "a Count and a chariot-and-six is
better than an old skinflint with a cudgel." And then he asked her if
her head was better, and supposed that she was used to beating; and cut
sundry other jokes, which made the poor wretch's wounds of mind and body
feel a thousand times sorer.

Tom, too, was made acquainted with the dispute, and swore his accustomed
vengeance against his stepfather. Such feelings, Wood, with a dexterous
malice, would never let rest; it was his joy, at first quite a
disinterested one, to goad Catherine and to frighten Hayes: though, in
truth, that unfortunate creature had no occasion for incitements from
without to keep up the dreadful state of terror and depression into
which he had fallen.

For, from the morning after the quarrel, the horrible words and looks
of Catherine never left Hayes's memory; but a cold fear followed
him--a dreadful prescience. He strove to overcome this fate as a coward
would--to kneel to it for compassion--to coax and wheedle it into
forgiveness. He was slavishly gentle to Catherine, and bore her fierce
taunts with mean resignation. He trembled before young Billings, who was
now established in the house (his mother said, to protect her against
the violence of her husband), and suffered his brutal language and
conduct without venturing to resist.

The young man and his mother lorded over the house: Hayes hardly dared
to speak in their presence; seldom sat with the family except at meals;
but slipped away to his chamber (he slept apart now from his wife) or
passed the evening at the public-house, where he was constrained to
drink--to spend some of his beloved sixpences for drink!

And, of course, the neighbours began to say, "John Hayes neglects
his wife." "He tyrannises over her, and beats her." "Always at the
public-house, leaving an honest woman alone at home!"

The unfortunate wretch did NOT hate his wife. He was used to her--fond
of her as much as he could be fond--sighed to be friends with her
again--repeatedly would creep, whimpering, to Wood's room, when the
latter was alone, and begged him to bring about a reconciliation. They
WERE reconciled, as much as ever they could be. The woman looked at him,
thought what she might be but for him, and scorned and loathed him with
a feeling that almost amounted to insanity. What nights she lay awake,
weeping, and cursing herself and him! His humility and beseeching looks
only made him more despicable and hateful to her.

If Hayes did not hate the mother, however, he hated the boy--hated and
feared him dreadfully. He would have poisoned him if he had had the
courage; but he dared not: he dared not even look at him as he sat
there, the master of the house, in insolent triumph. O God! how the
lad's brutal laughter rung in Hayes's ears; and how the stare of his
fierce bold black eyes pursued him! Of a truth, if Mr. Wood loved
mischief, as he did, honestly and purely for mischief's sake, he had
enough here. There was mean malice, and fierce scorn, and black revenge,
and sinful desire, boiling up in the hearts of these wretched people,
enough to content Mr. Wood's great master himself.

Hayes's business, as we have said, was nominally that of a carpenter;
but since, for the last few years, he had added to it that of a lender
of money, the carpenter's trade had been neglected altogether for one so
much more profitable. Mrs. Hayes had exerted herself, with much
benefit to her husband, in his usurious business. She was a resolute,
clear-sighted, keen woman, that did not love money, but loved to be rich
and push her way in the world. She would have nothing to do with the
trade now, however, and told her husband to manage it himself. She felt
that she was separated from him for ever, and could no more be brought
to consider her interests as connected with his own.

The man was well fitted for the creeping and niggling of his dastardly
trade; and gathered his moneys, and busied himself with his lawyer, and
acted as his own bookkeeper and clerk, not without satisfaction. His
wife's speculations, when they worked in concert, used often to frighten
him. He never sent out his capital without a pang, and only because he
dared not question her superior judgment and will. He began now to lend
no more: he could not let the money out of his sight. His sole pleasure
was to creep up into his room, and count and recount it. When Billings
came into the house, Hayes had taken a room next to that of Wood. It was
a protection to him; for Wood would often rebuke the lad for using Hayes
ill: and both Catherine and Tom treated the old man with deference.

At last--it was after he had collected a good deal of his money--Hayes
began to reason with himself, "Why should I stay?--stay to be insulted
by that boy, or murdered by him? He is ready for any crime." He
determined to fly. He would send Catherine money every year. No--she had
the furniture; let her let lodgings--that would support her. He would
go, and live away, abroad in some cheap place--away from that boy and
his horrible threats. The idea of freedom was agreeable to the poor
wretch; and he began to wind up his affairs as quickly as he could.

Hayes would now allow no one to make his bed or enter his room; and
Wood could hear him through the panels fidgeting perpetually to and fro,
opening and shutting of chests, and clinking of coin. At the least sound
he would start up, and would go to Billings's door and listen. Wood used
to hear him creeping through the passages, and returning stealthily to
his own chamber.

One day the woman and her son had been angrily taunting him in the
presence of a neighbour. The neighbour retired soon; and Hayes, who had
gone with him to the door, heard, on returning, the voice of Wood in the
parlour. The old man laughed in his usual saturnine way, and said, "Have
a care, Mrs. Cat; for if Hayes were to die suddenly, by the laws, the
neighbours would accuse thee of his death."

Hayes started as if he had been shot. "He too is in the plot," thought
he. "They are all leagued against me: they WILL kill me: they are only
biding their time." Fear seized him, and he thought of flying that
instant and leaving all; and he stole into his room and gathered his
money together. But only a half of it was there: in a few weeks all
would have come in. He had not the heart to go. But that night Wood
heard Hayes pause at HIS door, before he went to listen at Mrs.
Catherine's. "What is the man thinking of?" said Wood. "He is gathering
his money together. Has he a hoard yonder unknown to us all?"

Wood thought he would watch him. There was a closet between the two
rooms: Wood bored a hole in the panel, and peeped through. Hayes had a
brace of pistols, and four or five little bags before him on the table.
One of these he opened, and placed, one by one, five-and-twenty guineas
into it. Such a sum had been due that day--Catherine spoke of it only in
the morning; for the debtor's name had by chance been mentioned in the
conversation. Hayes commonly kept but a few guineas in the house. For
what was he amassing all these? The next day, Wood asked for change
for a twenty-pound bill. Hayes said he had but three guineas. And, when
asked by Catherine where the money was that was paid the day before,
said that it was at the banker's. "The man is going to fly," said Wood;
"that is sure: if he does, I know him--he will leave his wife without a
shilling."

He watched him for several days regularly: two or three more bags were
added to the former number. "They are pretty things, guineas," thought
Wood, "and tell no tales, like bank-bills." And he thought over the days
when he and Macshane used to ride abroad in search of them.

I don't know what thoughts entered into Mr. Wood's brain; but the next
day, after seeing young Billings, to whom he actually made a present of
a guinea, that young man, in conversing with his mother, said, "Do you
know, mother, that if you were free, and married the Count, I should be
a lord? It's the German law, Mr. Wood says; and you know he was in them
countries with Marlborough."

"Ay, that he would," said Mr. Wood, "in Germany: but Germany isn't
England; and it's no use talking of such things."

"Hush, child!" said Mrs. Hayes, quite eagerly: "how can _I_ marry the
Count? Besides, a'n't I married, and isn't he too great a lord for me?"

"Too great a lord?--not a whit, mother. If it wasn't for Hayes, I might
be a lord now. He gave me five guineas only last week; but curse the
skinflint who never will part with a shilling."

"It's not so bad as his striking your mother, Tom. I had my stick up,
and was ready to fell him t'other night," added Mr. Wood. And herewith
he smiled, and looked steadily in Mrs. Catherine's face. She dared not
look again; but she felt that the old man knew a secret that she had
been trying to hide from herself. Fool! he knew it; and Hayes knew it
dimly: and never, never, since that day of the gala, had it left her,
sleeping or waking. When Hayes, in his fear, had proposed to sleep away
from her, she started with joy: she had been afraid that she might talk
in her sleep, and so let slip her horrible confession.

Old Wood knew all her history since the period of the Marylebone fete.
He had wormed it out of her, day by day; he had counselled her how to
act; warned her not to yield; to procure, at least, a certain provision
for her son, and a handsome settlement for herself, if she determined
on quitting her husband. The old man looked on the business in a proper
philosophical light, told her bluntly that he saw she was bent upon
going off with the Count, and bade her take precautions: else she might
be left as she had been before.

Catherine denied all these charges; but she saw the Count daily,
notwithstanding, and took all the measures which Wood had recommended to
her. They were very prudent ones. Galgenstein grew hourly more in love:
never had he felt such a flame; not in the best days of his youth; not
for the fairest princess, countess, or actress, from Vienna to Paris.

At length--it was the night after he had seen Hayes counting his
money-bags--old Wood spoke to Mrs. Hayes very seriously. "That husband
of yours, Cat," said he, "meditates some treason; ay, and fancies we are
about such. He listens nightly at your door and at mine: he is going to
leave you, be sure on't; and if he leaves you, he leaves you to starve."

"I can be rich elsewhere," said Mrs. Cat.

"What, with Max?"

"Ay, with Max: and why not?" said Mrs. Hayes.

"Why not, fool! Do you recollect Birmingham? Do you think that
Galgenstein, who is so tender now because he HASN'T won you, will be
faithful because he HAS? Psha, woman, men are not made so! Don't go to
him until you are sure: if you were a widow now, he would marry you; but
never leave yourself at his mercy: if you were to leave your husband to
go to him, he would desert you in a fortnight!"

She might have been a Countess! she knew she might, but for this cursed
barrier between her and her fortune. Wood knew what she was thinking of,
and smiled grimly.

"Besides," he continued, "remember Tom. As sure as you leave Hayes
without some security from Max, the boy's ruined: he who might be a
lord, if his mother had but--Psha! never mind: that boy will go on
the road, as sure as my name's Wood. He's a Turpin cock in his eye, my
dear,--a regular Tyburn look. He knows too many of that sort already;
and is too fond of a bottle and a girl to resist and be honest when it
comes to the pinch."

"It's all true," said Mrs. Hayes. "Tom's a high mettlesome fellow, and
would no more mind a ride on Hounslow Heath than he does a walk now in
the Mall."

"Do you want him hanged, my dear?" said Wood.

"Ah, Doctor!"

"It IS a pity, and that's sure," concluded Mr. Wood, knocking the ashes
out of his pipe, and closing this interesting conversation. "It is a
pity that that old skinflint should be in the way of both your fortunes;
and he about to fling you over, too!"

Mrs. Catherine retired musing, as Mr. Billings had previously done; a
sweet smile of contentment lighted up the venerable features of Doctor
Wood, and he walked abroad into the streets as happy a fellow as any in
London.



CHAPTER XII. TREATS OF LOVE, AND PREPARES FOR DEATH.


And to begin this chapter, we cannot do better than quote a part of
a letter from M. l'Abbe O'Flaherty to Madame la Comtesse de X-----at
Paris:

"MADAM,--The little Arouet de Voltaire, who hath come 'hither to take a
turn in England,' as I see by the Post of this morning, hath brought me
a charming pacquet from your Ladyship's hands, which ought to render a
reasonable man happy; but, alas! makes your slave miserable. I think of
dear Paris (and something more dear than all Paris, of which, Madam,
I may not venture to speak further)--I think of dear Paris, and find
myself in this dismal Vitehall, where, when the fog clears up, I can
catch a glimpse of muddy Thames, and of that fatal palace which the
kings of England have been obliged to exchange for your noble castle of
Saint Germains, that stands so stately by silver Seine. Truly, no bad
bargain. For my part, I would give my grand ambassadorial saloons,
hangings, gildings, feasts, valets, ambassadors and all, for a bicoque
in sight of the Thuilleries' towers, or my little cell in the Irlandois.

"My last sheets have given you a pretty notion of our ambassador's
public doings; now for a pretty piece of private scandal respecting
that great man. Figure to yourself, Madam, his Excellency is in love;
actually in love, talking day and night about a certain fair one whom he
hath picked out of a gutter; who is well nigh forty years old; who was
his mistress when he was in England a captain of dragoons, some sixty,
seventy, or a hundred years since; who hath had a son by him, moreover,
a sprightly lad, apprentice to a tailor of eminence that has the honour
of making his Excellency's breeches.

"Since one fatal night when he met this fair creature at a certain place
of publique resort, called Marylebone Gardens, our Cyrus hath been an
altered creature. Love hath mastered this brainless ambassador, and his
antics afford me food for perpetual mirth. He sits now opposite to me at
a table inditing a letter to his Catherine, and copying it from--what do
you think?--from the 'Grand Cyrus.' 'I swear, madam, that my happiness
would be to offer you this hand, as I have my heart long ago, and I beg
you to bear in mind this declaration.' I have just dictated to him the
above tender words; for our Envoy, I need not tell you, is not strong at
writing or thinking.

"The fair Catherine, I must tell you, is no less than a carpenter's
wife, a well-to-do bourgeois, living at the Tyburn, or Gallows Road.
She found out her ancient lover very soon after our arrival, and hath a
marvellous hankering to be a Count's lady. A pretty little creature is
this Madam Catherine. Billets, breakfasts, pretty walks, presents of
silks and satins, pass daily between the pair; but, strange to say,
the lady is as virtuous as Diana, and hath resisted all my Count's
cajoleries hitherto. The poor fellow told me, with tears in his eyes,
that he believed he should have carried her by storm on the very first
night of their meeting, but that her son stepped into the way; and he or
somebody else hath been in the way ever since. Madam will never appear
alone. I believe it is this wondrous chastity of the lady that has
elicited this wondrous constancy of the gentleman. She is holding out
for a settlement; who knows if not for a marriage? Her husband, she
says, is ailing; her lover is fool enough, and she herself conducts
her negotiations, as I must honestly own, with a pretty notion of
diplomacy."

                    *****

This is the only part of the reverend gentleman's letter that directly
affects this history. The rest contains some scandal concerning greater
personages about the Court, a great share of abuse of the Elector
of Hanover, and a pretty description of a boxing-match at Mr. Figg's
amphitheatre in Oxford Road, where John Wells, of Edmund Bury (as by the
papers may be seen), master of the noble science of self-defence, did
engage with Edward Sutton, of Gravesend, master of the said science; and
the issue of the combat.

"N. B."--adds the Father, in a postscript--"Monsieur Figue gives a
hat to be cudgelled for before the Master mount; and the whole of
this fashionable information hath been given me by Monseigneur's son,
Monsieur Billings, garcon-tailleur, Chevalier de Galgenstein."

Mr. Billings was, in fact, a frequent visitor at the Ambassador's house;
to whose presence he, by a general order, was always admitted. As for
the connection between Mrs. Catherine and her former admirer, the
Abbe's history of it is perfectly correct; nor can it be said that this
wretched woman, whose tale now begins to wear a darker hue, was, in
anything but SOUL, faithless to her husband. But she hated him, longed
to leave him, and loved another: the end was coming quickly, and every
one of our unknowing actors and actresses were to be implicated, more or
less, in the catastrophe.

It will be seen that Mrs. Cat had followed pretty closely the
injunctions of Mr. Wood in regard to her dealings with the Count; who
grew more heart-stricken and tender daily, as the completion of his
wishes was delayed, and his desires goaded by contradiction. The Abbe
has quoted one portion of a letter written by him; here is the entire
performance, extracted, as the holy father said, chiefly from the
romance of the "Grand Cyrus".

           "Unhappy Maximilian unto unjust Catherina.

"MADAM,--It must needs be that I love you better than any ever did,
since, notwithstanding your injustice in calling me perfidious, I
love you no less than I did before. On the contrary, my passion is so
violent, and your unjust accusation makes me so sensible of it, that
if you did but know the resentments of my soule, you would confess your
selfe the most cruell and unjust woman in the world. You shall, ere
long, Madam, see me at your feete; and as you were my first passion, so
you will be my last.

"On my knees I will tell you, at the first handsom opportunity, that
the grandure of my passion can only be equalled by your beauty; it hath
driven me to such a fatall necessity, as that I cannot hide the misery
which you have caused. Sure, the hostil goddes have, to plague me,
ordayned that fatal marridge, by which you are bound to one so infinitly
below you in degree. Were that bond of ill-omind Hymen cut in twayn
witch binds you, I swear, Madam, that my happiniss woulde be to offer
you this hande, as I have my harte long agoe. And I praye you to beare
in minde this declaracion, which I here sign with my hande, and witch I
pray you may one day be called upon to prove the truth on. Beleave
me, Madam, that there is none in the World who doth more honor to your
vertue than myselfe, nor who wishes your happinesse with more zeal
than--MAXIMILIAN.

"From my lodgings in Whitehall, this 25th of February.

"To the incomparable Catherina, these, with a scarlet satten petticoat."

The Count had debated about the sentence promising marriage in event
of Hayes's death; but the honest Abbe cut these scruples very short, by
saying, justly, that, because he wrote in that manner, there was no need
for him to act so; that he had better not sign and address the note in
full; and that he presumed his Excellency was not quite so timid as to
fancy that the woman would follow him all the way to Germany, when his
diplomatic duties would be ended; as they would soon.

The receipt of this billet caused such a flush of joy and exultation to
unhappy happy Mrs. Catherine, that Wood did not fail to remark it, and
speedily learned the contents of the letter. Wood had no need to bid the
poor wretch guard it very carefully: it never from that day forth left
her; it was her title of nobility,--her pass to rank, wealth, happiness.
She began to look down on her neighbours; her manner to her husband grew
more than ordinarily scornful; the poor vain wretch longed to tell her
secret, and to take her place openly in the world. She a Countess, and
Tom a Count's son! She felt that she should royally become the title!

About this time--and Hayes was very much frightened at the prevalence
of the rumour--it suddenly began to be about in his quarter that he was
going to quit the country. The story was in everybody's mouth; people
used to sneer when he turned pale, and wept, and passionately denied it.

It was said, too, that Mrs. Hayes was not his wife, but his
mistress--everybody had this story--his mistress, whom he treated most
cruelly, and was about to desert. The tale of the blow which had felled
her to the ground was known in all quarters. When he declared that the
woman tried to stab him, nobody believed him: the women said he would
have been served right if she had done so. How had these stories gone
abroad? "Three days more, and I WILL fly," thought Hayes; "and the world
may say what it pleases."

Ay, fool, fly--away so swiftly that Fate cannot overtake thee: hide so
cunningly that Death shall not find thy place of refuge!



CHAPTER XIII. BEING A PREPARATION FOR THE END.


The reader, doubtless, doth now partly understand what dark acts of
conspiracy are beginning to gather around Mr. Hayes; and possibly hath
comprehended--

1. That if the rumour was universally credited which declared that Mrs.
Catherine was only Hayes's mistress, and not his wife,

She might, if she so inclined, marry another person; and thereby
not injure her fame and excite wonderment, but actually add to her
reputation.

2. That if all the world did steadfastly believe that Mr. Hayes intended
to desert this woman, after having cruelly maltreated her,

The direction which his journey might take would be of no consequence;
and he might go to Highgate, to Edinburgh, to Constantinople, nay, down
a well, and no soul would care to ask whither he had gone.

These points Mr. Hayes had not considered duly. The latter case had been
put to him, and annoyed him, as we have seen; the former had actually
been pressed upon him by Mrs. Hayes herself; who, in almost the only
communication she had had with him since their last quarrel, had asked
him, angrily, in the presence of Wood and her son, whether he had dared
to utter such lies, and how it came to pass that the neighbours looked
scornfully at her, and avoided her?

To this charge Mr. Hayes pleaded, very meekly, that he was not guilty;
and young Billings, taking him by the collar, and clinching his fist in
his face, swore a dreadful oath that he would have the life of him if
he dared abuse his mother. Mrs. Hayes then spoke of the general report
abroad, that he was going to desert her; which, if he attempted to do,
Mr. Billings vowed that he would follow him to Jerusalem and have his
blood. These threats, and the insolent language of young Billings,
rather calmed Hayes than agitated him: he longed to be on his journey;
but he began to hope that no obstacle would be placed in the way of
it. For the first time since many days, he began to enjoy a feeling
something akin to security, and could look with tolerable confidence
towards a comfortable completion of his own schemes of treason.

These points being duly settled, we are now arrived, O public, at a
point for which the author's soul hath been yearning ever since this
history commenced. We are now come, O critic, to a stage of the work
when this tale begins to assume an appearance so interestingly horrific,
that you must have a heart of stone if you are not interested by it.
O candid and discerning reader, who art sick of the hideous scenes of
brutal bloodshed which have of late come forth from pens of certain
eminent wits,[*] if you turn away disgusted from the book, remember that
this passage hath not been written for you, or such as you, who have
taste to know and hate the style in which it hath been composed; but
for the public, which hath no such taste:--for the public, which can
patronise four different representations of Jack Sheppard,--for the
public whom its literary providers have gorged with blood and foul
Newgate garbage,--and to whom we poor creatures, humbly following at
the tail of our great high-priests and prophets of the press, may, as in
duty bound, offer some small gift of our own: a little mite truly,
but given with good-will. Come up, then, fair Catherine and brave
Count;--appear, gallant Brock, and faultless Billings;--hasten hither,
honest John Hayes: the former chapters are but flowers in which we have
been decking you for the sacrifice. Ascend to the altar, ye innocent
lambs, and prepare for the final act: lo! the knife is sharpened, and
the sacrificer ready! Stretch your throats, sweet ones,--for the public
is thirsty, and must have blood!

     * This was written in 1840.



CHAPTER THE LAST.


That Mr. Hayes had some notion of the attachment of Monsieur de
Galgenstein for his wife is very certain: the man could not but perceive
that she was more gaily dressed, and more frequently absent than usual;
and must have been quite aware that from the day of the quarrel until
the present period, Catherine had never asked him for a shilling for the
house expenses. He had not the heart to offer, however; nor, in truth,
did she seem to remember that money was due.

She received, in fact, many sums from the tender Count. Tom was likewise
liberally provided by the same personage; who was, moreover, continually
sending presents of various kinds to the person on whom his affections
were centred.

One of these gifts was a hamper of choice mountain-wine, which had been
some weeks in the house, and excited the longing of Mr. Hayes, who loved
wine very much. This liquor was generally drunk by Wood and Billings,
who applauded it greatly; and many times, in passing through the
back-parlour,--which he had to traverse in order to reach the stair,
Hayes had cast a tender eye towards the drink; of which, had he dared,
he would have partaken.

On the 1st of March, in the year 1726, Mr. Hayes had gathered together
almost the whole sum with which he intended to decamp; and having on
that very day recovered the amount of a bill which he thought almost
hopeless, he returned home in tolerable good-humour; and feeling, so
near was his period of departure, something like security. Nobody had
attempted the least violence on him: besides, he was armed with pistols,
had his money in bills in a belt about his person, and really reasoned
with himself that there was no danger for him to apprehend.

He entered the house about dusk, at five o'clock. Mrs. Hayes was absent
with Mr. Billings; only Mr. Wood was smoking, according to his wont,
in the little back-parlour; and as Mr. Hayes passed, the old gentleman
addressed him in a friendly voice, and, wondering that he had been such
a stranger, invited him to sit and take a glass of wine. There was a
light and a foreman in the shop; Mr. Hayes gave his injunctions to that
person, and saw no objection to Mr. Wood's invitation.

The conversation, at first a little stiff between the two gentlemen,
began speedily to grow more easy and confidential: and so particularly
bland and good-humoured was Mr., or Doctor Wood, that his companion
was quite caught, and softened by the charm of his manner; and the pair
became as good friends as in the former days of their intercourse.

"I wish you would come down sometimes of evenings," quoth Doctor Wood;
"for, though no book-learned man, Mr. Hayes, look you, you are a man
of the world, and I can't abide the society of boys. There's Tom, now,
since this tiff with Mrs. Cat, the scoundrel plays the Grank Turk here!
The pair of 'em, betwixt them, have completely gotten the upper hand of
you. Confess that you are beaten, Master Hayes, and don't like the boy?"

"No more I do," said Hayes; "and that's the truth on't. A man doth not
like to have his wife's sins flung in his face, nor to be perpetually
bullied in his own house by such a fiery sprig as that."

"Mischief, sir,--mischief only," said Wood: "'tis the fun of youth, sir,
and will go off as age comes to the lad. Bad as you may think him--and
he is as skittish and fierce, sure enough, as a young colt---there is
good stuff in him; and though he hath, or fancies he hath, the right to
abuse every one, by the Lord he will let none others do so! Last week,
now, didn't he tell Mrs. Cat that you served her right in the last
beating matter? and weren't they coming to knives, just as in your case?
By my faith, they were. Ay, and at the "Braund's Head," when some fellow
said that you were a bloody Bluebeard, and would murder your wife,
stab me if Tom wasn't up in an instant and knocked the fellow down for
abusing of you!"

The first of these stories was quite true; the second was only a
charitable invention of Mr. Wood, and employed, doubtless, for the
amiable purpose of bringing the old and young men together. The scheme
partially succeeded; for, though Hayes was not so far mollified towards
Tom as to entertain any affection for a young man whom he had cordially
detested ever since he knew him, yet he felt more at ease and cheerful
regarding himself: and surely not without reason. While indulging in
these benevolent sentiments, Mrs. Catherine and her son arrived,
and found, somewhat to their astonishment, Mr. Hayes seated in the
back-parlour, as in former times; and they were invited by Mr. Wood to
sit down and drink.

We have said that certain bottles of mountain-wine were presented by the
Count to Mrs. Catherine: these were, at Mr. Wood's suggestion, produced;
and Hayes, who had long been coveting them, was charmed to have an
opportunity to drink his fill. He forthwith began bragging of his
great powers as a drinker, and vowed that he could manage eight bottles
without becoming intoxicated.

Mr. Wood grinned strangely, and looked in a peculiar way at Tom
Billings, who grinned too. Mrs. Cat's eyes were turned towards the
ground: but her face was deadly pale.

The party began drinking. Hayes kept up his reputation as a toper, and
swallowed one, two, three bottles without wincing. He grew talkative and
merry, and began to sing songs and to cut jokes; at which Wood laughed
hugely, and Billings after him. Mrs. Cat could not laugh; but sat
silent.

What ailed her? Was she thinking of the Count? She had been with Max
that day, and had promised him, for the next night at ten, an interview
near his lodgings at Whitehall. It was the first time that she would
see him alone. They were to meet (not a very cheerful place for a
love-tryst) at St. Margaret's churchyard, near Westminster Abbey. Of
this, no doubt, Cat was thinking; but what could she mean by whispering
to Wood, "No, no! for God's sake, not tonight!"

"She means we are to have no more liquor," said Wood to Mr. Hayes; who
heard this sentence, and seemed rather alarmed.

"That's it,--no more liquor," said Catherine eagerly; "you have had
enough to-night. Go to bed, and lock your door, and sleep, Mr. Hayes."

"But I say I've NOT had enough drink!" screamed Hayes; "I'm good for
five bottles more, and wager I will drink them too."

"Done, for a guinea!" said Wood.

"Done, and done!" said Billings.

"Be YOU quiet!" growled Hayes, scowling at the lad. "I will drink what
I please, and ask no counsel of yours." And he muttered some more curses
against young Billings, which showed what his feelings were towards his
wife's son; and which the latter, for a wonder, only received with a
scornful smile, and a knowing look at Wood.

Well! the five extra bottles were brought, and drunk by Mr. Hayes;
and seasoned by many songs from the recueil of Mr. Thomas d'Urfey and
others. The chief part of the talk and merriment was on Hayes's part;
as, indeed, was natural,--for, while he drank bottle after bottle of
wine, the other two gentlemen confined themselves to small beer,--both
pleading illness as an excuse for their sobriety.

And now might we depict, with much accuracy, the course of Mr. Hayes's
intoxication, as it rose from the merriment of the three-bottle point
to the madness of the four--from the uproarious quarrelsomeness of the
sixth bottle to the sickly stupidity of the seventh; but we are
desirous of bringing this tale to a conclusion, and must pretermit
all consideration of a subject so curious, so instructive, and so
delightful. Suffice it to say, as a matter of history, that Mr. Hayes
did actually drink seven bottles of mountain-wine; and that Mr. Thomas
Billings went to the "Braund's Head," in Bond Street, and purchased
another, which Hayes likewise drank.

"That'll do," said Mr. Wood to young Billings; and they led Hayes up to
bed, whither, in truth, he was unable to walk himself.

                    *****

Mrs. Springatt, the lodger, came down to ask what the noise was. "'Tis
only Tom Billings making merry with some friends from the country,"
answered Mrs. Hayes; whereupon Springatt retired, and the house was
quiet.

                    *****

Some scuffling and stamping was heard about eleven o'clock.

                    *****

After they had seen Mr. Hayes to bed, Billings remembered that he had a
parcel to carry to some person in the neighbourhood of the Strand;
and, as the night was remarkably fine, he and Mr. Wood agreed to walk
together, and set forth accordingly.

(Here follows a description of the THAMES AT MIDNIGHT, in a fine
historical style; with an account of Lambeth, Westminster, the Savoy,
Baynard's Castle, Arundel House, the Temple; of Old London Bridge,
with its twenty arches, "on which be houses builded, so that it seemeth
rather a continuall street than a bridge;"--of Bankside, and the "Globe"
and the "Fortune" Theatres; of the ferries across the river, and of the
pirates who infest the same--namely, tinklermen, petermen, hebbermen,
trawlermen; of the fleet of barges that lay at the Savoy steps; and of
the long lines of slim wherries sleeping on the river banks and basking
and shining in the moonbeams. A combat on the river is described,
that takes place between the crews of a tinklerman's boat and the
water-bailiffs. Shouting his war-cry, "St. Mary Overy a la rescousse!"
the water-bailiff sprung at the throat of the tinklerman captain. The
crews of both vessels, as if aware that the struggle of their chiefs
would decide the contest, ceased hostilities, and awaited on their
respective poops the issue of the death-shock. It was not long
coming. "Yield, dog!" said the water-bailiff. The tinklerman could not
answer--for his throat was grasped too tight in the iron clench of the
city champion; but drawing his snickersnee, he plunged it seven times in
the bailiff's chest: still the latter fell not. The death-rattle gurgled
in the throat of his opponent; his arms fell heavily to his side.
Foot to foot, each standing at the side of his boat, stood the brave
men--THEY WERE BOTH DEAD! "In the name of St. Clement Danes," said the
master, "give way, my men!" and, thrusting forward his halberd (seven
feet long, richly decorated with velvet and brass nails, and having
the city arms, argent, a cross gules, and in the first quarter a dagger
displayed of the second), he thrust the tinklerman's boat away from his
own; and at once the bodies of the captains plunged down, down, down,
down in the unfathomable waters.

After this follows another episode. Two masked ladies quarrel at the
door of a tavern overlooking the Thames: they turn out to be Stella and
Vanessa, who have followed Swift thither; who is in the act of reading
"Gulliver's Travels" to Gay, Arbuthnot, Bolingbroke, and Pope. Two
fellows are sitting shuddering under a doorway; to one of them Tom
Billings flung a sixpence. He little knew that the names of those two
young men were--Samuel Johnson and Richard Savage.)




ANOTHER LAST CHAPTER.


Mr. Hayes did not join the family the next day; and it appears that
the previous night's reconciliation was not very durable; for when Mrs.
Springatt asked Wood for Hayes, Mr. Wood stated that Hayes had gone away
without saying whither he was bound, or how long he might be absent.
He only said, in rather a sulky tone, that he should probably pass the
night at a friend's house. "For my part, I know of no friend he hath,"
added Mr. Wood; "and pray Heaven that he may not think of deserting his
poor wife, whom he hath beaten and ill-used so already!" In this prayer
Mrs. Springatt joined; and so these two worthy people parted.

What business Billings was about cannot be said; but he was this night
bound towards Marylebone Fields, as he was the night before for the
Strand and Westminster; and, although the night was very stormy and
rainy, as the previous evening had been fine, old Wood good-naturedly
resolved upon accompanying him; and forth they sallied together.

Mrs. Catherine, too, had HER business, as we have seen; but this was of
a very delicate nature. At nine o'clock, she had an appointment with
the Count; and faithfully, by that hour, had found her way to Saint
Margaret's churchyard, near Westminster Abbey, where she awaited
Monsieur de Galgenstein.

The spot was convenient, being very lonely, and at the same time close
to the Count's lodgings at Whitehall. His Excellency came, but somewhat
after the hour; for, to say the truth, being a freethinker, he had
the most firm belief in ghosts and demons, and did not care to pace
a churchyard alone. He was comforted, therefore, when he saw a woman
muffled in a cloak, who held out her hand to him at the gate, and said,
"Is that you?" He took her hand,--it was very clammy and cold; and at
her desire he bade his confidential footman, who had attended him with a
torch, to retire, and leave him to himself.

The torch-bearer retired, and left them quite in darkness; and the pair
entered the little cemetery, cautiously threading their way among the
tombs. They sat down on one, underneath a tree it seemed to be; the wind
was very cold, and its piteous howling was the only noise that broke
the silence of the place. Catherine's teeth were chattering, for all her
wraps; and when Max drew her close to him, and encircled her waist with
one arm, and pressed her hand, she did not repulse him, but rather
came close to him, and with her own damp fingers feebly returned his
pressure.

The poor thing was very wretched and weeping. She confided to Max the
cause of her grief. She was alone in the world,--alone and penniless.
Her husband had left her; she had that very day received a letter from
him which confirmed all that she had suspected so long. He had left her,
carried away all his property, and would not return!

If we say that a selfish joy filled the breast of Monsieur de
Galgenstein, the reader will not be astonished. A heartless libertine,
he felt glad at the prospect of Catherine's ruin; for he hoped that
necessity would make her his own. He clasped the poor thing to his
heart, and vowed that he would replace the husband she had lost, and
that his fortune should be hers.

"Will you replace him?" said she.

"Yes, truly, in everything but the name, dear Catherine; and when he
dies, I swear you shall be Countess of Galgenstein."

"Will you swear?" she cried, eagerly.

"By everything that is most sacred: were you free now, I would" (and
here he swore a terrific oath) "at once make you mine."

We have seen before that it cost Monsieur de Galgenstein nothing to
make these vows. Hayes was likely, too, to live as long as Catherine--as
long, at least, as the Count's connection with her; but he was caught in
his own snare.

She took his hand and kissed it repeatedly, and bathed it in her tears,
and pressed it to her bosom. "Max," she said, "I AM FREE! Be mine, and I
will love you as I have done for years and years."

Max started back. "What, is he dead?" he said.

"No, no, not dead: but he never was my husband."

He let go her hand, and, interrupting her, said sharply, "Indeed, madam,
if this carpenter never was your husband, I see no cause why _I_
should be. If a lady, who hath been for twenty years the mistress of a
miserable country boor, cannot find it in her heart to put up with the
protection of a nobleman--a sovereign's representative--she may seek a
husband elsewhere!"

"I was no man's mistress except yours," sobbed Catherine, wringing her
hands and sobbing wildly; "but, O Heaven! I deserved this. Because I was
a child, and you saw, and ruined, and left me--because, in my sorrow and
repentance, I wished to repair my crime, and was touched by that man's
love, and married him--because he too deceives and leaves me--because,
after loving you--madly loving you for twenty years--I will not now
forfeit your respect, and degrade myself by yielding to your will, you
too must scorn me! It is too much--too much--O Heaven!" And the wretched
woman fell back almost fainting.

Max was almost frightened by this burst of sorrow on her part, and was
coming forward to support her; but she motioned him away, and, taking
from her bosom a letter, said, "If it were light, you could see, Max,
how cruelly I have been betrayed by that man who called himself my
husband. Long before he married me, he was married to another. This
woman is still living, he says; and he says he leaves me for ever."

At this moment the moon, which had been hidden behind Westminster Abbey,
rose above the vast black mass of that edifice, and poured a flood of
silver light upon the little church of St. Margaret's, and the spot
where the lovers stood. Max was at a little distance from Catherine,
pacing gloomily up and down the flags. She remained at her old position
at the tombstone under the tree, or pillar, as it seemed to be, as the
moon got up. She was leaning against the pillar, and holding out to Max,
with an arm beautifully white and rounded, the letter she had received
from her husband: "Read it, Max," she said: "I asked for light, and here
is Heaven's own, by which you may read."

But Max did not come forward to receive it. On a sudden his face assumed
a look of the most dreadful surprise and agony. He stood still, and
stared with wild eyes starting from their sockets; he stared upwards,
at a point seemingly above Catherine's head. At last he raised up his
finger slowly and said, "Look, Cat--THE HEAD--THE HEAD!" Then uttering a
horrible laugh, he fell down grovelling among the stones, gibbering and
writhing in a fit of epilepsy.

Catherine started forward and looked up. She had been standing against a
post, not a tree--the moon was shining full on it now; and on the summit
strangely distinct, and smiling ghastly, was a livid human head.

The wretched woman fled--she dared look no more. And some hours
afterwards, when, alarmed by the Count's continued absence, his
confidential servant came back to seek for him in the churchyard, he was
found sitting on the flags, staring full at the head, and laughing,
and talking to it wildly, and nodding at it. He was taken up a hopeless
idiot, and so lived for years and years; clanking the chain, and moaning
under the lash, and howling through long nights when the moon peered
through the bars of his solitary cell, and he buried his face in the
straw.

                    *****

There--the murder is out! And having indulged himself in a chapter of
the very finest writing, the author begs the attention of the British
public towards it; humbly conceiving that it possesses some of those
peculiar merits which have rendered the fine writing in other chapters
of the works of other authors so famous.

Without bragging at all, let us just point out the chief claims of the
above pleasing piece of composition. In the first place, it is perfectly
stilted and unnatural; the dialogue and the sentiments being artfully
arranged, so as to be as strong and majestic as possible. Our dear Cat
is but a poor illiterate country wench, who has come from cutting her
husband's throat; and yet, see! she talks and looks like a tragedy
princess, who is suffering in the most virtuous blank verse. This is the
proper end of fiction, and one of the greatest triumphs that a novelist
can achieve: for to make people sympathise with virtue is a vulgar trick
that any common fellow can do; but it is not everybody who can take a
scoundrel, and cause us to weep and whimper over him as though he were
a very saint. Give a young lady of five years old a skein of silk and
a brace of netting-needles, and she will in a short time turn you out
a decent silk purse--anybody can; but try her with a sow's ear, and see
whether she can make a silk purse out of THAT. That is the work for your
real great artist; and pleasant it is to see how many have succeeded in
these latter days.

The subject is strictly historical, as anyone may see by referring to
the Daily Post of March 3, 1726, which contains the following paragraph:

"Yesterday morning, early, a man's head, that by the freshness of it
seemed to have been newly cut off from the body, having its own hair
on, was found by the river's side, near Millbank, Westminster, and was
afterwards exposed to public view in St. Margaret's churchyard, where
thousands of people have seen it; but none could tell who the unhappy
person was, much less who committed such a horrid and barbarous action.
There are various conjectures relating to the deceased; but there being
nothing certain, we omit them. The head was much hacked and mangled in
the cutting off."

The head which caused such an impression upon Monsieur de Galgenstein
was, indeed, once on the shoulders of Mr. John Hayes, who lost it under
the following circumstances. We have seen how Mr. Hayes was induced
to drink. Mr. Hayes having been encouraged in drinking the wine, and
growing very merry therewith, he sang and danced about the room; but his
wife, fearing the quantity he had drunk would not have the wished-for
effect on him, she sent away for another bottle, of which he drank
also. This effectually answered their expectations; and Mr. Hayes became
thereby intoxicated, and deprived of his understanding.

He, however, made shift to get into the other room, and, throwing
himself upon the bed, fell asleep; upon which Mrs. Hayes reminded them
of the affair in hand, and told them that was the most proper juncture
to finish the business. [*]

                    *****

     * The description of the murder and the execution of the
     culprits, which here follows in the original, was taken from
     the newspapers of the day.  Coming from such a source they
     have, as may be imagined, no literary merit whatever.  The
     details of the crime are simply horrible, without one touch
     of even that sort of romance which sometimes gives a little
     dignity to murder.  As such they precisely suited Mr.
     Thackeray's purpose at the time--which was to show the real
     manners and customs of the Sheppards and Turpins who were
     then the popular heroes of fiction.  But nowadays there is
     no such purpose to serve, and therefore these too literal
     details are omitted.

                    *****


Ring, ding, ding! the gloomy green curtain drops, the dramatis personae
are duly disposed of, the nimble candle snuffers put out the lights, and
the audience goeth pondering home. If the critic take the pains to ask
why the author, who hath been so diffuse in describing the early and
fabulous acts of Mrs. Catherine's existence, should so hurry off the
catastrophe where a deal of the very finest writing might have been
employed, Solomons replies that the "ordinary" narrative is far
more emphatic than any composition of his own could be, with all the
rhetorical graces which he might employ. Mr. Aram's trial, as taken by
the penny-a-liners of those days, had always interested him more than
the lengthened and poetical report which an eminent novelist has given
of the same. Mr. Turpin's adventures are more instructive and agreeable
to him in the account of the Newgate Plutarch, than in the learned
Ainsworth's Biographical Dictionary. And as he believes that the
professional gentlemen who are employed to invest such heroes with the
rewards that their great actions merit, will go through the ceremony of
the grand cordon with much more accuracy and despatch than can be shown
by the most distinguished amateur; in like manner he thinks that the
history of such investitures should be written by people directly
concerned, and not by admiring persons without, who must be ignorant of
many of the secrets of Ketchcraft. We very much doubt if Milton himself
could make a description of an execution half so horrible as the simple
lines in the Daily Post of a hundred and ten years since, that now lies
before us--"herrlich wie am ersten Tag,"--as bright and clean as on
the day of publication. Think of it! it has been read by Belinda at her
toilet, scanned at "Button's" and "Will's," sneered at by wits, talked
of in palaces and cottages, by a busy race in wigs, red heels, hoops,
patches, and rags of all variety--a busy race that hath long since
plunged and vanished in the unfathomable gulf towards which we march so
briskly.

Where are they? "Afflavit Deus"--and they are gone! Hark! is not the
same wind roaring still that shall sweep us down? and yonder stands the
compositor at his types who shall put up a pretty paragraph some day to
say how, "Yesterday, at his house in Grosvenor Square," or "At Botany
Bay, universally regretted," died So-and-So. Into what profound
moralities is the paragraph concerning Mrs. Catherine's burning leading
us!

Ay, truly, and to that very point have we wished to come; for, having
finished our delectable meal, it behoves us to say a word or two by way
of grace at its conclusion, and be heartily thankful that it is over. It
has been the writer's object carefully to exclude from his drama (except
in two very insignificant instances--mere walking-gentlemen parts), any
characters but those of scoundrels of the very highest degree. That he
has not altogether failed in the object he had in view, is evident from
some newspaper critiques which he has had the good fortune to see; and
which abuse the tale of "Catherine" as one of the dullest, most vulgar,
and immoral works extant. It is highly gratifying to the author to find
that such opinions are abroad, as they convince him that the taste for
Newgate literature is on the wane, and that when the public critic has
right down undisguised immorality set before him, the honest creature is
shocked at it, as he should be, and can declare his indignation in good
round terms of abuse. The characters of the tale ARE immoral, and no
doubt of it; but the writer humbly hopes the end is not so. The public
was, in our notion, dosed and poisoned by the prevailing style of
literary practice, and it was necessary to administer some medicine
that would produce a wholesome nausea, and afterwards bring about a more
healthy habit.

And, thank Heaven, this effect HAS been produced in very many instances,
and that the "Catherine" cathartic has acted most efficaciously. The
author has been pleased at the disgust which his work has excited, and
has watched with benevolent carefulness the wry faces that have been
made by many of the patients who have swallowed the dose. Solomons
remembers, at the establishment in Birchin Lane where he had the honour
of receiving his education, there used to be administered to the boys a
certain cough-medicine, which was so excessively agreeable that all the
lads longed to have colds in order to partake of the remedy. Some of our
popular novelists have compounded their drugs in a similar way, and
made them so palatable that a public, once healthy and honest, has been
well-nigh poisoned by their wares. Solomons defies anyone to say the
like of himself--that his doses have been as pleasant as champagne, and
his pills as sweet as barley-sugar;--it has been his attempt to make
vice to appear entirely vicious; and in those instances where he hath
occasionally introduced something like virtue, to make the sham as
evident as possible, and not allow the meanest capacity a single chance
to mistake it.

And what has been the consequence? That wholesome nausea which it has
been his good fortune to create wherever he has been allowed to practise
in his humble circle.

Has anyone thrown away a halfpennyworth of sympathy upon any person
mentioned in this history? Surely no. But abler and more famous men than
Solomons have taken a different plan; and it becomes every man in his
vocation to cry out against such, and expose their errors as best he
may.

Labouring under such ideas, Mr. Isaac Solomons, junior, produced the
romance of Mrs. Cat, and confesses himself completely happy to have
brought it to a conclusion. His poem may be dull--ay, and probably
is. The great Blackmore, the great Dennis, the great Sprat, the great
Pomfret, not to mention great men of our own time--have they not also
been dull, and had pretty reputations too? Be it granted Solomons IS
dull; but don't attack his morality; he humbly submits that, in his
poem, no man shall mistake virtue for vice, no man shall allow a single
sentiment of pity or admiration to enter his bosom for any character of
the piece: it being, from beginning to end, a scene of unmixed rascality
performed by persons who never deviate into good feeling. And although
he doth not pretend to equal the great modern authors, whom he hath
mentioned, in wit or descriptive power; yet, in the point of moral, he
meekly believes that he has been their superior; feeling the greatest
disgust for the characters he describes, and using his humble endeavour
to cause the public also to hate them.

Horsemonger Lane: January 1840.

========================================
========================================

from the 1911 John Murray edition.





THE TREMENDOUS ADVENTURES OF MAJOR GAHAGAN




CHAPTER I



"Truth is strange,
Stranger than fiction."

I think it but right that in making my appearance before the public
I should at once acquaint them with my titles and name.  My card,
as I leave it at the houses of the nobility, my friends, is as
follows:-


MAJOR GOLIAH O'GRADY GAHAGAN, H.E.I.C.S.,
Commanding Battalion of
Irregular Horse,
AHMEDNUGGAR.


Seeing, I say, this simple visiting ticket, the world will avoid
any of those awkward mistakes as to my person, which have been so
frequent of late.  There has been no end to the blunders regarding
this humble title of mine, and the confusion thereby created.  When
I published my volume of poems, for instance, the Morning Post
newspaper remarked "that the Lyrics of the Heart, by Miss Gahagan,
may be ranked among the sweetest flowrets of the present spring
season."  The Quarterly Review, commenting upon my "Observations on
the Pons Asinorum" (4to, London, 1836), called me "Doctor Gahagan,"
and so on.  It was time to put an end to these mistakes, and I have
taken the above simple remedy.

I was urged to it by a very exalted personage.  Dining in August
last at the palace of the T-l-r-es at Paris, the lovely young Duch-
ss of Orl-ns (who, though she does not speak English, understands
it as well as I do), said to me in the softest Teutonic, "Lieber
Herr Major, haben sie den Ahmednuggarischen-jager-battalion
gelassen?"  "Warum denn?" said I, quite astonished at her R-l H-
ss's question.  The P-cess then spoke of some trifle from my pen,
which was simply signed Goliah Gahagan.

There was, unluckily, a dead silence as H.R.H. put this question.

"Comment donc?" said H.M. Lo-is Ph-l-ppe, looking gravely at Count
Mole; "le cher Major a quitte l'armee!  Nicolas donc sera maitre de
l'Inde!"  H. M- and the Pr. M-n-ster pursued their conversation in
a low tone, and left me, as may be imagined, in a dreadful state of
confusion.  I blushed and stuttered, and murmured out a few
incoherent words to explain--but it would not do--I could not
recover my equanimity during the course of the dinner; and while
endeavouring to help an English duke, my neighbour, to poulet a
l'Austerlitz, fairly sent seven mushrooms and three large greasy
croutes over his whiskers and shirt-frill.  Another laugh at my
expense.  "Ah! M. le Major," said the Q- of the B-lg-ns, archly,
"vous n'aurez jamais votre brevet de Colonel."  Her M-y's joke will
be better understood when I state that his Grace is the brother of
a Minister.

I am not at liberty to violate the sanctity of private life, by
mentioning the names of the parties concerned in this little
anecdote.  I only wish to have it understood that I am a gentleman,
and live at least in DECENT society.  Verbum sat.

But to be serious.  I am obliged always to write the name of Goliah
in full, to distinguish me from my brother, Gregory Gahagan, who
was also a Major (in the King's service), and whom I killed in a
duel, as the public most likely knows.  Poor Greg! a very trivial
dispute was the cause of our quarrel, which never would have
originated but for the similarity of our names.  The circumstance
was this:  I had been lucky enough to render the Nawaub of Lucknow
some trifling service (in the notorious affair of Choprasjee
Muckjee), and his Highness sent down a gold toothpick-case directed
to Captain G. Gahagan, which I of course thought was for me:  my
brother madly claimed it; we fought, and the consequence was, that
in about three minutes he received a slash in the right side (cut
6), which effectually did his business:- he was a good swordsman
enough--I was THE BEST in the universe.  The most ridiculous part
of the affair is, that the toothpick-case was his, after all--he
had left it on the Nawaub's table at tiffin.  I can't conceive what
madness prompted him to fight about such a paltry bauble; he had
much better have yielded it at once, when he saw I was determined
to have it.  From this slight specimen of my adventures, the reader
will perceive that my life has been one of no ordinary interest;
and, in fact, I may say that I have led a more remarkable life than
any man in the service--I have been at more pitched battles, led
more forlorn hopes, had more success among the fair sex, drunk
harder, read more, been a handsomer man than any officer now
serving Her Majesty.

When I first went to India in 1802, I was a raw cornet of
seventeen, with blazing red hair, six feet four in height, athletic
at all kinds of exercises, owing money to my tailor and everybody
else who would trust me, possessing an Irish brogue, and my full
pay of 120l. a year.  I need not say that with all these advantages
I did that which a number of clever fellows have done before me--I
fell in love, and proposed to marry immediately.

But how to overcome the difficulty?--It is true that I loved Julia
Jowler--loved her to madness; but her father intended her for a
Member of Council at least, and not for a beggarly Irish ensign.
It was, however, my fate to make the passage to India (on board of
the "Samuel Snob" East Indiaman, Captain Duffy) with this lovely
creature, and my misfortune instantaneously to fall in love with
her.  We were not out of the Channel before I adored her,
worshipped the deck which she trod upon, kissed a thousand times
the cuddy-chair on which she used to sit.  The same madness fell on
every man in the ship.  The two mates fought about her at the Cape;
the surgeon, a sober pious Scotchman, from disappointed affection,
took so dreadfully to drinking as to threaten spontaneous
combustion; and old Colonel Lilywhite, carrying his wife and seven
daughters to Bengal, swore that he would have a divorce from Mrs.
L., and made an attempt at suicide; the captain himself told me,
with tears in his eyes, that he hated his hitherto-adored Mrs.
Duffy, although he had had nineteen children by her.

We used to call her the witch--there was magic in her beauty and in
her voice.  I was spell-bound when I looked at her, and stark
staring mad when she looked at me!  O lustrous black eyes!--O
glossy night-black ringlets!--O lips!--O dainty frocks of white
muslin!--O tiny kid slippers!--though old and gouty, Gahagan sees
you still!  I recollect, off Ascension, she looked at me in her
particular way one day at dinner, just as I happened to be blowing
on a piece of scalding hot green fat.  I was stupefied at once--I
thrust the entire morsel (about half a pound) into my mouth.  I
made no attempt to swallow, or to masticate it, but left it there
for many minutes, burning, burning!  I had no skin to my palate for
seven weeks after, and lived on rice-water during the rest of the
voyage.  The anecdote is trivial, but it shows the power of Julia
Jowler over me.

The writers of marine novels have so exhausted the subject of
storms, shipwrecks, mutinies, engagements, sea-sickness, and so
forth, that (although I have experienced each of these in many
varieties) I think it quite unnecessary to recount such trifling
adventures; suffice it to say, that during our five months' trajet,
my mad passion for Julia daily increased; so did the captain's and
the surgeon's; so did Colonel Lilywhite's; so did the doctor's, the
mate's--that of most part of the passengers, and a considerable
number of the crew.  For myself, I swore--ensign as I was--I would
win her for my wife; I vowed that I would make her glorious with my
sword--that as soon as I had made a favourable impression on my
commanding officer (which I did not doubt to create), I would lay
open to him the state of my affections, and demand his daughter's
hand.  With such sentimental outpourings did our voyage continue
and conclude.

We landed at the Sunderbunds on a grilling hot day in December
1802, and then for the moment Julia and I separated.  She was
carried off to her papa's arms in a palankeen, surrounded by at
least forty hookahbadars; whilst the poor cornet, attended but by
two dandies and a solitary beasty (by which unnatural name these
blackamoors are called), made his way humbly to join the regiment
at headquarters.

The -'th Regiment of Bengal Cavalry, then under the command of
Lieut.-Colonel Julius Jowler, C.B., was known throughout Asia and
Europe by the proud title of the Bundelcund Invincibles--so great
was its character for bravery, so remarkable were its services in
that delightful district of India.  Major Sir George Gutch was next
in command, and Tom Thrupp, as kind a fellow as ever ran a Mahratta
through the body, was second Major.  We were on the eve of that
remarkable war which was speedily to spread throughout the whole of
India, to call forth the valour of a Wellesley, and the indomitable
gallantry of a Gahagan; which was illustrated by our victories at
Ahmednuggar (where I was the first over the barricade at the
storming of the Pettah); at Argaum, where I slew with my own sword
twenty-three matchlock-men, and cut a dromedary in two; and by that
terrible day of Assaye, where Wellesley would have been beaten but
for me--me alone:  I headed nineteen charges of cavalry, took
(aided by only four men of my own troop) seventeen field-pieces,
killing the scoundrelly French artillerymen; on that day I had
eleven elephants shot under me, and carried away Scindiah's nose-
ring with a pistol-ball.  Wellesley is a Duke and a Marshal, I but
a simple Major of Irregulars.  Such is fortune and war!  But my
feelings carry me away from my narrative, which had better proceed
with more order.

On arriving, I say, at our barracks at Dum Dum, I for the first
time put on the beautiful uniform of the Invincibles:  a light blue
swallow-tailed jacket with silver lace and wings, ornamented with
about 3,000 sugar-loaf buttons, rhubarb-coloured leather
inexpressibles (tights), and red morocco boots with silver spurs
and tassels, set off to admiration the handsome persons of the
officers of our corps.  We wore powder in those days; and a
regulation pigtail of seventeen inches, a brass helmet surrounded
by leopard skin, with a bearskin top and a horsetail feather, gave
the head a fierce and chivalrous appearance, which is far more
easily imagined than described.

Attired in this magnificent costume, I first presented myself
before Colonel Jowler.  He was habited in a manner precisely
similar, but not being more than five feet in height, and weighing
at least fifteen stone, the dress he wore did not become him quite
so much as slimmer and taller men.  Flanked by his tall Majors,
Thrupp and Gutch, he looked like a stumpy skittle-ball between two
attenuated skittles.  The plump little Colonel received me with
vast cordiality, and I speedily became a prime favourite with
himself and the other officers of the corps.  Jowler was the most
hospitable of men; and gratifying my appetite and my love together,
I continually partook of his dinners, and feasted on the sweet
presence of Julia.

I can see now, what I would not and could not perceive in those
early days, that this Miss Jowler--on whom I had lavished my first
and warmest love, whom I had endowed with all perfection and
purity--was no better than a little impudent flirt, who played with
my feelings, because during the monotony of a sea voyage she had no
other toy to play with; and who deserted others for me, and me for
others, just as her whim or her interest might guide her.  She had
not been three weeks at headquarters when half the regiment was in
love with her.  Each and all of the candidates had some favour to
boast of, or some encouraging hopes on which to build.  It was the
scene of the "Samuel Snob" over again, only heightened in interest
by a number of duels.  The following list will give the reader a
notion of some of them:-


1.  Cornet Gahagan . . . Ensign Hicks, of the Sappers and Miners.
Hicks received a ball in his jaw, and was half choked by a quantity
of carroty whisker forced down his throat with the ball.

2.  Captain Macgillicuddy, B.N.I. Cornet Gahagan.  I was run
through the body, but the sword passed between the ribs, and
injured me very slightly.

3.  Captain Macgillicuddy, B.N.I. Mr. Mulligatawny, B.C.S., Deputy-
Assistant Vice Sub-Controller of the Boggleywollah Indigo grounds,
Ramgolly branch.


Macgillicuddy should have stuck to sword's play, and he might have
come off in his second duel as well as in his first; as it was, the
civilian placed a ball and a part of Mac's gold repeater in his
stomach.  A remarkable circumstance attended this shot, an account
of which I sent home to the "Philosophical Transactions:" the
surgeon had extracted the ball, and was going off, thinking that
all was well, when the gold repeater struck thirteen in poor
Macgillicuddy's abdomen.  I suppose that the works must have been
disarranged in some way by the bullet, for the repeater was one of
Barraud's, never known to fail before, and the circumstance
occurred at seven o'clock. {1}

I could continue, almost ad infinitum, an account of the wars which
this Helen occasioned, but the above three specimens will, I should
think, satisfy the peaceful reader.  I delight not in scenes of
blood, Heaven knows, but I was compelled in the course of a few
weeks, and for the sake of this one woman, to fight nine duels
myself, and I know that four times as many more took place
concerning her.

I forgot to say that Jowler's wife was a half-caste woman, who had
been born and bred entirely in India, and whom the Colonel had
married from the house of her mother, a native.  There were some
singular rumours abroad regarding this latter lady's history:  it
was reported that she was the daughter of a native Rajah, and had
been carried off by a poor English subaltern in Lord Clive's time.
The young man was killed very soon after, and left his child with
its mother.  The black Prince forgave his daughter and bequeathed
to her a handsome sum of money.  I suppose that it was on this
account that Jowler married Mrs. J., a creature who had not, I do
believe, a Christian name, or a single Christian quality:  she was
a hideous, bloated, yellow creature, with a beard, black teeth, and
red eyes:  she was fat, lying, ugly, and stingy--she hated and was
hated by all the world, and by her jolly husband as devoutly as by
any other.  She did not pass a month in the year with him, but
spent most of her time with her native friends.  I wonder how she
could have given birth to so lovely a creature as her daughter.
This woman was of course with the Colonel when Julia arrived, and
the spice of the devil in her daughter's composition was most
carefully nourished and fed by her.  If Julia had been a flirt
before, she was a downright jilt now; she set the whole cantonment
by the ears; she made wives jealous and husbands miserable; she
caused all those duels of which I have discoursed already, and yet
such was the fascination of THE WITCH that I still thought her an
angel.  I made court to the nasty mother in order to be near the
daughter; and I listened untiringly to Jowler's interminable dull
stories, because I was occupied all the time in watching the
graceful movements of Miss Julia.

But the trumpet of war was soon ringing in our ears; and on the
battle-field Gahagan is a man!  The Bundelcund Invincibles received
orders to march, and Jowler, Hector-like, donned his helmet and
prepared to part from his Andromache.  And now arose his
perplexity:  what must be done with his daughter, his Julia?  He
knew his wife's peculiarities of living, and did not much care to
trust his daughter to her keeping; but in vain he tried to find her
an asylum among the respectable ladies of his regiment.  Lady Gutch
offered to receive her, but would have nothing to do with Mrs.
Jowler; the surgeon's wife, Mrs. Sawbone, would have neither mother
nor daughter:  there was no help for it, Julia and her mother must
have a house together, and Jowler knew that his wife would fill it
with her odious blackamoor friends.

I could not, however, go forth satisfied to the campaign until I
learned from Julia my fate.  I watched twenty opportunities to see
her alone, and wandered about the Colonel's bungalow as an informer
does about a public-house, marking the incomings and the outgoings
of the family, and longing to seize the moment when Miss Jowler,
unbiassed by her mother or her papa, might listen, perhaps, to my
eloquence, and melt at the tale of my love.

But it would not do--old Jowler seemed to have taken all of a
sudden to such a fit of domesticity, that there was no finding him
out of doors, and his rhubarb-coloured wife (I believe that her
skin gave the first idea of our regimental breeches), who before
had been gadding ceaselessly abroad, and poking her broad nose into
every menage in the cantonment, stopped faithfully at home with her
spouse.  My only chance was to beard the old couple in their den,
and ask them at once for their cub.

So I called one day at tiffin:- old Jowler was always happy to have
my company at this meal; it amused him, he said, to see me drink
Hodgson's pale ale (I drank two hundred and thirty-four dozen the
first year I was in Bengal)--and it was no small piece of fun,
certainly, to see old Mrs. Jowler attack the currie-bhaut;--she was
exactly the colour of it, as I have had already the honour to
remark, and she swallowed the mixture with a gusto which was never
equalled, except by my poor friend Dando a propos d'huitres.  She
consumed the first three platefuls with a fork and spoon, like a
Christian; but as she warmed to her work, the old hag would throw
away her silver implements, and dragging the dishes towards her, go
to work with her hands, flip the rice into her mouth with her
fingers, and stow away a quantity of eatables sufficient for a
sepoy company.  But why do I diverge from the main point of my
story?

Julia, then, Jowler, and Mrs. J., were at luncheon; the dear girl
was in the act to sabler a glass of Hodgson as I entered.  "How do
you do, Mr. Gagin?" said the old hag, leeringly.  "Eat a bit o'
currie-bhaut,"--and she thrust the dish towards me, securing a heap
as it passed.  "What!  Gagy my boy, how do, how do?" said the fat
Colonel.  "What! run through the body?--got well again--have some
Hodgson--run through your body too!"--and at this, I may say,
coarse joke (alluding to the fact that in these hot climates the
ale oozes out as it were from the pores of the skin) old Jowler
laughed:  a host of swarthy chobdars, kitmatgars, sices, consomahs,
and bobbychies laughed too, as they provided me, unasked, with the
grateful fluid.  Swallowing six tumblers of it, I paused nervously
for a moment, and then said -

"Bobbachy, consomah, ballybaloo hoga."

The black ruffians took the hint, and retired.

"Colonel and Mrs. Jowler," said I solemnly, "we are alone; and you,
Miss Jowler, you are alone too; that is--I mean--I take this
opportunity to--(another glass of ale, if you please)--to express,
once for all, before departing on a dangerous campaign"--(Julia
turned pale)--"before entering, I say, upon a war which may stretch
in the dust my high-raised hopes and me, to express my hopes while
life still remains to me, and to declare in the face of heaven,
earth, and Colonel Jowler, that I love you, Julia!"  The Colonel,
astonished, let fall a steel fork, which stuck quivering for some
minutes in the calf of my leg; but I heeded not the paltry
interruption.  "Yes, by yon bright heaven," continued I, "I love
you, Julia!  I respect my commander, I esteem your excellent and
beauteous mother:  tell me, before I leave you, if I may hope for a
return of my affection.  Say that you love me, and I will do such
deeds in this coming war, as shall make you proud of the name of
your Gahagan."

The old woman, as I delivered these touching words, stared,
snapped, and ground her teeth, like an enraged monkey.  Julia was
now red, now white; the Colonel stretched forward, took the fork
out of the calf of my leg, wiped it, and then seized a bundle of
letters which I had remarked by his side.

"A cornet!" said he, in a voice choking with emotion; "a pitiful
beggarly Irish cornet aspire to the hand of Julia Jowler!  Gag--
Gahagan, are you mad, or laughing at us?  Look at these letters,
young man--at these letters, I say--one hundred and twenty-four
epistles from every part of India (not including one from the
Governor-General, and six from his brother, Colonel Wellesley)--one
hundred and twenty-four proposals for the hand of Miss Jowler!
Cornet Gahagan," he continued, "I wish to think well of you:  you
are the bravest, the most modest, and, perhaps, the handsomest man
in our corps; but you have not got a single rupee.  You ask me for
Julia, and you do not possess even an anna!"--(Here the old rogue
grinned, as if he had made a capital pun.)--"No, no," said he,
waxing good-natured; "Gagy my boy, it is nonsense!  Julia love,
retire with your mamma; this silly young gentleman will remain and
smoke a pipe with me."

I took one:  it was the bitterest chillum I ever smoked in my life.

* * *

I am not going to give here an account of my military services;
they will appear in my great national autobiography, in forty
volumes, which I am now preparing for the press.  I was with my
regiment in all Wellesley's brilliant campaigns; then taking dawk,
I travelled across the country north-eastward, and had the honour
of fighting by the side of Lord Lake at Laswaree, Degg,
Furruckabad, Futtyghur, and Bhurtpore:  but I will not boast of my
actions--the military man knows them, MY SOVEREIGN appreciates
them.  If asked who was the bravest man of the Indian army, there
is not an officer belonging to it who would not cry at once,
GAHAGAN.  The fact is, I was desperate:  I cared not for life,
deprived of Julia Jowler.

With Julia's stony looks ever before my eyes, her father's stern
refusal in my ears, I did not care, at the close of the campaign,
again to seek her company or to press my suit.  We were eighteen
months on service, marching and counter-marching, and fighting
almost every other day:  to the world I did not seem altered; but
the world only saw the face, and not the seared and blighted heart
within me.  My valour, always desperate, now reached to a pitch of
cruelty; I tortured my grooms and grass-cutters for the most
trifling offence or error,--I never in action spared a man,--I
sheared off three hundred and nine heads in the course of that
single campaign.

Some influence, equally melancholy, seemed to have fallen upon poor
old Jowler.  About six months after we had left Dum Dum, he
received a parcel of letters from Benares (whither his wife had
retired with her daughter), and so deeply did they seem to weigh
upon his spirits, that he ordered eleven men of his regiment to be
flogged within two days; but it was against the blacks that he
chiefly turned his wrath.  Our fellows, in the heat and hurry of
the campaign, were in the habit of dealing rather roughly with
their prisoners, to extract treasure from them:  they used to pull
their nails out by the root, to boil them in kedgeree pots, to flog
them and dress their wounds with cayenne pepper, and so on.
Jowler, when he heard of these proceedings, which before had always
justly exasperated him (he was a humane and kind little man), used
now to smile fiercely and say, "D- the black scoundrels!  Serve
them right, serve them right!"

One day, about a couple of miles in advance of the column, I had
been on a foraging-party with a few dragoons, and was returning
peaceably to camp, when of a sudden a troop of Mahrattas burst on
us from a neighbouring mango-tope, in which they had been hidden:
in an instant three of my men's saddles were empty, and I was left
with but seven more to make head against at least thirty of these
vagabond black horsemen.  I never saw in my life a nobler figure
than the leader of the troop--mounted on a splendid black Arab; he
was as tall, very nearly, as myself; he wore a steel cap and a
shirt of mail, and carried a beautiful French carbine, which had
already done execution upon two of my men.  I saw that our only
chance of safety lay in the destruction of this man.  I shouted to
him in a voice of thunder (in the Hindustanee tongue of course),
"Stop, dog, if you dare, and encounter a man!"

In reply his lance came whirling in the air over my head, and
mortally transfixed poor Foggarty of ours, who was behind me.
Grinding my teeth and swearing horribly, I drew that scimitar which
never yet failed its blow, {2} and rushed at the Indian.  He came
down at full gallop, his own sword making ten thousand gleaming
circles in the air, shrieking his cry of battle.

The contest did not last an instant.  With my first blow I cut off
his sword-arm at the wrist; my second I levelled at his head.  I
said that he wore a steel cap, with a gilt iron spike of six
inches, and a hood of chain mail.  I rose in my stirrups and
delivered "St. George;" my sword caught the spike exactly on the
point, split it sheer in two, cut crashing through the steel cap
and hood, and was only stopped by a ruby which he wore in his back-
plate.  His head, cut clean in two between the eyebrows and
nostrils, even between the two front teeth, fell one side on each
shoulder, and he galloped on till his horse was stopped by my men,
who were not a little amused at the feat.

As I had expected, the remaining ruffians fled on seeing their
leader's fate.  I took home his helmet by way of curiosity, and we
made a single prisoner, who was instantly carried before old
Jowler.

We asked the prisoner the name of the leader of the troop:  he said
it was Chowder Loll.

"Chowder Loll!" shrieked Colonel Jowler.  "O Fate! thy hand is
here!"  He rushed wildly into his tent--the next day applied for
leave of absence.  Gutch took the command of the regiment, and I
saw him no more for some time.

* * *

As I had distinguished myself not a little during the war, General
Lake sent me up with despatches to Calcutta, where Lord Wellesley
received me with the greatest distinction.  Fancy my surprise, on
going to a ball at Government House, to meet my old friend Jowler;
my trembling, blushing, thrilling delight, when I saw Julia by his
side!

Jowler seemed to blush too when he beheld me.  I thought of my
former passages with his daughter.  "Gagy my boy," says he, shaking
hands, "glad to see you.  Old friend, Julia--come to tiffin--
Hodgson's pale--brave fellow Gagy."  Julia did not speak, but she
turned ashy pale, and fixed upon me her awful eyes!  I fainted
almost, and uttered some incoherent words.  Julia took my hand,
gazed at me still, and said, "Come!"  Need I say I went?

I will not go over the pale ale and currie-bhaut again! but this I
know, that in half-an-hour I was as much in love as I ever had
been:  and that in three weeks I--yes, I--was the accepted lover of
Julia!  I did not pause to ask where were the one hundred and
twenty-four offers? why I, refused before, should be accepted now?
I only felt that I loved her, and was happy!

* * *

One night, one memorable night, I could not sleep, and, with a
lover's pardonable passion, wandered solitary through the City of
Palaces until I came to the house which contained my Julia.  I
peeped into the compound--all was still; I looked into the
verandah--all was dark, except a light--yes, one light--and it was
in Julia's chamber!  My heart throbbed almost to stifling.  I
would--I WOULD advance, if but to gaze upon her for a moment, and
to bless her as she slept.  I DID look, I DID advance; and, O
Heaven!  I saw a lamp burning, Mrs. Jow. in a night-dress, with a
very dark baby in her arms, and Julia looking tenderly at an ayah,
who was nursing another.

"Oh, Mamma," said Julia, "what would that fool Gahagan say if he
knew all?"

"HE DOES KNOW ALL!" shouted I, springing forward, and tearing down
the tatties from the window.  Mrs. Jow. ran shrieking out of the
room, Julia fainted, the cursed black children squalled, and their
d-d nurse fell on her knees, gabbling some infernal jargon of
Hindustanee.  Old Jowler at this juncture entered with a candle and
a drawn sword.

"Liar! scoundrel! deceiver!" shouted I.  "Turn, ruffian, and defend
yourself!"  But old Jowler, when he saw me, only whistled, looked
at his lifeless daughter, and slowly left the room.

Why continue the tale?  I need not now account for Jowler's gloom
on receiving his letters from Benares--for his exclamation upon the
death of the Indian chief--for his desire to marry his daughter:
the woman I was wooing was no longer Miss Julia Jowler, she was
Mrs. Chowder Loll!



CHAPTER II:  ALLYGHUR AND LASWAREE



I sat down to write gravely and sadly, for (since the appearance of
some of my adventures in a monthly magazine) unprincipled men have
endeavoured to rob me of the only good I possess, to question the
statements that I make, and, themselves without a spark of honour
or good feeling, to steal from me that which is my sole wealth--my
character as a teller of THE TRUTH.

The reader will understand that it is to the illiberal strictures
of a profligate press I now allude; among the London journalists,
none (luckily for themselves) have dared to question the veracity
of my statements:  they know me, and they know that I am IN LONDON.
If I can use the pen, I can also wield a more manly and terrible
weapon, and would answer their contradictions with my sword!  No
gold or gems adorn the hilt of that war-worn scimitar; but there is
blood upon the blade--the blood of the enemies of my country, and
the maligners of my honest fame.  There are others, however--the
disgrace of a disgraceful trade--who, borrowing from distance a
despicable courage, have ventured to assail me.  The infamous
editors of the Kelso Champion, the Bungay Beacon, the Tipperary
Argus, and the Stoke Pogis Sentinel, and other dastardly organs of
the provincial press, have, although differing in politics, agreed
upon this one point, and, with a scoundrelly unanimity, vented a
flood of abuse upon the revelations made by me.

They say that I have assailed private characters, and wilfully
perverted history to blacken the reputation of public men.  I ask,
was any one of these men in Bengal in the year 1803?  Was any
single conductor of any one of these paltry prints ever in
Bundelcund or the Rohilla country?  Does this EXQUISITE Tipperary
scribe know the difference between Hurrygurrybang and Burrumtollah?
Not he! and because, forsooth, in those strange and distant lands
strange circumstances have taken place, it is insinuated that the
relater is a liar:  nay, that the very places themselves have no
existence but in my imagination.  Fools!--but I will not waste my
anger upon them, and proceed to recount some other portions of my
personal history.

It is, I presume, a fact which even THESE scribbling assassins will
not venture to deny, that before the commencement of the campaign
against Scindiah, the English General formed a camp at Kanouge on
the Jumna, where he exercised that brilliant little army which was
speedily to perform such wonders in the Dooab.  It will be as well
to give a slight account of the causes of a war which was speedily
to rage through some of the fairest portions of the Indian
continent.

Shah Allum, the son of Shah Lollum, the descendant by the female
line of Nadir Shah (that celebrated Toorkomaun adventurer, who had
well-nigh hurled Bajazet and Selim the Second from the throne of
Bagdad)--Shah Allum, I say, although nominally the Emperor of
Delhi, was in reality the slave of the various warlike chieftains
who lorded it by turns over the country and the sovereign, until
conquered and slain by some more successful rebel.  Chowder Loll
Masolgee, Zubberdust Khan, Dowsunt Row Scindiah, and the celebrated
Bobbachy Jung Bahawder, had held for a time complete mastery in
Delhi.  The second of these, a ruthless Afghan soldier, had
abruptly entered the capital; nor was he ejected from it until he
had seized upon the principal jewels, and likewise put out the eyes
of the last of the unfortunate family of Afrasiab.  Scindiah came
to the rescue of the sightless Shah Allum, and though he destroyed
his oppressor, only increased his slavery; holding him in as
painful a bondage as he had suffered under the tyrannous Afghan.

As long as these heroes were battling among themselves, or as long
rather as it appeared that they had any strength to fight a battle,
the British Government, ever anxious to see its enemies by the
ears, by no means interfered in the contest.  But the French
Revolution broke out, and a host of starving sans-culottes appeared
among the various Indian States, seeking for military service, and
inflaming the minds of the various native princes against the
British East India Company.  A number of these entered into
Scindiah's ranks:  one of them, Perron, was commander of his army;
and though that chief was as yet quite engaged in his hereditary
quarrel with Jeswunt Row Holkar, and never thought of an invasion
of the British territory, the Company all of a sudden discovered
that Shah Allum, his sovereign, was shamefully ill-used, and
determined to re-establish the ancient splendour of his throne.

Of course it was sheer benevolence for poor Shah Allum that
prompted our governors to take these kindly measures in his favour.
I don't know how it happened that, at the end of the war, the poor
Shah was not a whit better off than at the beginning; and that
though Holkar was beaten, and Scindiah annihilated, Shah Allum was
much such a puppet as before.  Somehow, in the hurry and confusion
of this struggle, the oyster remained with the British Government,
who had so kindly offered to dress it for the Emperor, while His
Majesty was obliged to be contented with the shell.

The force encamped at Kanouge bore the title of the Grand Army of
the Ganges and the Jumna; it consisted of eleven regiments of
cavalry and twelve battalions of infantry, and was commanded by
General Lake in person.

Well, on the 1st of September we stormed Perron's camp at Allyghur;
on the fourth we took that fortress by assault; and as my name was
mentioned in general orders, I may as well quote the Commander-in-
Chief's words regarding me--they will spare me the trouble of
composing my own eulogium:-


"The Commander-in-Chief is proud thus publicly to declare his high
sense of the gallantry of Lieutenant Gahagan, of the -- Cavalry.
In the storming of the fortress, although unprovided with a single
ladder, and accompanied but by a few brave men, Lieutenant Gahagan
succeeded in escalading the inner and fourteenth wall of the place.
Fourteen ditches lined with sword-blades and poisoned chevaux-de-
frise, fourteen walls bristling with innumerable artillery and as
smooth as looking-glasses, were in turn triumphantly passed by that
enterprising officer.  His course was to be traced by the heaps of
slaughtered enemies lying thick upon the platforms; and alas! by
the corpses of most of the gallant men who followed him!  When at
length he effected his lodgment, and the dastardly enemy, who dared
not to confront him with arms, let loose upon him the tigers and
lions of Scindiah's menagerie, this meritorious officer destroyed,
with his own hand, four of the largest and most ferocious animals,
and the rest, awed by the indomitable majesty of BRITISH VALOUR,
shrank back to their dens.  Thomas Higgory, a private, and Runty
Goss, havildar, were the only two who remained out of the nine
hundred who followed Lieutenant Gahagan.  Honour to them!  Honour
and tears for the brave men who perished on that awful day!"


* * *

I have copied this, word for word, from the Bengal Hurkaru of
September 24, 1803:  and anybody who has the slightest doubt as to
the statement, may refer to the paper itself.

And here I must pause to give thanks to Fortune, which so
marvellously preserved me, Sergeant-Major Higgory, and Runty Goss.
Were I to say that any valour of ours had carried us unhurt through
this tremendous combat, the reader would laugh me to scorn.  No:
though my narrative is extraordinary, it is nevertheless authentic:
and never never would I sacrifice truth for the mere sake of
effect.  The fact is this:- the citadel of Allyghur is situated
upon a rock, about a thousand feet above the level of the sea, and
is surrounded by fourteen walls, as his Excellency was good enough
to remark in his despatch.  A man who would mount these without
scaling-ladders, is an ass; he who would SAY he mounted them
without such assistance, is a liar and a knave.  We HAD scaling-
ladders at the commencement of the assault, although it was quite
impossible to carry them beyond the first line of batteries.
Mounted on them, however, as our troops were falling thick about
me, I saw that we must ignominiously retreat, unless some other
help could be found for our brave fellows to escalade the next
wall.  It was about seventy feet high.  I instantly turned the guns
of wall A on wall B, and peppered the latter so as to make, not a
breach, but a scaling place; the men mounting in the holes made by
the shot.  By this simple stratagem, I managed to pass each
successive barrier--for to ascend a wall which the General was
pleased to call "as smooth as glass" is an absurd impossibility:  I
seek to achieve none such:-


"I dare do all that may become a man;
Who dares do more, is neither more nor less."


Of course, had the enemy's guns been commonly well served, not one
of us would ever have been alive out of the three; but whether it
was owing to fright, or to the excessive smoke caused by so many
pieces of artillery, arrive we did.  On the platforms, too, our
work was not quite so difficult as might be imagined--killing these
fellows was sheer butchery.  As soon as we appeared, they all
turned and fled helter-skelter, and the reader may judge of their
courage by the fact that out of about seven hundred men killed by
us, only forty had wounds in front, the rest being bayoneted as
they ran.

And beyond all other pieces of good fortune was the very letting
out of these tigers; which was the dernier ressort of Bournonville,
the second commandant of the fort.  I had observed this man
(conspicuous for a tricoloured scarf which he wore) upon every one
of the walls as we stormed them, and running away the very first
among the fugitives.  He had all the keys of the gates; and in his
tremor, as he opened the menagerie portal, left the whole bunch in
the door, which I seized when the animals were overcome.  Runty
Goss then opened them one by one, our troops entered, and the
victorious standard of my country floated on the walls of Allyghur!

When the General, accompanied by his staff, entered the last line
of fortifications, the brave old man raised me from the dead
rhinoceros on which I was seated, and pressed me to his breast.
But the excitement which had borne me through the fatigues and
perils of that fearful day failed all of a sudden, and I wept like
a child upon his shoulder.

Promotion, in our army, goes unluckily by seniority; nor is it in
the power of the General-in-Chief to advance a Caesar, if he finds
him in the capacity of a subaltern:  MY reward for the above
exploit was, therefore, not very rich.  His Excellency had a
favourite horn snuff-box (for, though exalted in station, he was in
his habits most simple):  of this, and about a quarter of an ounce
of high-dried Welsh, which he always took, he made me a present,
saying, in front of the line, "Accept this, Mr. Gahagan, as a token
of respect from the first to the bravest officer in the army."

Calculating the snuff to be worth a halfpenny, I should say that
fourpence was about the value of this gift:  but it has at least
this good effect--it serves to convince any person who doubts my
story, that the facts of it are really true.  I have left it at the
office of my publisher, along with the extract from the Bengal
Hurkaru, and anybody may examine both by applying in the counting-
house of Mr. Cunningham. {3}  That once popular expression, or
proverb, "Are you up to snuff?" arose out of the above
circumstance; for the officers of my corps, none of whom, except
myself, had ventured on the storming party, used to twit me about
this modest reward for my labours.  Never mind! when they want me
to storm a fort AGAIN, I shall know better.

Well, immediately after the capture of this important fortress,
Perron, who had been the life and soul of Scindiah's army, came in
to us, with his family and treasure, and was passed over to the
French settlements at Chandernagur.  Bourquien took his command,
and against him we now moved.  The morning of the 11th of September
found us upon the plains of Delhi.

It was a burning hot day, and we were all refreshing ourselves
after the morning's march, when I, who was on the advanced picket
along with O'Gawler of the King's Dragoons, was made aware of the
enemy's neighbourhood in a very singular manner.  O'Gawler and I
were seated under a little canopy of horse-cloths, which we had
formed to shelter us from the intolerable heat of the sun, and were
discussing with great delight a few Manilla cheroots, and a stone
jar of the most exquisite, cool, weak, refreshing sangaree.  We had
been playing cards the night before, and O'Gawler had lost to me
seven hundred rupees.  I emptied the last of the sangaree into the
two pint tumblers out of which we were drinking, and holding mine
up, said, "Here's better luck to you next time, O'Gawler!"

As I spoke the words--whish!--a cannon-ball cut the tumbler clean
out of my hand, and plumped into poor O'Gawler's stomach.  It
settled him completely, and of course I never got my seven hundred
rupees.  Such are the uncertainties of war!

To strap on my sabre and my accoutrements--to mount my Arab
charger--to drink off what O'Gawler had left of the sangaree--and
to gallop to the General, was the work of a moment.  I found him as
comfortably at tiffin as if he were at his own house in London.

"General," said I, as soon as I got into his paijamahs (or tent),
"you must leave your lunch if you want to fight the enemy."

"The enemy--psha!  Mr. Gahagan, the enemy is on the other side of
the river."

"I can only tell your Excellency that the enemy's guns will hardly
carry five miles, and that Cornet O'Gawler was this moment shot
dead at my side with a cannon-ball."

"Ha! is it so?" said his Excellency, rising, and laying down the
drumstick of a grilled chicken.  "Gentlemen, remember that the eyes
of Europe are upon us, and follow me!"

Each aide-de-camp started from table and seized his cocked hat;
each British heart beat high at the thoughts of the coming melee.
We mounted our horses, and galloped swiftly after the brave old
General; I not the last in the train, upon my famous black charger.

It was perfectly true, the enemy were posted in force within three
miles of our camp, and from a hillock in the advance to which we
galloped, we were enabled with our telescopes to see the whole of
his imposing line.  Nothing can better describe it than this:-

    ___________________ A
  /....................
 /.
/.


- A is the enemy, and the dots represent the hundred and twenty
pieces of artillery which defended his line.  He was moreover,
entrenched; and a wide morass in his front gave him an additional
security.

His Excellency for a moment surveyed the line, and then said,
turning round to one of his aides-de-camp, "Order up Major-General
Tinkler and the cavalry."

"HERE, does your Excellency mean?" said the aide-de-camp,
surprised, for the enemy had perceived us, and the cannon-balls
were flying about as thick as peas.

"HERE, SIR!" said the old General, stamping with his foot in a
passion, and the A.D.C. shrugged his shoulders and galloped away.
In five minutes we heard the trumpets in our camp, and in twenty
more the greater part of the cavalry had joined us.

Up they came, five thousand men, their standards flapping in the
air, their long line of polished jack-boots gleaming in the golden
sunlight.  "And now we are here," said Major-General Sir Theophilus
Tinkler, "what next?"  "Oh, d- it," said the Commander-in-Chief,
"charge, charge--nothing like charging--galloping--guns--rascally
black scoundrels--charge, charge!"  And then turning round to me
(perhaps he was glad to change the conversation), he said,
"Lieutenant Gahagan, you will stay with me."

And well for him I did, for I do not hesitate to say that the
battle WAS GAINED BY ME.  I do not mean to insult the reader by
pretending that any personal exertions of mine turned the day,--
that I killed, for instance, a regiment of cavalry or swallowed a
battery of guns,--such absurd tales would disgrace both the hearer
and the teller.  I, as is well known, never say a single word which
cannot be proved, and hate more than all other vices the absurd sin
of egotism:  I simply mean that my ADVICE to the General, at a
quarter-past two o'clock in the afternoon of that day, won this
great triumph for the British army.

Gleig, Mill, and Thorn have all told the tale of this war, though
somehow they have omitted all mention of the hero of it.  General
Lake, for the victory of that day, became Lord Lake of Laswaree.
Laswaree! and who, forsooth, was the real conqueror of Laswaree?  I
can lay my hand upon my heart and say that I was.  If any proof is
wanting of the fact, let me give it at once, and from the highest
military testimony in the world--I mean that of the Emperor
Napoleon.

In the month of March, 1817, I was passenger on board the "Prince
Regent," Captain Harris, which touched at St. Helena on its passage
from Calcutta to England.  In company with the other officers on
board the ship, I paid my respects to the illustrious exile of
Longwood, who received us in his garden, where he was walking
about, in a nankeen dress and a large broad-brimmed straw hat, with
General Montholon, Count Las Casas, and his son Emanuel, then a
little boy; who I dare say does not recollect me, but who
nevertheless played with my sword-knot and the tassels of my
Hessian boots during the whole of our interview with his Imperial
Majesty.

Our names were read out (in a pretty accent, by the way!) by
General Montholon, and the Emperor, as each was pronounced, made a
bow to the owner of it, but did not vouchsafe a word.  At last
Montholon came to mine.  The Emperor looked me at once in the face,
took his hands out of his pockets, put them behind his back, and
coming up to me smiling, pronounced the following words:-

"Assaye, Delhi, Deeg, Futtyghur?"

I blushed, and, taking off my hat with a bow, said, "Sire, c'est
moi."

"Parbleu! je le savais bien," said the Emperor, holding out his
snuff-box.  "En usez-vous, Major?"  I took a large pinch (which,
with the honour of speaking to so great a man, brought the tears
into my eyes), and he continued as nearly as possible in the
following words:-

"Sir, you are known; you come of an heroic nation.  Your third
brother, the Chef de Bataillon, Count Godfrey Gahagan, was in my
Irish Brigade."

Gahagan.  "Sire, it is true.  He and my countrymen in your
Majesty's service stood under the green flag in the breach of
Burgos, and beat Wellington back.  It was the only time, as your
Majesty knows, that Irishmen and Englishmen were beaten in that
war."

Napoleon (looking as if he would say, "D- your candour, Major
Gahagan").  "Well, well; it was so.  Your brother was a Count, and
died a General in my service."

Gahagan.  "He was found lying upon the bodies of nine-and-twenty
Cossacks at Borodino.  They were all dead, and bore the Gahagan
mark."

Napoleon (to Montholon).  "C'est vrai, Montholon:  je vous donne ma
parole d'honneur la plus sacree, que c'est vrai.  Ils ne sont pas
d'autres, ces terribles Ga'gans.  You must know that Monsieur
gained the battle of Delhi as certainly as I did that of
Austerlitz.  In this way:- Ce belitre de Lor Lake, after calling up
his cavalry, and placing them in front of Holkar's batteries, qui
balayaient la plaine, was for charging the enemy's batteries with
his horse, who would have been ecrases, mitrailles, foudroyes to a
man but for the cunning of ce grand rogue que vous voyez."

Montholon.  "Coquin de Major, va!"

Napoleon.  "Montholon! tais-toi.  When Lord Lake, with his great
bull-headed English obstinacy, saw the facheuse position into which
he had brought his troops, he was for dying on the spot, and would
infallibly have done so--and the loss of his army would have been
the ruin of the East India Company--and the ruin of the English
East India Company would have established my Empire (bah! it was a
republic then!) in the East--but that the man before us, Lieutenant
Goliah Gahagan, was riding at the side of General Lake."

Montholon (with an accent of despair and fury).  "Gredin! cent
mille tonnerres de Dieu!"

Napoleon (benignantly).  "Calme-toi, mon fidele ami.  What will
you?  It was fate.  Gahagan, at the critical period of the battle,
or rather slaughter (for the English had not slain a man of the
enemy), advised a retreat."

Montholon.  "Le lache!  Un Francais meurt, mais il ne recule
jamais."

Napoleon.  "Stupide!  Don't you see why the retreat was ordered?--
don't you know that it was a feint on the part of Gahagan to draw
Holkar from his impregnable entrenchments?  Don't you know that the
ignorant Indian fell into the snare, and issuing from behind the
cover of his guns, came down with his cavalry on the plains in
pursuit of Lake and his dragoons?  Then it was that the Englishmen
turned upon him; the hardy children of the North swept down his
feeble horsemen, bore them back to their guns, which were useless,
entered Holkar's entrenchments along with his troops, sabred the
artillerymen at their pieces, and won the battle of Delhi!"

As the Emperor spoke, his pale cheek glowed red, his eye flashed
fire, his deep clear voice rung as of old when he pointed out the
enemy from beneath the shadow of the Pyramids, or rallied his
regiments to the charge upon the death-strewn plain of Wagram.  I
have had many a proud moment in my life, but never such a proud one
as this; and I would readily pardon the word "coward," as applied
to me by Montholon, in consideration of the testimony which his
master bore in my favour.

"Major," said the Emperor to me in conclusion, "why had I not such
a man as you in my service?  I would have made you a Prince and a
Marshal!" and here he fell into a reverie, of which I knew and
respected the purport.  He was thinking, doubtless, that I might
have retrieved his fortunes; and indeed I have very little doubt
that I might.

Very soon after, coffee was brought by Monsieur Marchand,
Napoleon's valet-de-chambre, and after partaking of that beverage,
and talking upon the politics of the day, the Emperor withdrew,
leaving me deeply impressed by the condescension he had shown in
this remarkable interview.



CHAPTER III:  A PEEP INTO SPAIN--ACCOUNT OF THE ORIGIN AND SERVICES
OF THE AHMEDNUGGAR IRREGULARS



HEADQUARTERS, MORELLA:  September 15, 1838

I have been here for some months, along with my young friend
Cabrera:  and in the hurry and bustle of war--daily on guard and in
the batteries for sixteen hours out of the twenty-four, with
fourteen severe wounds and seven musket-balls in my body--it may be
imagined that I have had little time to think about the publication
of my memoirs.  Inter arma silent leges--in the midst of fighting
be hanged to writing! as the poet says; and I never would have
bothered myself with a pen, had not common gratitude incited me to
throw off a few pages.

Along with Oraa's troops, who have of late been beleaguering this
place, there was a young Milesian gentleman, Mr. Toone O'Connor
Emmett Fitzgerald Sheeny by name, a law student, and a member of
Gray's Inn, and what he called Bay Ah of Trinity College, Dublin.
Mr. Sheeny was with the Queen's people, not in a military capacity,
but as representative of an English journal; to which, for a
trifling weekly remuneration, he was in the habit of transmitting
accounts of the movements of the belligerents, and his own opinion
of the politics of Spain.  Receiving, for the discharge of his
duty, a couple of guineas a week from the proprietors of the
journal in question, he was enabled, as I need scarcely say, to
make such a show in Oraa's camp as only a Christino general
officer, or at the very least a colonel of a regiment, can afford
to keep up.

In the famous sortie which we made upon the twenty-third, I was of
course among the foremost in the melee, and found myself, after a
good deal of slaughtering (which it would be as disagreeable as
useless to describe here), in the court of a small inn or podesta,
which had been made the headquarters of several Queenite officers
during the siege.  The pesatero or landlord of the inn had been
despatched by my brave chapel-churies, with his fine family of
children--the officers quartered in the podesta had of course
bolted; but one man remained, and my fellows were on the point of
cutting him into ten thousand pieces with their borachios, when I
arrived in the room time enough to prevent the catastrophe.  Seeing
before me an individual in the costume of a civilian--a white hat,
a light blue satin cravat, embroidered with butterflies and other
quadrupeds, a green coat and brass buttons, and a pair of blue
plaid trousers, I recognised at once a countryman, and interposed
to save his life.

In an agonised brogue the unhappy young man was saying all that he
could to induce the chapel-churies to give up their intention of
slaughtering him; but it is very little likely that his
protestations would have had any effect upon them, had not I
appeared in the room, and shouted to the ruffians to hold their
hand.

Seeing a general officer before them (I have the honour to hold
that rank in the service of His Catholic Majesty), and moreover one
six feet four in height, and armed with that terrible cabecilla (a
sword so called, because it is five feet long) which is so well
known among the Spanish armies--seeing, I say, this figure, the
fellows retired, exclaiming, "Adios, corpo di bacco nosotros," and
so on, clearly proving (by their words) that they would, if they
dared, have immolated the victim whom I had thus rescued from their
fury.  "Villains!" shouted I, hearing them grumble, "away! quit the
apartment!"  Each man, sulkily sheathing his sombrero, obeyed, and
quitted the camarilla.

It was then that Mr. Sheeny detailed to me the particulars to which
I have briefly adverted; and, informing me at the same time that he
had a family in England who would feel obliged to me for his
release, and that his most intimate friend the English Ambassador
would move heaven and earth to revenge his fall, he directed my
attention to a portmanteau passably well filled, which he hoped
would satisfy the cupidity of my troops.  I said, though with much
regret, that I must subject his person to a search; and hence arose
the circumstance which has called for what I fear you will consider
a somewhat tedious explanation.  I found upon Mr. Sheeny's person
three sovereigns in English money (which I have to this day), and
singularly enough a copy of the New Monthly Magazine, containing a
portion of my adventures.  It was a toss-up whether I should let
the poor young man be shot or no, but this little circumstance
saved his life.  The gratified vanity of authorship induced me to
accept his portmanteau and valuables, and to allow the poor wretch
to go free.  I put the Magazine in my coat-pocket, and left him and
the podesta.

The men, to my surprise, had quitted the building, and it was full
time for me to follow; for I found our sallying party, after
committing dreadful ravages in Oraa's lines, were in full retreat
upon the fort, hotly pressed by a superior force of the enemy.  I
am pretty well known and respected by the men of both parties in
Spain (indeed I served for some months on the Queen's side before I
came over to Don Carlos); and, as it is my maxim never to give
quarter, I never expect to receive it when taken myself.  On
issuing from the podesta with Sheeny's portmanteau and my sword in
my hand, I was a little disgusted and annoyed to see our own men in
a pretty good column retreating at double-quick, and about four
hundred yards beyond me, up the hill leading to the fort; while on
my left hand, and at only a hundred yards, a troop of the Queenite
lancers were clattering along the road.

I had got into the very middle of the road before I made this
discovery, so that the fellows had a full sight of me, and whizz!
came a bullet by my left whisker before I could say Jack Robinson.
I looked round--there were seventy of the accursed malvados at the
least, and within, as I said, a hundred yards.  Were I to say that
I stopped to fight seventy men, you would write me down a fool or a
liar:  no, sir, I did not fight, I ran away.

I am six feet four--my figure is as well known in the Spanish army
as that of the Count de Luchana, or my fierce little friend Cabrera
himself.  "GAHAGAN!" shouted out half-a-dozen scoundrelly voices,
and fifty more shots came rattling after me.  I was running--
running as the brave stag before the hounds--running as I have done
a great number of times before in my life, when there was no help
for it but a race.

After I had run about five hundred yards, I saw that I had gained
nearly three upon our column in front, and that likewise the
Christino horsemen were left behind some hundred yards more; with
the exception of three, who were fearfully near me.  The first was
an officer without a lance; he had fired both his pistols at me,
and was twenty yards in advance of his comrades; there was a
similar distance between the two lancers who rode behind him.  I
determined then to wait for No. 1, and as he came up delivered cut
3 at his horse's near leg--off it flew, and down, as I expected,
went horse and man.  I had hardly time to pass my sword through my
prostrate enemy, when No. 2 was upon me.  If I could but get that
fellow's horse, thought I, I am safe; and I executed at once the
plan which I hoped was to effect my rescue.

I had, as I said, left the podesta with Sheeny's portmanteau, and,
unwilling to part with some of the articles it contained--some
shirts, a bottle of whisky, a few cakes of Windsor soap, &c. &c.,--
I had carried it thus far on my shoulders, but now was compelled to
sacrifice it malgre moi.  As the lancer came up, I dropped my sword
from my right hand, and hurled the portmanteau at his head, with
aim so true, that he fell back on his saddle like a sack, and thus
when the horse galloped up to me, I had no difficulty in
dismounting the rider:  the whisky-bottle struck him over his right
eye, and he was completely stunned.  To dash him from the saddle
and spring myself into it, was the work of a moment; indeed, the
two combats had taken place in about a fifth part of the time which
it has taken the reader to peruse the description.  But in the
rapidity of the last encounter, and the mounting of my enemy's
horse, I had committed a very absurd oversight--I was scampering
away WITHOUT MY SWORD!  What was I to do?--to scamper on, to be
sure, and trust to the legs of my horse for safety!

The lancer behind me gained on me every moment, and I could hear
his horrid laugh as he neared me.  I leaned forward jockey-fashion
in my saddle, and kicked, and urged, and flogged with my hand, but
all in vain.  Closer--closer--the point of his lance was within two
feet of my back.  Ah! ah! he delivered the point, and fancy my
agony when I felt it enter--through exactly fifty-nine pages of the
New Monthly Magazine.  Had it not been for that Magazine, I should
have been impaled without a shadow of a doubt.  Was I wrong in
feeling gratitude?  Had I not cause to continue my contributions to
that periodical?

When I got safe into Morella, along with the tail of the sallying
party, I was for the first time made acquainted with the ridiculous
result of the lancer's thrust (as he delivered his lance, I must
tell you that a ball came whizz over my head from our fellows, and
entering at his nose, put a stop to his lancing for the future).  I
hastened to Cabrera's quarter, and related to him some of my
adventures during the day.

"But, General," said he, "you are standing.  I beg you chiudete
l'uscio (take a chair)."

I did so, and then for the first time was aware that there was some
foreign substance in the tail of my coat, which prevented my
sitting at ease.  I drew out the Magazine which I had seized, and
there, to my wonder, discovered the Christino lance twisted up like
a fish-hook or a pastoral crook.

"Ha! ha! ha!" said Cabrera (who is a notorious wag).

"Valdepenas madrilenos," growled out Tristany.

"By my cachuca di caballero (upon my honour as a gentleman),"
shrieked out Ros d'Eroles, convulsed with laughter, "I will send it
to the Bishop of Leon for a crozier."

"Gahagan has CONSECRATED it," giggled out Ramon Cabrera; and so
they went on with their muchacas for an hour or more.  But, when
they heard that the means of my salvation from the lance of the
scoundrelly Christino had been the Magazine containing my own
history, their laugh was changed into wonder.  I read them
(speaking Spanish more fluently than English) every word of my
story.  "But how is this?" said Cabrera.  "You surely have other
adventures to relate?"

"Excellent sir," said I, "I have;" and that very evening, as we sat
over our cups of tertullia (sangaree), I continued my narrative in
nearly the following words:-

"I left off in the very middle of the battle of Delhi, which ended,
as everybody knows, in the complete triumph of the British arms.
But who gained the battle?  Lord Lake is called Viscount Lake of
Delhi and Laswaree, while Major Gaha--nonsense, never mind HIM,
never mind the charge he executed when, sabre in hand, he leaped
the six-foot wall in the mouth of the roaring cannon, over the
heads of the gleaming pikes; when, with one hand seizing the sacred
peishcush, or fish--which was the banner always borne before
Scindiah,--he, with his good sword, cut off the trunk of the famous
white elephant, which, shrieking with agony, plunged madly into the
Mahratta ranks, followed by his giant brethren, tossing, like chaff
before the wind, the affrighted kitmatgars.  He, meanwhile, now
plunging into the midst of a battalion of consomahs, now cleaving
to the chine a screaming and ferocious bobbachee, {4} rushed on,
like the simoom across the red Zaharan plain, killing, with his own
hand, a hundred and forty-thr--but never mind--'ALONE HE DID IT;'
sufficient be it for him, however, that the victory was won:  he
cares not for the empty honours which were awarded to more
fortunate men!

"We marched after the battle to Delhi, where poor blind old Shah
Allum received us, and bestowed all kinds of honours and titles on
our General.  As each of the officers passed before him, the Shah
did not fail to remark my person, {5} and was told my name.

"Lord Lake whispered to him my exploits, and the old man was so
delighted with the account of my victory over the elephant (whose
trunk I use to this day), that he said, 'Let him be called
GUJPUTI,' or the lord of elephants; and Gujputi was the name by
which I was afterwards familiarly known among the natives,--the
men, that is.  The women had a softer appellation for me, and
called me 'Mushook,' or charmer.

"Well, I shall not describe Delhi, which is doubtless well known to
the reader; nor the siege of Agra, to which place we went from
Delhi; nor the terrible day at Laswaree, which went nigh to finish
the war.  Suffice it to say that we were victorious, and that I was
wounded; as I have invariably been in the two hundred and four
occasions when I have found myself in action.  One point, however,
became in the course of this campaign QUITE evident--THAT SOMETHING
MUST BE DONE FOR GAHAGAN.  The country cried shame, the King's
troops grumbled, the sepoys openly murmured that their Gujputi was
only a lieutenant, when he had performed such signal services.
What was to be done?  Lord Wellesley was in an evident quandary.
'Gahagan,' wrote he, 'to be a subaltern is evidently not your fate-
-YOU WERE BORN FOR COMMAND; but Lake and General Wellesley are good
officers, they cannot be turned out--I must make a post for you.
What say you, my dear fellow, to a corps of IRREGULAR HORSE?'

"It was thus that the famous corps of AHMEDNUGGAR IRREGULARS had
its origin; a guerilla force, it is true, but one which will long
be remembered in the annals of our Indian campaigns.

* * *

"As the commander of this regiment, I was allowed to settle the
uniform of the corps, as well as to select recruits.  These were
not wanting as soon as my appointment was made known, but came
flocking to my standard a great deal faster than to the regular
corps in the Company's service.  I had European officers, of
course, to command them, and a few of my countrymen as sergeants;
the rest were all natives, whom I chose of the strongest and
bravest men in India; chiefly Pitans, Afghans, Hurrumzadehs, and
Calliawns:  for these are well known to be the most warlike
districts of our Indian territory.

"When on parade and in full uniform we made a singular and noble
appearance.  I was always fond of dress; and, in this instance gave
a carte blanche to my taste, and invented the most splendid costume
that ever perhaps decorated a soldier.  I am, as I have stated
already, six feet four inches in height, and of matchless symmetry
and proportion.  My hair and beard are of the most brilliant
auburn, so bright as scarcely to be distinguished at a distance
from scarlet.  My eyes are bright blue, overshadowed by bushy
eyebrows of the colour of my hair, and a terrific gash of the
deepest purple, which goes over the forehead, the eyelid, and the
cheek, and finishes at the ear, gives my face a more strictly
military appearance than can be conceived.  When I have been
drinking (as is pretty often the case) this gash becomes ruby
bright, and as I have another which took off a piece of my under-
lip, and shows five of my front teeth, I leave you to imagine that
'seldom lighted on the earth' (as the monster Burke remarked of one
of his unhappy victims) 'a more extraordinary vision.'  I improved
these natural advantages; and, while in cantonment during the hot
winds at Chittybobbary, allowed my hair to grow very long, as did
my beard, which reached to my waist.  It took me two hours daily to
curl my hair in ten thousand little corkscrew ringlets, which waved
over my shoulders, and to get my moustaches well round to the
corners of my eyelids.  I dressed in loose scarlet trousers and red
morocco boots, a scarlet jacket, and a shawl of the same colour
round my waist; a scarlet turban three feet high, and decorated
with a tuft of the scarlet feathers of the flamingo, formed my
head-dress, and I did not allow myself a single ornament, except a
small silver skull and cross-bones in front of my turban.  Two
brace of pistols, a Malay creese, and a tulwar, sharp on both
sides, and very nearly six feet in length, completed this elegant
costume.  My two flags were each surmounted with a real skull and
cross-bones, and ornamented one with a black, and the other with a
red beard (of enormous length, taken from men slain in battle by
me).  On one flag were of course the arms of John Company; on the
other, an image of myself bestriding a prostrate elephant, with the
simple word 'GUJPUTI' written underneath in the Nagaree, Persian,
and Sanscrit characters.  I rode my black horse, and looked, by the
immortal gods, like Mars.  To me might be applied the words which
were written concerning handsome General Webb, in Marlborough's
time:-


"'To noble danger he conducts the way,
His great example all his troop obey,
Before the front the Major sternly rides,
With such an air as Mars to battle strides.
Propitious Heaven must sure a hero save
Like Paris handsome, and like Hector brave!'


"My officers (Captains Biggs and Mackanulty, Lieutenants Glogger,
Pappendick, Stuffle, &c. &c.) were dressed exactly in the same way,
but in yellow; and the men were similarly equipped, but in black.
I have seen many regiments since, and many ferocious-looking men,
but the Ahmednuggar Irregulars were more dreadful to the view than
any set of ruffians on which I ever set eyes.  I would to Heaven
that the Czar of Muscovy had passed through Cabool and Lahore, and
that I with my old Ahmednuggars stood on a fair field to meet him!
Bless you, bless you, my swart companions in victory! through the
mist of twenty years I hear the booming of your war-cry, and mark
the glitter of your scimitars as ye rage in the thickest of the
battle! {6}

"But away with melancholy reminiscences.  You may fancy what a
figure the Irregulars cut on a field-day--a line of five hundred
black-faced, black-dressed, black-horsed, black-bearded men--Biggs,
Glogger, and the other officers in yellow, galloping about the
field like flashes of lightning; myself enlightening them, red,
solitary, and majestic, like yon glorious orb in heaven.

"There are very few men, I presume, who have not heard of Holkar's
sudden and gallant incursion into the Dooab, in the year 1804, when
we thought that the victory of Laswaree and the brilliant success
at Deeg had completely finished him.  Taking ten thousand horse he
broke up his camp at Palimbang; and the first thing General Lake
heard of him was, that he was at Putna, then at Rumpooge, then at
Doncaradam--he was, in fact, in the very heart of our territory.

"The unfortunate part of the affair was this:- His Excellency,
despising the Mahratta chieftain, had allowed him to advance about
two thousand miles in his front, and knew not in the slightest
degree where to lay hold on him.  Was he at Hazarubaug? was he at
Bogly Gunge? nobody knew, and for a considerable period the
movements of Lake's cavalry were quite ambiguous, uncertain,
promiscuous, and undetermined.

"Such, briefly, was the state of affairs in October 1804.  At the
beginning of that month I had been wounded (a trifling scratch,
cutting off my left upper eyelid, a bit of my cheek, and my under-
lip), and I was obliged to leave Biggs in command of my Irregulars,
whilst I retired for my wounds to an English station at
Furruckabad, alias Futtyghur--it is, as every twopenny postman
knows, at the apex of the Dooab.  We have there a cantonment, and
thither I went for the mere sake of the surgeon and the sticking-
plaster.

"Furruckabad, then, is divided into two districts or towns:  the
lower Cotwal, inhabited by the natives, and the upper (which is
fortified slightly, and has all along been called Futtyghur,
meaning in Hindustanee 'the-favourite-resort-of-the-white-faced-
Feringhees-near-the-mango-tope-consecrated-to-Ram'), occupied by
Europeans.  (It is astonishing, by the way, how comprehensive that
language is, and how much can be conveyed in one or two of the
commonest phrases.)

"Biggs, then, and my men were playing all sorts of wondrous pranks
with Lord Lake's army, whilst I was detained an unwilling prisoner
of health at Futtyghur.

"An unwilling prisoner, however, I should not say.  The cantonment
at Futtyghur contained that which would have made any man a happy
slave.  Woman, lovely woman, was there in abundance and variety!
The fact is, that, when the campaign commenced in 1803, the ladies
of the army all congregated to this place, where they were left, as
it was supposed, in safety.  I might, like Homer, relate the names
and qualities of all.  I may at least mention SOME whose memory is
still most dear to me.  There was -

"Mrs. Major-General Bulcher, wife of Bulcher of the Infantry.

"Miss Bulcher.

"MISS BELINDA BULCHER (whose name I beg the printer to place in
large capitals).

"Mrs. Colonel Vandegobbleschroy.

"Mrs. Major Macan and the four Misses Macan.

"The Honourable Mrs. Burgoo, Mrs. Flix, Hicks, Wicks, and many more
too numerous to mention.  The flower of our camp was, however,
collected there, and the last words of Lord Lake to me, as I left
him, were, 'Gahagan, I commit those women to your charge.  Guard
them with your life, watch over them with your honour, defend them
with the matchless power of your indomitable arm.'

"Futtyghur is, as I have said, a European station, and the pretty
air of the bungalows, amid the clustering topes of mango-trees, has
often ere this excited the admiration of the tourist and sketcher.
On the brow of a hill--the Burrumpooter river rolls majestically at
its base; and no spot, in a word, can be conceived more exquisitely
arranged, both by art and nature, as a favourite residence of the
British fair.  Mrs. Bulcher, Mrs. Vandegobbleschroy, and the other
married ladies above mentioned, had each of them delightful
bungalows and gardens in the place, and between one cottage and
another my time passed as delightfully as can the hours of any man
who is away from his darling occupation of war.

"I was the commandant of the fort.  It is a little insignificant
pettah, defended simply by a couple of gabions, a very ordinary
counterscarp, and a bomb-proof embrasure.  On the top of this my
flag was planted, and the small garrison of forty men only were
comfortably barracked off in the casemates within.  A surgeon and
two chaplains (there were besides three reverend gentlemen of
amateur missions, who lived in the town), completed, as I may say,
the garrison of our little fortalice, which I was left to defend
and to command.

"On the night of the first of November, in the year 1804, I had
invited Mrs. Major-General Bulcher and her daughters, Mrs.
Vandegobbleschroy, and, indeed, all the ladies in the cantonment,
to a little festival in honour of the recovery of my health, of the
commencement of the shooting season, and indeed as a farewell
visit, for it was my intention to take dawk the very next morning
and return to my regiment.  The three amateur missionaries whom I
have mentioned, and some ladies in the cantonment of very rigid
religious principles, refused to appear at my little party.  They
had better never have been born than have done as they did:  as you
shall hear.

"We had been dancing merrily all night, and the supper (chiefly of
the delicate condor, the luscious adjutant, and other birds of a
similar kind, which I had shot in the course of the day) had been
duly feted by every lady and gentleman present; when I took an
opportunity to retire on the ramparts, with the interesting and
lovely Belinda Bulcher.  I was occupied, as the French say, in
CONTER-ing fleurettes to this sweet young creature, when, all of a
sudden, a rocket was seen whizzing through the air, and a strong
light was visible in the valley below the little fort.

"'What, fireworks!  Captain Gahagan,' said Belinda; 'this is too
gallant.'

"'Indeed, my dear Miss Bulcher,' said I, 'they are fireworks of
which I have no idea:  perhaps our friends the missionaries--'

"'Look, look!' said Belinda, trembling, and clutching tightly hold
of my arm:  'what do I see? yes--no--yes! it is--OUR BUNGALOW IS IN
FLAMES!'

"It was true, the spacious bungalow occupied by Mrs. Major-General
was at that moment seen a prey to the devouring element--another
and another succeeded it--seven bungalows, before I could almost
ejaculate the name of Jack Robinson, were seen blazing brightly in
the black midnight air!

"I seized my night-glass, and looking towards the spot where the
conflagration raged, what was my astonishment to see thousands of
black forms dancing round the fires; whilst by their lights I could
observe columns after columns of Indian horse, arriving and taking
up their ground in the very middle of the open square or tank,
round which the bungalows were built!

"'Ho, warder!' shouted I (while the frightened and trembling
Belinda clung closer to my side, and pressed the stalwart arm that
encircled her waist), 'down with the drawbridge! see that your
masolgees' (small tumbrels which are used in place of large
artillery) 'be well loaded:  you, sepoys, hasten and man the
ravelin! you, choprasees, put out the lights in the embrasures! we
shall have warm work of it to-night, or my name is not Goliah
Gahagan.'

"The ladies, the guests (to the number of eighty-three), the
sepoys, choprasees, masolgees, and so on, had all crowded on the
platform at the sound of my shouting, and dreadful was the
consternation, shrill the screaming, occasioned by my words.  The
men stood irresolute and mute with terror; the women, trembling,
knew scarcely whither to fly for refuge.  'Who are yonder
ruffians?' said I.  A hundred voices yelped in reply--some said the
Pindarees, some said the Mahrattas, some vowed it was Scindiah, and
others declared it was Holkar--no one knew.

"'Is there any one here,' said I, 'who will venture to reconnoitre
yonder troops?'  There was a dead pause.

"'A thousand tomauns to the man who will bring me news of yonder
army!' again I repeated.  Still a dead silence.  The fact was that
Scindiah and Holkar both were so notorious for their cruelty, that
no one dared venture to face the danger.  'Oh for fifty of my brave
Ahmednuggarees!' thought I.

"'Gentlemen,' said I, 'I see it--you are cowards--none of you dare
encounter the chance even of death.  It is an encouraging prospect:
know you not that the ruffian Holkar, if it be he, will with to-
morrow's dawn beleaguer our little fort, and throw thousands of men
against our walls? know you not that, if we are taken, there is no
quarter, no hope; death for us--and worse than death for these
lovely ones assembled here?'  Here the ladies shrieked and raised a
howl as I have heard the jackals on a summer's evening.  Belinda,
my dear Belinda! flung both her arms round me, and sobbed on my
shoulder (or in my waistcoat-pocket rather, for the little witch
could reach no higher).

"'Captain Gahagan,' sobbed she, 'Go-Go-Goggle-iah!'

"'My soul's adored!' replied I.

"'Swear to me one thing.'

"'I swear.'

"'That if--that if--the nasty, horrid, odious black Mah-ra-a-a-
attahs take the fort, you will put me out of their power.'

"I clasped the dear girl to my heart, and swore upon my sword that,
rather than she should incur the risk of dishonour, she should
perish by my own hand.  This comforted her; and her mother, Mrs.
Major-General Bulcher, and her elder sister, who had not until now
known a word of our attachment, (indeed, but for these
extraordinary circumstances, it is probable that we ourselves
should never have discovered it), were under these painful
circumstances made aware of my beloved Belinda's partiality for me.
Having communicated thus her wish of self-destruction, I thought
her example a touching and excellent one, and proposed to all the
ladies that they should follow it, and that at the entry of the
enemy into the fort, and at a signal given by me, they should one
and all make away with themselves.  Fancy my disgust when, after
making this proposition, not one of the ladies chose to accede to
it, and received it with the same chilling denial that my former
proposal to the garrison had met with.

"In the midst of this hurry and confusion, as if purposely to add
to it, a trumpet was heard at the gate of the fort, and one of the
sentinels came running to me, saying that a Mahratta soldier was
before the gate with a flag of truce!

"I went down, rightly conjecturing, as it turned out, that the
party, whoever they might be, had no artillery; and received at the
point of my sword a scroll of which the following is a translation.


"'To Goliah Gahagan Gujputi.

"'LORD OF ELEPHANTS, SIR,--I have the honour to inform you that I
arrived before this place at eight o'clock p.m. with ten thousand
cavalry under my orders.  I have burned, since my arrival,
seventeen bungalows in Furruckabad and Futtyghur, and have likewise
been under the painful necessity of putting to death three
clergymen (mollahs) and seven English officers, whom I found in the
village; the women have been transferred to safe keeping in the
harems of my officers and myself.

"'As I know your courage and talents, I shall be very happy if you
will surrender the fortress, and take service as a major-general
(hookahbadar) in my army.  Should my proposal not meet with your
assent, I beg leave to state that to-morrow I shall storm the fort,
and on taking it, shall put to death every male in the garrison,
and every female above twenty years of age.  For yourself I shall
reserve a punishment, which for novelty and exquisite torture has,
I flatter myself, hardly ever been exceeded.  Awaiting the favour
of a reply, I am, Sir,

"'Your very obedient servant,

"'JESWUNT ROW HOLKAR.
"'CAMP BEFORE FUTTYGHUR:  September 1, 1804.
"'R. S. V. P.'


"The officer who had brought this precious epistle (it is
astonishing how Holkar had aped the forms of English
correspondence), an enormous Pitan soldier, with a shirt of mail,
and a steel cap and cape, round which his turban wound, was leaning
against the gate on his matchlock, and whistling a national melody.
I read the letter, and saw at once there was no time to be lost.
That man, thought I, must never go back to Holkar.  Were he to
attack us now before we were prepared, the fort would be his in
half-an-hour.

"Tying my white pocket-handkerchief to a stick, I flung open the
gate and advanced to the officer:  he was standing, I said, on the
little bridge across the moat.  I made him a low salaam, after the
fashion of the country, and, as he bent forward to return the
compliment, I am sorry to say, I plunged forward, gave him a
violent blow on the head, which deprived him of all sensation, and
then dragged him within the wall, raising the drawbridge after me.

"I bore the body into my own apartment; there, swift as thought, I
stripped him of his turban, cammerbund, peijammahs, and papooshes,
and, putting them on myself, determined to go forth and reconnoitre
the enemy."

* * *

Here I was obliged to stop, for Cabrera, Ros d'Eroles, and the rest
of the staff, were sound asleep!  What I did in my reconnaissance,
and how I defended the fort of Futtyghur, I shall have the honour
of telling on another occasion.



CHAPTER IV:  THE INDIAN CAMP--THE SORTIE FROM THE FORT



HEADQUARTERS, MORELLA:  October 3, 1838

It is a balmy night.  I hear the merry jingle of the tambourine,
and the cheery voices of the girls and peasants, as they dance
beneath my casement, under the shadow of the clustering vines.  The
laugh and song pass gaily round, and even at this distance I can
distinguish the elegant form of Ramon Cabrera, as he whispers gay
nothings in the ears of the Andalusian girls, or joins in the
thrilling chorus of Riego's hymn, which is ever and anon
vociferated by the enthusiastic soldiery of Carlos Quinto.  I am
alone, in the most inaccessible and most bomb-proof tower of our
little fortalice; the large casements are open--the wind, as it
enters, whispers in my ear its odorous recollections of the orange
grove and the myrtle bower.  My torch (a branch of the fragrant
cedar-tree) flares and flickers in the midnight breeze, and
disperses its scent and burning splinters on my scroll and the desk
where I write--meet implements for a soldier's authorship!--it is
CARTRIDGE paper over which my pen runs so glibly, and a yawning
barrel of gunpowder forms my rough writing-table.  Around me, below
me, above me, all--all is peace!  I think, as I sit here so lonely,
on my country, England! and muse over the sweet and bitter
recollections of my early days!  Let me resume my narrative, at the
point where (interrupted by the authoritative summons of war) I
paused on the last occasion.

I left off, I think--(for I am a thousand miles away from proof-
sheets as I write, and, were I not writing the simple TRUTH, must
contradict myself a thousand times in the course of my tale)--I
think, I say, that I left off at that period of my story, when,
Holkar being before Futtyghur, and I in command of that fortress, I
had just been compelled to make away with his messenger:  and,
dressed in the fallen Indian's accoutrements, went forth to
reconnoitre the force, and, if possible, to learn the intentions of
the enemy.  However much my figure might have resembled that of the
Pitan, and, disguised in his armour, might have deceived the lynx-
eyed Mahrattas, into whose camp I was about to plunge, it was
evident that a single glance at my fair face and auburn beard would
have undeceived the dullest blockhead in Holkar's army.  Seizing,
then, a bottle of Burgess's walnut catsup, I dyed my face and my
hands, and, with the simple aid of a flask of Warren's jet, I made
my hair and beard as black as ebony.  The Indian's helmet and chain
hood covered likewise a great part of my face, and I hoped thus,
with luck, impudence, and a complete command of all the Eastern
dialects and languages, from Burmah to Afghanistan, to pass scot-
free through this somewhat dangerous ordeal.

I had not the word of the night, it is true--but I trusted to good
fortune for that, and passed boldly out of the fortress, bearing
the flag of truce as before; I had scarcely passed on a couple of
hundred yards, when lo! a party of Indian horsemen, armed like him
I had just overcome, trotted towards me.  One was leading a noble
white charger, and no sooner did he see me than, dismounting from
his own horse, and giving the rein to a companion, he advanced to
meet me with the charger; a second fellow likewise dismounted and
followed the first:  one held the bridle of the horse, while the
other (with a multitude of salaams, aleikums, and other
genuflexions) held the jewelled stirrup, and kneeling, waited until
I should mount.

I took the hint at once:  the Indian who had come up to the fort
was a great man--that was evident; I walked on with a majestic air,
gathered up the velvet reins, and sprung into the magnificent high-
peaked saddle.  "Buk, buk," said I.  "It is good.  In the name of
the forty-nine Imaums, let us ride on."  And the whole party set
off at a brisk trot, I keeping silence, and thinking with no little
trepidation of what I was about to encounter.

As we rode along, I heard two of the men commenting upon my unusual
silence (for I suppose, I--that is the Indian--was a talkative
officer).  "The lips of the Bahawder are closed," said one.  "Where
are those birds of Paradise, his long-tailed words? they are
imprisoned between the golden bars of his teeth!"

"Kush," said his companion, "be quiet!  Bobbachy Bahawder has seen
the dreadful Feringhee, Gahagan Khan Gujputi, the elephant-lord,
whose sword reaps the harvest of death; there is but one champion
who can wear the papooshes of the elephant-slayer--it is Bobbachy
Bahawder!"

"You speak truly, Puneeree Muckun, the Bahawder ruminates on the
words of the unbeliever:  he is an ostrich, and hatches the eggs of
his thoughts."

"Bekhusm! on my nose be it!  May the young birds, his actions, be
strong and swift in flight."

"May they DIGEST IRON!" said Puneeree Muckun, who was evidently a
wag in his way.

"O--ho!" thought I, as suddenly the light flashed upon me.  "It
was, then, the famous Bobbachy Bahawder whom I overcame just now!
and he is the man destined to stand in my slippers, is he?" and I
was at that very moment standing in his own!  Such are the chances
and changes that fall to the lot of the soldier!

I suppose everybody--everybody who has been in India, at least--has
heard the name of Bobbachy Bahawder:  it is derived from the two
Hindustanee words--bobbachy, general; bahawder, artilleryman.  He
had entered into Holkar's service in the latter capacity, and had,
by his merit and his undaunted bravery in action, attained the
dignity of the peacock's feather, which is only granted to noblemen
of the first class; he was married, moreover, to one of Holkar's
innumerable daughters; a match which, according to the Chronique
Scandaleuse, brought more of honour than of pleasure to the poor
Bobbachy.  Gallant as he was in the field, it was said that in the
harem he was the veriest craven alive, completely subjugated by his
ugly and odious wife.  In all matters of importance the late
Bahawder had been consulted by his prince, who had, as it appears
(knowing my character, and not caring to do anything rash in his
attack upon so formidable an enemy), sent forward the unfortunate
Pitan to reconnoitre the fort; he was to have done yet more, as I
learned from the attendant Puneeree Muckun, who was, I soon found
out, an old favourite with the Bobbachy--doubtless on account of
his honesty and love of repartee.

"The Bahawder's lips are closed," said he, at last, trotting up to
me; "has he not a word for old Puneeree Muckun?"

"Bismillah, mashallah, barikallah," said I; which means, "My good
friend, what I have seen is not worth the trouble of relation, and
fills my bosom with the darkest forebodings."

"You could not then see the Gujputi alone, and stab him with your
dagger?"

[Here was a pretty conspiracy!]  "No, I saw him, but not alone; his
people were always with him."

"Hurrumzadeh! it is a pity; we waited but the sound of your jogree
(whistle), and straightway would have galloped up and seized upon
every man, woman, and child in the fort:  however, there are but a
dozen men in the garrison, and they have not provision for two
days--they must yield; and then hurrah for the moon-faces!
Mashallah!  I am told the soldiers who first get in are to have
their pick.  How my old woman, Rotee Muckun, will be surprised when
I bring home a couple of Feringhee wives,--ha! ha!"

"Fool!" said I, "be still!--twelve men in the garrison there are
twelve hundred!  Gahagan himself is as good as a thousand men; and
as for food, I saw with my own eyes five hundred bullocks grazing
in the courtyard as I entered."  This WAS a bouncer, I confess; but
my object was to deceive Puneeree Muckun, and give him as high a
notion as possible of the capabilities of defence which the
besieged had.

"Pooch, pooch," murmured the men; "it is a wonder of a fortress:
we shall never be able to take it until our guns come up."

There was hope then! they had no battering-train.  Ere this arrived
I trusted that Lord Lake would hear of our plight, and march down
to rescue us.  Thus occupied in thought and conversation, we rode
on until the advanced sentinel challenged us, when old Puneeree
gave the word, and we passed on into the centre of Holkar's camp.

It was a strange--a stirring sight!  The camp-fires were lighted;
and round them--eating, reposing, talking, looking at the merry
steps of the dancing-girls, or listening to the stories of some
Dhol Baut (or Indian improvisatore)--were thousands of dusky
soldiery.  The camels and horses were picketed under the banyan-
trees, on which the ripe mango fruit was growing, and offered them
an excellent food.  Towards the spot which the golden fish and
royal purdahs, floating in the wind, designated as the tent of
Holkar, led an immense avenue--of elephants! the finest street,
indeed, I ever saw.  Each of the monstrous animals had a castle on
its back, armed with Mauritanian archers and the celebrated Persian
matchlock-men:  it was the feeding time of these royal brutes, and
the grooms were observed bringing immense toffungs, or baskets,
filled with pine-apples, plantains, bananas, Indian corn, and
cocoa-nuts, which grow luxuriantly at all seasons of the year.  We
passed down this extraordinary avenue--no less than three hundred
and eighty-eight tails did I count on each side--each tail
appertaining to an elephant twenty-five feet high--each elephant
having a two-storied castle on its back--each castle containing
sleeping and eating rooms for the twelve men that formed its
garrison, and were keeping watch on the roof--each roof bearing a
flagstaff twenty feet long on its top, the crescent glittering with
a thousand gems, and round it the imperial standard,--each standard
of silk velvet and cloth-of-gold, bearing the well-known device of
Holkar, argent an or gules, between a sinople of the first, a
chevron truncated, wavy.  I took nine of these myself in the course
of a very short time after, and shall be happy, when I come to
England, to show them to any gentleman who has a curiosity that
way.  Through this gorgeous scene our little cavalcade passed, and
at last we arrived at the quarters occupied by Holkar.

That celebrated chieftain's tents and followers were gathered round
one of the British bungalows which had escaped the flames, and
which he occupied during the siege.  When I entered the large room
where he sat, I found him in the midst of a council of war; his
chief generals and viziers seated round him, each smoking his
hookah, as is the common way with these black fellows, before, at,
and after breakfast, dinner, supper, and bedtime.  There was such a
cloud raised by their smoke you could hardly see a yard before you-
-another piece of good-luck for me--as it diminished the chances of
my detection.  When, with the ordinary ceremonies, the kitmatgars
and consomahs had explained to the prince that Bobbachy Bahawder,
the right eye of the Sun of the Universe (as the ignorant heathens
called me), had arrived from his mission, Holkar immediately
summoned me to the maidaun, or elevated platform, on which he was
seated in a luxurious easy-chair, and I, instantly taking off my
slippers, falling on my knees, and beating my head against the
ground ninety-nine times, proceeded, still on my knees, a hundred
and twenty feet through the room, and then up the twenty steps
which led to his maidaun--a silly, painful, and disgusting
ceremony, which can only be considered as a relic of barbarian
darkness, which tears the knees and shins to pieces, let alone the
pantaloons.  I recommend anybody who goes to India, with the
prospect of entering the service of the native rajahs, to recollect
my advice, and have them WELL WADDED.

Well, the right eye of the Sun of the Universe scrambled as well as
he could up the steps of the maidaun (on which, in rows, smoking,
as I have said, the musnuds or general officers were seated), and I
arrived within speaking distance of Holkar, who instantly asked me
the success of my mission.  The impetuous old man thereon poured
out a multitude of questions:  "How many men are there in the
fort?" said he; "how many women?  Is it victualled? have they
ammunition?  Did you see Gahagan Sahib, the commander? did you kill
him?"

All these questions Jeswunt Row Holkar puffed out with so many
whiffs of tobacco.

Taking a chillum myself, and raising about me such a cloud that,
upon my honour as a gentleman, no man at three yards' distance
could perceive anything of me except the pillar of smoke in which I
was encompassed, I told Holkar, in Oriental language of course, the
best tale I could with regard to the fort.

"Sir," said I, "to answer your last question first--that dreadful
Gujputi I have seen--and he is alive:  he is eight feet, nearly, in
height; he can eat a bullock daily (of which he has seven hundred
at present in the compound, and swears that during the siege he
will content himself with only three a week):  he has lost, in
battle, his left eye; and what is the consequence?  O Ram Gunge" (O
thou-with-the-eye-as-bright-as-morning and-with-beard-as-black-as-
night), "Goliah Gujputi--NEVER SLEEPS!"

"Ah, you Ghorumsaug (you thief of the world)," said the Prince
Vizier, Saadut Alee Beg Bimbukchee--"it's joking you are;"--and
there was a universal buzz through the room at the announcement of
this bouncer.

"By the hundred and eleven incarnations of Vishnu," said I,
solemnly (an oath which no Indian was ever known to break), "I
swear that so it is:  so at least he told me, and I have good cause
to know his power.  Gujputi is an enchanter:  he is leagued with
devils; he is invulnerable.  Look," said I, unsheathing my dagger--
and every eye turned instantly towards me--"thrice did I stab him
with this steel--in the back, once--twice right through the heart;
but he only laughed me to scorn, and bade me tell Holkar that the
steel was not yet forged which was to inflict an injury upon him."

I never saw a man in such a rage as Holkar was when I gave him this
somewhat imprudent message.

"Ah, lily-livered rogue!" shouted he out to me, "milk-blooded
unbeliever! pale-faced miscreant! lives he after insulting thy
master in thy presence?  In the name of the Prophet, I spit on
thee, defy thee, abhor thee, degrade thee!  Take that, thou liar of
the universe! and that--and that--and that!"

Such are the frightful excesses of barbaric minds! every time this
old man said, "Take that," he flung some article near him at the
head of the undaunted Gahagan--his dagger, his sword, his carbine,
his richly ornamented pistols, his turban covered with jewels,
worth a hundred thousand crores of rupees--finally, his hookah,
snake mouthpiece, silver-bell, chillum and all--which went hissing
over my head, and flattening into a jelly the nose of the Grand
Vizier.

"Yock muzzee! my nose is off," said the old man, mildly.  "Will you
have my life, O Holkar? it is thine likewise!" and no other word of
complaint escaped his lips.

Of all these missiles, though a pistol and carbine had gone off as
the ferocious Indian flung them at my head, and the naked scimitar,
fiercely but unadroitly thrown, had lopped off the limbs of one or
two of the musnuds as they sat trembling on their omrahs, yet,
strange to say, not a single weapon had hurt me.  When the hubbub
ceased, and the unlucky wretches who had been the victims of this
fit of rage had been removed, Holkar's good-humour somewhat
returned, and he allowed me to continue my account of the fort;
which I did, not taking the slightest notice of his burst of
impatience:  as indeed it would have been the height of
impoliteness to have done, for such accidents happened many times
in the day.

"It is well that the Bobbachy has returned," snuffled out the poor
Grand Vizier, after I had explained to the Council the
extraordinary means of defence possessed by the garrison.

"Your star is bright, O Bahawder! for this very night we had
resolved upon an escalade of the fort, and we had sworn to put
every one of the infidel garrison to the edge of the sword."

"But you have no battering train," said I.

"Bah! we have a couple of ninety-six pounders, quite sufficient to
blow the gates open; and then, hey for a charge!" said Loll
Mahommed, a general of cavalry, who was a rival of Bobbachy's, and
contradicted, therefore, every word I said.  "In the name of
Juggernaut, why wait for the heavy artillery?  Have we not swords?
Have we not hearts?  Mashallah!  Let cravens stay with Bobbachy,
all true men will follow Loll Mahommed!  Allahhumdillah, Bismillah,
Barikallah?" {7} and drawing his scimitar, he waved it over his
head, and shouted out his cry of battle.  It was repeated by many
of the other omrahs; the sound of their cheers was carried into the
camp, and caught up by the men; the camels began to cry, the horses
to prance and neigh, the eight hundred elephants set up a scream,
the trumpeters and drummers clanged away at their instruments.  I
never heard such a din before or after.  How I trembled for my
little garrison when I heard the enthusiastic cries of this
innumerable host!

There was but one way for it.  "Sir," said I, addressing Holkar,
"go out to-night, and you go to certain death.  Loll Mahommed has
not seen the fort as I have.  Pass the gate if you please, and for
what? to fall before the fire of a hundred pieces of artillery; to
storm another gate, and then another, and then to be blown up, with
Gahagan's garrison in the citadel.  Who talks of courage?  Were I
not in your august presence, O star of the faithful, I would crop
Loll Mahommed's nose from his face, and wear his ears as an
ornament in my own pugree!  Who is there here that knows not the
difference between yonder yellow-skinned coward and Gahagan Khan
Guj--I mean Bobbachy Bahawder?  I am ready to fight one, two,
three, or twenty of them, at broad-sword, small-sword, single-
stick, with fists if you please.  By the holy piper, fighting is
like mate and dthrink to Ga---to Bobbachy, I mane--whoop! come on,
you divvle, and I'll bate the skin off your ugly bones."

This speech had very nearly proved fatal to me, for, when I am
agitated, I involuntarily adopt some of the phraseology peculiar to
my own country; which is so un-eastern, that, had there been any
suspicion as to my real character, detection must indubitably have
ensued.  As it was, Holkar perceived nothing, but instantaneously
stopped the dispute.  Loll Mahommed, however, evidently suspected
something; for, as Holkar, with a voice of thunder, shouted out;
"Tomasha (silence)," Loll sprang forward and gasped out -

"My lord! my lord! this is not Bob--"

But he could say no more.  "Gag the slave!" screamed out Holkar,
stamping with fury; and a turban was instantly twisted round the
poor devil's jaws.  "Ho, furoshes! carry out Loll Mahommed Khan,
give him a hundred dozen on the soles of his feet, set him upon a
white donkey, and carry him round the camp, with an inscription
before him:  'This is the way that Holkar rewards the talkative.'"

I breathed again; and ever as I heard each whack of the bamboo
falling on Loll Mahommed's feet, I felt peace returning to my mind,
and thanked my stars that I was delivered of this danger.

"Vizier," said Holkar, who enjoyed Loll's roars amazingly, "I owe
you a reparation for your nose:  kiss the hand of your prince, O
Saadut Alee Beg Bimbukchee! be from this day forth Zoheir u
Dowlut!"

The good old man's eyes filled with tears.  "I can bear thy
severity, O Prince," said he; "I cannot bear thy love.  Was it not
an honour that your Highness did me just now when you condescended
to pass over the bridge of your slave's nose?"

The phrase was by all voices pronounced to be very poetical.  The
Vizier retired, crowned with his new honours, to bed.  Holkar was
in high good-humour.

"Bobbachy," said he, "thou, too, must pardon me.  A propos, I have
news for thee.  Your wife, the incomparable Puttee Rooge" (white
and red rose), "has arrived in camp."

"My WIFE, my lord!" said I, aghast.

"Our daughter, the light of thine eyes!  Go, my son; I see thou art
wild with joy.  The Princess's tents are set up close by mine, and
I know thou longest to join her."

My wife?  Here was a complication truly!



CHAPTER V:  THE ISSUE OF MY INTERVIEW WITH MY WIFE



I found Puneeree Muckun, with the rest of my attendants, waiting at
the gate, and they immediately conducted me to my own tents in the
neighbourhood.  I have been in many dangerous predicaments before
that time and since, but I don't care to deny that I felt in the
present instance such a throbbing of the heart as I never have
experienced when leading a forlorn hope, or marching up to a
battery.

As soon as I entered the tents a host of menials sprang forward,
some to ease me of my armour, some to offer me refreshments, some
with hookahs, attar of roses (in great quart bottles), and the
thousand delicacies of Eastern life.  I motioned them away.  "I
will wear my armour," said I; "I shall go forth to-night.  Carry my
duty to the princess, and say I grieve that to-night I have not the
time to see her.  Spread me a couch here, and bring me supper here:
a jar of Persian wine well cooled, a lamb stuffed with pistachio-
nuts, a pillaw of a couple of turkeys, a curried kid--anything.
Begone!  Give me a pipe; leave me alone, and tell me when the meal
is ready."

I thought by these means to put off the fair Puttee Rooge, and
hoped to be able to escape without subjecting myself to the
examination of her curious eyes.  After smoking for a while, an
attendant came to tell me that my supper was prepared in the inner
apartment of the tent (I suppose that the reader, if he be
possessed of the commonest intelligence, knows that the tents of
the Indian grandees are made of the finest Cashmere Shawls, and
contain a dozen rooms at least, with carpets, chimneys, and sash-
windows complete).  I entered, I say, into an inner chamber, and
there began with my fingers to devour my meal in the Oriental
fashion, taking, every now and then, a pull from the wine-jar,
which was cooling deliciously in another jar of snow.

I was just in the act of despatching the last morsel of a most
savoury stewed lamb and rice, which had formed my meal, when I
heard a scuffle of feet, a shrill clatter of female voices, and,
the curtain being flung open, in marched a lady accompanied by
twelve slaves, with moon faces and slim waists, lovely as the
houris in Paradise.

The lady herself, to do her justice, was as great a contrast to her
attendants as could possibly be:  she was crooked, old, of the
complexion of molasses, and rendered a thousand times more ugly by
the tawdry dress and the blazing jewels with which she was covered.
A line of yellow chalk drawn from her forehead to the tip of her
nose (which was further ornamented by an immense glittering nose-
ring), her eyelids painted bright red, and a large dab of the same
colour on her chin, showed she was not of the Mussulman, but the
Brahmin faith--and of a very high caste:  you could see that by her
eyes.  My mind was instantaneously made up as to my line of action.

The male attendants had of course quitted the apartment, as they
heard the well-known sound of her voice.  It would have been death
to them to have remained and looked in her face.  The females
ranged themselves round their mistress, as she squatted down
opposite to me.

"And is this," said she, "a welcome, O Khan! after six months'
absence, for the most unfortunate and loving wife in all the world?
Is this lamb, O glutton! half so tender as thy spouse?  Is this
wine, O sot! half so sweet as her looks?"

I saw the storm was brewing--her slaves, to whom she turned, kept
up a kind of chorus:-

"Oh, the faithless one!" cried they.  "Oh, the rascal, the false
one, who has no eye for beauty, and no heart for love, like the
Khanum's!"

"A lamb is not so sweet as love," said I gravely; "but a lamb has a
good temper:  a wine-cup is not so intoxicating as a woman--but a
wine-cup has NO TONGUE, O Khanum Gee!" and again I dipped my nose
in the soul-refreshing jar.

The sweet Puttee Rooge was not, however, to be put off by my
repartees; she and her maidens recommenced their chorus, and
chattered and stormed until I lost all patience.

"Retire, friends," said I, "and leave me in peace."

"Stir, on your peril!" cried the Khanum.

So, seeing there was no help for it but violence, I drew out my
pistols, cocked them, and said, "O houris! these pistols contain
each two balls:  the daughter of Holkar bears a sacred life for me-
-but for you!--by all the saints of Hindustan, four of ye shall die
if ye stay a moment longer in my presence!"  This was enough; the
ladies gave a shriek, and skurried out of the apartment like a
covey of partridges on the wing.

Now, then, was the time for action.  My wife, or rather Bobbachy's
wife, sat still, a little flurried by the unusual ferocity which
her lord had displayed in her presence.  I seized her hand and,
gripping it close, whispered in her ear, to which I put the other
pistol:- "O Khanum, listen and scream not; the moment you scream,
you die!"  She was completely beaten:  she turned as pale as a
woman could in her situation, and said, "Speak, Bobbachy Bahawder,
I am dumb."

"Woman," said I, taking off my helmet, and removing the chain cape
which had covered almost the whole of my face--"I AM NOT THY
HUSBAND--I am the slayer of elephants, the world-renowned GAHAGAN!"

As I said this, and as the long ringlets of red hair fell over my
shoulders (contrasting strangely with my dyed face and beard), I
formed one of the finest pictures that can possibly be conceived,
and I recommend it as a subject to Mr. Heath, for the next "Book of
Beauty."

"Wretch!" said she, "what wouldst thou?"

"You black-faced fiend," said I, "raise but your voice, and you are
dead!"

"And afterwards," said she, "do you suppose that YOU can escape?
The torments of hell are not so terrible as the tortures that
Holkar will invent for thee."

"Tortures, madam?" answered I, coolly.  "Fiddlesticks!  You will
neither betray me, nor will I be put to the torture:  on the
contrary, you will give me your best jewels and facilitate my
escape to the fort.  Don't grind your teeth and swear at me.
Listen, madam:  you know this dress and these arms;--they are the
arms of your husband, Bobbachy Bahawder--MY PRISONER.  He now lies
in yonder fort, and if I do not return before daylight, at sunrise
he dies:  and then, when they send his corpse back to Holkar, what
will you, his WIDOW, do?

"Oh!" said she, shuddering, "spare me, spare me!"

"I'll tell you what you will do.  You will have the pleasure of
dying along with him--of BEING ROASTED, madam:  an agonising death,
from which your father cannot save you, to which he will be the
first man to condemn and conduct you.  Ha!  I see we understand
each other, and you will give me over the cash-box and jewels."
And so saying I threw myself back with the calmest air imaginable,
flinging the pistols over to her.  "Light me a pipe, my love," said
I, "and then go and hand me over the dollars:  do you hear?"  You
see I had her in my power--up a tree, as the Americans say, and she
very humbly lighted my pipe for me, and then departed for the goods
I spoke about.

What a thing is luck!  If Loll Mahommed had not been made to take
that ride round the camp, I should infallibly have been lost.

My supper, my quarrel with the princess, and my pipe afterwards,
had occupied a couple of hours of my time.  The princess returned
from her quest, and brought with her the box, containing valuables
to the amount of about three millions sterling.  (I was cheated of
them afterwards, but have the box still, a plain deal one.)  I was
just about to take my departure, when a tremendous knocking,
shouting, and screaming was heard at the entrance of the tent.  It
was Holkar himself, accompanied by that cursed Loll Mahommed, who,
after his punishment, found his master restored to good-humour, and
had communicated to him his firm conviction that I was an impostor.

"Ho, Begum!" shouted he, in the ante-room (for he and his people
could not enter the women's apartments), "speak, O my daughter! is
your husband returned?"

"Speak, madam," said I, "or REMEMBER THE ROASTING."

"He is, Papa," said the Begum.

"Are you sure?  Ho! ho! ho!" (the old ruffian was laughing
outside)--"are you sure it is?--Ha! aha!--he-e-e!"

"Indeed it is he, and no other.  I pray you, father, to go, and to
pass no more such shameless jests on your daughter.  Have I ever
seen the face of any other man?"  And hereat she began to weep as
if her heart would break--the deceitful minx!

Holkar's laugh was instantly turned to fury.  "Oh, you liar and
eternal thief!" said he, turning round (as I presume, for I could
only hear) to Loll Mahommed, "to make your prince eat such
monstrous dirt as this!  Furoshes, seize this man.  I dismiss him
from my service, I degrade him from his rank, I appropriate to
myself all his property:  and hark ye, furoshes, GIVE HIM A HUNDRED
DOZEN MORE!"

Again I heard the whacks of the bamboos, and peace flowed into my
soul.

* * *

Just as morn began to break, two figures were seen to approach the
little fortress of Futtyghur:  one was a woman wrapped closely in a
veil; the other a warrior, remarkable for the size and manly beauty
of his form, who carried in his hand a deal box of considerable
size.  The warrior at the gate gave the word and was admitted; the
woman returned slowly to the Indian camp.  Her name was Puttee
Rooge; his was -

G. O'G. G., M.H.E.I.C.S.. C.I.H.A.



CHAPTER VI:  FAMINE IN THE GARRISON



Thus my dangers for the night being overcome, I hastened with my
precious box into my own apartment, which communicated with
another, where I had left my prisoner, with a guard to report if he
should recover, and to prevent his escape.  My servant, Ghorumsaug,
was one of the guard.  I called him, and the fellow came, looking
very much confused and frightened, as it seemed, at my appearance.

"Why, Ghorumsaug," said I, "what makes thee look so pale, fellow?"
(He was as white as a sheet.)  "It is thy master, dost thou not
remember him?"  The man had seen me dress myself in the Pitan's
clothes, but was not present when I had blacked my face and beard
in the manner I have described.

"O Bramah, Vishnu, and Mahomet!" cried the faithful fellow, "and do
I see my dear master disguised in this way?  For Heaven's sake let
me rid you of this odious black paint; for what will the ladies say
in the ballroom, if the beautiful Feringhee should appear amongst
them with his roses turned into coal?"

I am still one of the finest men in Europe, and at the time of
which I write, when only two-and-twenty, I confess I was a little
vain of my personal appearance, and not very willing to appear
before my dear Belinda disguised like a blackamoor.  I allowed
Ghorumsaug to divest me of the heathenish armour and habiliments
which I wore; and having, with a world of scrubbing and trouble,
divested my face and beard of their black tinge, I put on my own
becoming uniform, and hastened to wait on the ladies; hastened, I
say,--although delayed would have been the better word, for the
operation of bleaching lasted at least two hours.

"How is the prisoner, Ghorumsaug?" said I, before leaving my
apartment.

"He has recovered from the blow which the Lion dealt him; two men
and myself watch over him; and Macgillicuddy Sahib (the second in
command) has just been the rounds, and has seen that all was
secure."

I bade Ghorumsaug help me to put away my chest of treasure (my
exultation in taking it was so great that I could not help
informing him of its contents); and this done, I despatched him to
his post near the prisoner, while I prepared to sally forth and pay
my respects to the fair creatures under my protection.  "What good
after all have I done," thought I to myself, "in this expedition
which I had so rashly undertaken?"  I had seen the renowned Holkar;
I had been in the heart of his camp; I knew the disposition of his
troops, that there were eleven thousand of them, and that he only
waited for his guns to make a regular attack on the fort.  I had
seen Puttee Rooge; I had robbed her (I say ROBBED her, and I don't
care what the reader or any other man may think of the act) of a
deal box, containing jewels to the amount of three millions
sterling, the property of herself and husband.

Three millions in money and jewels!  And what the deuce were money
and jewels to me or to my poor garrison?  Could my adorable Miss
Bulcher eat a fricassee of diamonds, or, Cleopatra-like, melt down
pearls to her tea?  Could I, careless as I am about food, with a
stomach that would digest anything--(once, in Spain, I ate the leg
of a horse during a famine, and was so eager to swallow this morsel
that I bolted the shoe, as well as the hoof, and never felt the
slightest inconvenience from either)--could I, I say, expect to
live long and well upon a ragout of rupees, or a dish of stewed
emeralds and rubies?  With all the wealth of Croesus before me I
felt melancholy; and would have paid cheerfully its weight in
carats for a good honest round of boiled beef.  Wealth, wealth,
what art thou?  What is gold?--Soft metal.  What are diamonds?--
Shining tinsel.  The great wealth-winners, the only fame-achievers,
the sole objects worthy of a soldier's consideration, are
beefsteaks, gunpowder, and cold iron.

The two latter means of competency we possessed; I had in my own
apartments a small store of gunpowder (keeping it under my own bed,
with a candle burning for fear of accidents); I had 14 pieces of
artillery (4 long 48's and 4 carronades, 5 howitzers, and a long
brass mortar, for grape, which I had taken myself at the battle of
Assaye), and muskets for ten times my force.  My garrison, as I
have told the reader in a previous number, consisted of 40 men, two
chaplains, and a surgeon; add to these my guests, 83 in number, of
whom nine only were gentlemen (in tights, powder, pigtails, and
silk stockings, who had come out merely for a dance, and found
themselves in for a siege).  Such were our numbers:-


Troops and artillerymen        40
Ladies                         74
Other non-combatants           11
MAJOR-GENERAL O'G.GAHAGAN   1,000
                            1,125


I count myself good for a thousand, for so I was regularly rated in
the army:  with this great benefit to it, that I only consumed as
much as an ordinary mortal.  We were then, as far as the victuals
went, 126 mouths; as combatants we numbered 1,040 gallant men, with
12 guns and a fort, against Holkar and his 12,000.  No such
alarming odds, if -

IF!--ay, there was the rub--IF we had SHOT, as well as powder for
our guns; IF we had not only MEN but MEAT.  Of the former commodity
we had only three rounds for each piece.  Of the latter, upon my
sacred honour, to feed 126 souls, we had but


Two drumsticks of fowls, and a bone of ham.
Fourteen bottles of ginger-beer.
Of soda-water, four ditto.
Two bottles of fine Spanish olives.
Raspberry cream--the remainder of two dishes.
Seven macaroons, lying in the puddle of a demolished trifle.
Half a drum of best Turkey figs.
Some bits of broken bread; two Dutch cheeses (whole); the crust of
an old Stilton; and about an ounce of almonds and raisins.
Three ham-sandwiches, and a pot of currant-jelly, and 197 bottles
of brandy, rum, madeira, pale ale (my private stock); a couple of
hard eggs for a salad, and a flask of Florence oil.


This was the provision for the whole garrison!  The men after
supper had seized upon the relics of the repast, as they were
carried off from the table; and these were the miserable remnants I
found and counted on my return; taking good care to lock the door
of the supper-room, and treasure what little sustenance still
remained in it.

When I appeared in the saloon, now lighted up by the morning sun, I
not only caused a sensation myself, but felt one in my own bosom
which was of the most painful description.  Oh, my reader! may you
never behold such a sight as that which presented itself:  eighty-
three men and women in ball-dresses; the former with their lank
powdered locks streaming over their faces; the latter with faded
flowers, uncurled wigs, smudged rouge, blear eyes, draggling
feathers, rumpled satins--each more desperately melancholy and
hideous than the other--each, except my beloved Belinda Bulcher,
whose raven ringlets never having been in curl could of course
never go out of curl; whose cheek, pale as the lily, could, as it
may naturally be supposed, grow no paler; whose neck and beauteous
arms, dazzling as alabaster, needed no pearl-powder, and therefore,
as I need not state, did not suffer because the pearl-powder had
come off.  Joy (deft link-boy!) lit his lamps in each of her eyes
as I entered.  As if I had been her sun, her spring, lo! blushing
roses mantled in her cheek!  Seventy-three ladies, as I entered,
opened their fire upon me, and stunned me with cross-questions,
regarding my adventures in the camp--SHE, as she saw me, gave a
faint scream (the sweetest, sure, that ever gurgled through the
throat of a woman!) then started up--then made as if she would sit
down--then moved backwards--then tottered forwards--then tumbled
into my--Psha! why recall, why attempt to describe that delicious--
that passionate greeting of two young hearts?  What was the
surrounding crowd to us?  What cared we for the sneers of the men,
the titters of the jealous women, the shrill "Upon my word!" of the
elder Miss Bulcher, and the loud expostulations of Belinda's mamma?
The brave girl loved me, and wept in my arms.  "Goliah! my Goliah!"
said she, "my brave, my beautiful, THOU art returned, and hope
comes back with thee.  Oh! who can tell the anguish of my soul,
during this dreadful dreadful night!"  Other similar ejaculations
of love and joy she uttered; and if I HAD perilled life in her
service, if I DID believe that hope of escape there was none, so
exquisite was the moment of our meeting, that I forgot all else in
this overwhelming joy!

* * *

[The Major's description of this meeting, which lasted at the very
most not ten seconds, occupies thirteen pages of writing.  We have
been compelled to dock off twelve-and-a-half; for the whole
passage, though highly creditable to his feelings, might possibly
be tedious to the reader.]

* * *

As I said, the ladies and gentlemen were inclined to sneer, and
were giggling audibly.  I led the dear girl to a chair, and,
scowling round with a tremendous fierceness, which those who know
me know I can sometimes put on, I shouted out, "Hark ye! men and
women--I am this lady's truest knight--her husband I hope one day
to be.  I am commander, too, in this fort--the enemy is without it;
another word of mockery--another glance of scorn--and, by Heaven, I
will hurl every man and woman from the battlements, a prey to the
ruffianly Holkar!"  This quieted them.  I am a man of my word, and
none of them stirred or looked disrespectfully from that moment.

It was now my turn to make them look foolish.  Mrs.
Vandegobbleschroy (whose unfailing appetite is pretty well known to
every person who has been in India) cried, "Well, Captain Gahagan,
your ball has been so pleasant, and the supper was despatched so
long ago, that myself and the ladies would be very glad of a little
breakfast."  And Mrs. Van giggled as if she had made a very witty
and reasonable speech.  "Oh! breakfast, breakfast, by all means,"
said the rest; "we really are dying for a warm cup of tea."

"Is it bohay tay or souchong tay that you'd like, ladies?" says I.

"Nonsense, you silly man; any tea you like," said fat Mrs. Van.

"What do you say, then, to some prime GUNPOWDER?"  Of course they
said it was the very thing.

"And do you like hot rowls or cowld--muffins or crumpets--fresh
butter or salt?  And you, gentlemen, what do you say to some
ilegant divvled-kidneys for yourselves, and just a trifle of
grilled turkeys, and a couple of hundthred new-laid eggs for the
ladies?"

"Pooh, pooh! be it as you will, my dear fellow," answered they all.

"But stop," says I.  "O ladies, O ladies!  O gentlemen, gentlemen!
that you should ever have come to the quarters of Goliah Gahagan,
and he been without--"

"What?" said they, in a breath.

"Alas! alas!  I have not got a single stick of chocolate in the
whole house."

"Well, well, we can do without it."

"Or a single pound of coffee."

"Never mind; let that pass too."  (Mrs. Van and the rest were
beginning to look alarmed.)

"And about the kidneys--now I remember, the black divvles outside
the fort have seized upon all the sheep; and how are we to have
kidneys without them?"  (Here there was a slight o-o-o!)

"And with regard to the milk and crame, it may be remarked that the
cows are likewise in pawn, and not a single drop can be had for
money or love:  but we can beat up eggs, you know, in the tay,
which will be just as good."

"Oh! just as good."

"Only the divvle's in the luck, there's not a fresh egg to be had--
no, nor a fresh chicken," continued I, "nor a stale one either; not
a tayspoonful of souchong, nor a thimbleful of bohay; nor the laste
taste in life of butther, salt or fresh; nor hot rowls or cowld!"

"In the name of Heaven!" said Mrs. Van, growing very pale, "what is
there, then?"

"Ladies and gentlemen, I'll tell you what there is now," shouted I.
"There's


"Two drumsticks of fowls, and a bone of ham.
Fourteen bottles of ginger-beer," &c. &c. &c.


And I went through the whole list of eatables as before, ending
with the ham-sandwiches and the pot of jelly.

"Law!  Mr. Gahagan," said Mrs. Colonel Vandegobbleschroy, "give me
the ham-sandwiches--I must manage to breakfast off them."

And you should have heard the pretty to-do there was at this modest
proposition!  Of course I did not accede to it--why should I?  I
was the commander of the fort, and intended to keep these three
very sandwiches for the use of myself and my dear Belinda.
"Ladies," said I, "there are in this fort one hundred and twenty-
six souls, and this is all the food which is to last us during the
siege.  Meat there is none--of drink there is a tolerable quantity;
and at one o'clock punctually, a glass of wine and one olive shall
be served out to each woman:  the men will receive two glasses, and
an olive and a fig--and this must be your food during the siege.
Lord Lake cannot be absent more than three days; and if he be--why,
still there is a chance--why do I say a chance?--a CERTAINTY of
escaping from the hands of these ruffians."

"Oh, name it, name it, dear Captain Gahagan!" screeched the whole
covey at a breath.

"It lies," answered I, "in the powder magazine.  I will blow this
fort, and all it contains, to atoms, ere it becomes the prey of
Holkar."

The women, at this, raised a squeal that might have been heard in
Holkar's camp, and fainted in different directions; but my dear
Belinda whispered in my ear, "Well done, thou noble knight! bravely
said, my heart's Goliah!"  I felt I was right:  I could have blown
her up twenty times for the luxury of that single moment!  "And
now, ladies," said I, "I must leave you.  The two chaplains will
remain with you to administer professional consolation--the other
gentlemen will follow me upstairs to the ramparts, where I shall
find plenty of work for them."



CHAPTER VII:  THE ESCAPE



Loth as they were, these gentlemen had nothing for it but to obey,
and they accordingly followed me to the ramparts, where I proceeded
to review my men.  The fort, in my absence, had been left in
command of Lieutenant Macgillicuddy, a countryman of my own (with
whom, as may be seen in an early chapter of my memoirs, I had an
affair of honour); and the prisoner Bobbachy Bahawder, whom I had
only stunned, never wishing to kill him, had been left in charge of
that officer.  Three of the garrison (one of them a man of the
Ahmednuggar Irregulars, my own body-servant, Ghorumsaug above
named) were appointed to watch the captive by turns, and never
leave him out of their sight.  The lieutenant was instructed to
look to them and to their prisoner; and as Bobbachy was severely
injured by the blow which I had given him, and was, moreover, bound
hand and foot, and gagged smartly with cords, I considered myself
sure of his person.

Macgillicuddy did not make his appearance when I reviewed my little
force, and the three havildars were likewise absent:  this did not
surprise me, as I had told them not to leave their prisoner; but
desirous to speak with the lieutenant, I despatched a messenger to
him, and ordered him to appear immediately.

The messenger came back; he was looking ghastly pale:  he whispered
some information into my ear, which instantly caused me to hasten
to the apartments where I had caused Bobbachy Bahawder to be
confined.

The men had fled;--Bobbachy had fled; and in his place, fancy my
astonishment when I found--with a rope cutting his naturally wide
mouth almost into his ears--with a dreadful sabre-cut across his
forehead--with his legs tied over his head, and his arms tied
between his legs--my unhappy, my attached friend--Mortimer
Macgillicuddy!

He had been in this position for about three hours--it was the very
position in which I had caused Bobbachy Bahawder to be placed--an
attitude uncomfortable, it is true, but one which renders escape
impossible, unless treason aid the prisoner.

I restored the lieutenant to his natural erect position; I poured
half-a-bottle of whisky down the immensely enlarged orifice of his
mouth; and when he had been released, he informed me of the
circumstances that had taken place.

Fool that I was! idiot!--upon my return to the fort, to have been
anxious about my personal appearance, and to have spent a couple of
hours in removing the artificial blackening from my beard and
complexion, instead of going to examine my prisoner--when his
escape would have been prevented.  O foppery, foppery!--it was that
cursed love of personal appearance which had led me to forget my
duty to my general, my country, my monarch, and my own honour!

Thus it was that the escape took place:- My own fellow of the
Irregulars, whom I had summoned to dress me, performed the
operation to my satisfaction, invested me with the elegant uniform
of my corps, and removed the Pitan's disguise, which I had taken
from the back of the prostrate Bobbachy Bahawder.  What did the
rogue do next?--Why, he carried back the dress to the Bobbachy--he
put it, once more, on its right owner; he and his infernal black
companions (who had been won over by the Bobbachy with promises of
enormous reward) gagged Macgillicuddy, who was going the rounds,
and then marched with the Indian coolly up to the outer gate, and
gave the word.  The sentinel, thinking it was myself, who had first
come in, and was as likely to go out again--(indeed my rascally
valet said that Gahagan Sahib was about to go out with him and his
two companions to reconnoitre)--opened the gates, and off they
went!

This accounted for the confusion of my valet when I entered!--and
for the scoundrel's speech, that the lieutenant had JUST BEEN THE
ROUNDS;--he HAD, poor fellow, and had been seized and bound in this
cruel way.  The three men, with their liberated prisoner, had just
been on the point of escape, when my arrival disconcerted them:  I
had changed the guard at the gate (whom they had won over
likewise); and yet, although they had overcome poor Mac, and
although they were ready for the start, they had positively no
means for effecting their escape, until I was ass enough to put
means in their way.  Fool! fool! thrice besotted fool that I was,
to think of my own silly person when I should have been occupied
solely with my public duty.

From Macgillicuddy's incoherent accounts, as he was gasping from
the effects of the gag and the whisky he had taken to revive him,
and from my own subsequent observations, I learned this sad story.
A sudden and painful thought struck me--my precious box!--I rushed
back, I found that box--I have it still.  Opening it, there, where
I had left ingots, sacks of bright tomauns, kopeks and rupees,
strings of diamonds as big as ducks' eggs, rubies as red as the
lips of my Belinda, countless strings of pearls, amethysts,
emeralds, piles upon piles of bank-notes--I found--a piece of
paper! with a few lines in the Sanscrit language, which are thus,
word for word, translated:-


"EPIGRAM.
(On disappointing a certain Major.)

"The conquering lion return'd with his prey,
And safe in his cavern he set it;
The sly little fox stole the booty away,
And, as he escaped, to the lion did say,
'AHA! don't you wish you may get it?'"


Confusion!  Oh, how my blood boiled as I read these cutting lines.
I stamped,--I swore,--I don't know to what insane lengths my rage
might have carried me, had not at this moment a soldier rushed in,
screaming, "The enemy, the enemy!"



CHAPTER VIII:  THE CAPTIVE



It was high time, indeed, that I should make my appearance.  Waving
my sword with one hand and seizing my telescope with the other, I
at once frightened and examined the enemy.  Well they knew when
they saw that flamingo-plume floating in the breeze--that awful
figure standing in the breach--that waving war-sword sparkling in
the sky--well, I say, they knew the name of the humble individual
who owned the sword, the plume, and the figure.  The ruffians were
mustered in front, the cavalry behind.  The flags were flying, the
drums, gongs, tambourines, violoncellos, and other instruments of
Eastern music, raised in the air a strange barbaric melody; the
officers (yatabals), mounted on white dromedaries, were seen
galloping to and fro, carrying to the advancing hosts the orders of
Holkar.

You see that two sides of the fort of Futtyghur (rising as it does
on a rock that is almost perpendicular) are defended by the
Burrumpooter river, two hundred feet deep at this point, and a
thousand yards wide, so that I had no fear about them attacking me
in that quarter.  My guns, therefore (with their six-and-thirty
miserable charges of shot), were dragged round to the point at
which I conceived Holkar would be most likely to attack me.  I was
in a situation that I did not dare to fire, except at such times as
I could kill a hundred men by a single discharge of a cannon; so
the attacking party marched and marched, very strongly, about a
mile and a half off, the elephants marching without receiving the
slightest damage from us, until they had come to within four
hundred yards of our walls (the rogues knew all the secrets of our
weakness, through the betrayal of the dastardly Ghorumsaug, or they
never would have ventured so near).  At that distance--it was about
the spot where the Futtyghur hill began gradually to rise--the
invading force stopped; the elephants drew up in a line, at right
angles with our wall (the fools! they thought they should expose
themselves too much by taking a position parallel to it); the
cavalry halted too, and--after the deuce's own flourish of trumpets
and banging of gongs, to be sure,--somebody, in a flame-coloured
satin dress, with an immense jewel blazing in his pugree (that
looked through my telescope like a small but very bright planet),
got up from the back of one of the very biggest elephants, and
began a speech.

The elephants were, as I said, in a line formed with admirable
precision, about three hundred of them.  The following little
diagram will explain matters:-

.......   G |
E           |
            | F


E is the line of elephants.  F is the wall of the fort.  G a gun in
the fort.  Now the reader will see what I did.

The elephants were standing, their trunks waggling to and fro
gracefully before them; and I, with superhuman skill and activity,
brought the gun G (a devilish long brass gun) to bear upon them.  I
pointed it myself; bang! it went, and what was the consequence?
Why, this:-

  x
.......   G |
E           |
            | F

F is the fort, as before.  G is the gun, as before.  E, the
elephants, as we have previously seen them.  What then is x? x is
the line taken by the ball fired from G, which took off ONE HUNDRED
AND THIRTY-FOUR ELEPHANTS' TRUNKS, and only spent itself in the
tusk of a very old animal, that stood the hundred and thirty-fifth!

I say that such a shot was never fired before or since; that a gun
was never pointed in such a way.  Suppose I had been a common man,
and contented myself with firing bang at the head of the first
animal?  An ass would have done it, prided himself had he hit his
mark, and what would have been the consequence?  Why, that the ball
might have killed two elephants and wounded a third; but here,
probably, it would have stopped, and done no further mischief.  The
trunk was the place at which to aim; there are no bones there; and
away, consequently, went the bullet, shearing, as I have said,
through one hundred and thirty-five probosces.  Heavens! what a
howl there was when the shot took effect!  What a sudden stoppage
of Holkar's speech!  What a hideous snorting of elephants!  What a
rush backwards was made by the whole army, as if some demon was
pursuing them!

Away they went.  No sooner did I see them in full retreat, than,
rushing forward myself, I shouted to my men, "My friends, yonder
lies your dinner!"  We flung open the gates--we tore down to the
spot where the elephants had fallen:  seven of them were killed;
and of those that escaped to die of their hideous wounds elsewhere,
most had left their trunks behind them.  A great quantity of them
we seized; and I myself, cutting up with my scimitar a couple of
the fallen animals, as a butcher would a calf, motioned to the men
to take the pieces back to the fort, where barbecued elephant was
served round for dinner, instead of the miserable allowance of an
olive and a glass of wine, which I had promised to my female
friends, in my speech to them.  The animal reserved for the ladies
was a young white one--the fattest and tenderest I ever ate in my
life:  they are very fair eating, but the flesh has an India-rubber
flavour, which, until one is accustomed to it, is unpalatable.

It was well that I had obtained this supply, for, during my absence
on the works, Mrs. Vandegobbleschroy and one or two others had
forced their way into the supper-room, and devoured every morsel of
the garrison larder, with the exception of the cheeses, the olives,
and the wine, which were locked up in my own apartment, before
which stood a sentinel.  Disgusting Mrs. Van!  When I heard of her
gluttony, I had almost a mind to eat HER.  However, we made a very
comfortable dinner off the barbecued steaks, and when everybody had
done, had the comfort of knowing that there was enough for one meal
more.

The next day, as I expected, the enemy attacked us in great force,
attempting to escalade the fort; but by the help of my guns, and my
good sword, by the distinguished bravery of Lieutenant
Macgillicuddy and the rest of the garrison, we beat this attack off
completely, the enemy sustaining a loss of seven hundred men.  We
were victorious; but when another attack was made, what were we to
do?  We had still a little powder left, but had fired off all the
shot, stones, iron-bars, &c. in the garrison!  On this day, too, we
devoured the last morsel of our food:  I shall never forget Mrs.
Vandegobbleschroy's despairing look, as I saw her sitting alone,
attempting to make some impression on the little white elephant's
roasted tail.

The third day the attack was repeated.  The resources of genius are
never at an end.  Yesterday I had no ammunition; to-day, I
discovered charges sufficient for two guns, and two swivels, which
were much longer, but had bores of about blunderbuss size.

This time my friend Loll Mahommed, who had received, as the reader
may remember, such a bastinadoing for my sake, headed the attack.
The poor wretch could not walk, but he was carried in an open
palanquin, and came on waving his sword, and cursing horribly in
his Hindustan jargon.  Behind him came troops of matchlock-men, who
picked off every one of our men who showed their noses above the
ramparts; and a great host of blackamoors with scaling-ladders,
bundles to fill the ditch, fascines, gabions, culverins, demilunes,
counterscarps, and all the other appurtenances of offensive war.

On they came; my guns and men were ready for them.  You will ask
how my pieces were loaded?  I answer, that though my garrison were
without food, I knew my duty as an officer, and HAD PUT THE TWO
DUTCH CHEESES INTO THE TWO GUNS, AND HAD CRAMMED THE CONTENTS OF A
BOTTLE OF OLIVES INTO EACH SWIVEL.

They advanced,--whish! went one of the Dutch cheeses,--bang! went
the other.  Alas! they did little execution.  In their first
contact with an opposing body, they certainly floored it; but they
became at once like so much Welsh-rabbit, and did no execution
beyond the man whom they struck down.

"Hogree, pogree, wongree-fum (praise to Allah and the forty-nine
Imaums!)" shouted out the ferocious Loll Mahommed when he saw the
failure of my shot.  "Onward, sons of the Prophet! the infidel has
no more ammunition.  A hundred thousand lakhs of rupees to the man
who brings me Gahagan's head!"

His men set up a shout, and rushed forward--he, to do him justice,
was at the very head, urging on his own palanquin-bearers, and
poking them with the tip of his scimitar.  They came panting up the
hill:  I was black with rage, but it was the cold concentrated rage
of despair.  "Macgillicuddy," said I, calling that faithful
officer, "you know where the barrels of powder are?"  He did.  "You
know the use to make of them?"  He did.  He grasped my hand.
"Goliah," said he, "farewell!  I swear that the fort shall be in
atoms, as soon as yonder unbelievers have carried it.  Oh, my poor
mother!" added the gallant youth, as sighing, yet fearless, he
retired to his post.

I gave one thought to my blessed, my beautiful Belinda, and then,
stepping into the front, took down one of the swivels;--a shower of
matchlock balls came whizzing round my head.  I did not heed them.

I took the swivel, and aimed coolly.  Loll Mahommed, his palanquin,
and his men, were now not above two hundred yards from the fort.
Loll was straight before me, gesticulating and shouting to his men.
I fired--bang!!!

I aimed so true, that ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTEEN BEST SPANISH OLIVES
WERE LODGED IN A LUMP IN THE FACE OF THE UNHAPPY LOLL MAHOMMED.
The wretch, uttering a yell the most hideous and unearthly I ever
heard, fell back dead; the frightened bearers flung down the
palanquin and ran--the whole host ran as one man:  their screams
might be heard for leagues.  "Tomasha, tomasha," they cried, "it is
enchantment!"  Away they fled, and the victory a third time was
ours.  Soon as the fight was done, I flew back to my Belinda.  We
had eaten nothing for twenty-four hours, but I forgot hunger in the
thought of once more beholding her!

The sweet soul turned towards me with a sickly smile as I entered,
and almost fainted in my arms; but alas! it was not love which
caused in her bosom an emotion so strong--it was hunger!  "Oh! my
Goliah," whispered she, "for three days I have not tasted food--I
could not eat that horrid elephant yesterday; but now--oh!
Heaven!--"  She could say no more, but sank almost lifeless on my
shoulder.  I administered to her a trifling dram of rum, which
revived her for a moment, and then rushed downstairs, determined
that if it were a piece of my own leg, she should still have
something to satisfy her hunger.  Luckily I remembered that three
or four elephants were still lying in the field, having been killed
by us in the first action, two days before.  Necessity, thought I,
has no law; my adorable girl must eat elephant, until she can get
something better.

I rushed into the court where the men were, for the most part,
assembled.  "Men," said I, "our larder is empty; we must fill it as
we did the day before yesterday.  Who will follow Gahagan on a
foraging party?"  I expected that, as on former occasions, every
man would offer to accompany me.

To my astonishment, not a soul moved--a murmur arose among the
troops; and at last one of the oldest and bravest came forward.

"Captain," he said, "it is of no use; we cannot feed upon elephants
for ever; we have not a grain of powder left, and must give up the
fort when the attack is made to-morrow.  We may as well be
prisoners now as then, and we won't go elephant-hunting any more."

"Ruffian!" I said, "he who first talks of surrender, dies!" and I
cut him down.  "Is there anyone else who wishes to speak?"

No one stirred.

"Cowards! miserable cowards!" shouted I; "what, you dare not move
for fear of death at the hands of those wretches who even now fled
before your arms--what, do I say your arms?--before MINE!--alone I
did it; and as alone I routed the foe, alone I will victual the
fortress!  Ho! open the gate!"

I rushed out; not a single man would follow.  The bodies of the
elephants that we had killed still lay on the ground where they had
fallen, about four hundred yards from the fort.  I descended calmly
the hill, a very steep one, and coming to the spot, took my pick of
the animals, choosing a tolerably small and plump one, of about
thirteen feet high, which the vultures had respected.  I threw this
animal over my shoulders, and made for the fort.

As I marched up the acclivity, whizz--piff--whirr! came the balls
over my head; and pitter-patter, pitter-patter! they fell on the
body of the elephant like drops of rain.  The enemy were behind me;
I knew it, and quickened my pace.  I heard the gallop of their
horse:  they came nearer, nearer; I was within a hundred yards of
the fort--seventy--fifty!  I strained every nerve; I panted with
the superhuman exertion--I ran--could a man run very fast with such
a tremendous weight on his shoulders?

Up came the enemy; fifty horsemen were shouting and screaming at my
tail.  O Heaven! five yards more--one moment--and I am saved.  It
is done--I strain the last strain--I make the last step--I fling
forward my precious burden into the gate opened wide to receive me
and it, and--I fall!  The gate thunders to, and I am left on the
outside!  Fifty knives are gleaming before my bloodshot eyes--fifty
black hands are at my throat, when a voice exclaims, "Stop!--kill
him not, it is Gujputi!"  A film came over my eyes--exhausted
nature would bear no more.



CHAPTER IX:  SURPRISE OF FUTTYGHUR



When I awoke from the trance into which I had fallen, I found
myself in a bath, surrounded by innumerable black faces; and a
Hindoo pothukoor (whence our word apothecary) feeling my pulse and
looking at me with an air of sagacity.

"Where am I?" I exclaimed, looking round and examining the strange
faces, and the strange apartment which met my view.  "Bekhusm!"
said the apothecary.  "Silence!  Gahagan Sahib is in the hands of
those who know his valour, and will save his life."

"Know my valour, slave?  Of course you do," said I; "but the fort--
the garrison--the elephant--Belinda, my love--my darling--
Macgillicuddy--the scoundrelly mutineers--the deal bo- "

I could say no more; the painful recollections pressed so heavily
upon my poor shattered mind and frame, that both failed once more.
I fainted again, and I know not how long I lay insensible.

Again, however, I came to my senses:  the pothukoor applied
restoratives, and after a slumber of some hours I awoke, much
refreshed.  I had no wound; my repeated swoons had been brought on
(as indeed well they might) by my gigantic efforts in carrying the
elephant up a steep hill a quarter of a mile in length.  Walking,
the task is bad enough:  but running, it is the deuce; and I would
recommend any of my readers who may be disposed to try and carry a
dead elephant, never, on any account, to go a pace of more than
five miles an hour.

Scarcely was I awake, when I heard the clash of arms at my door
(plainly indicating that sentinels were posted there), and a single
old gentleman, richly habited, entered the room.  Did my eyes
deceive me?  I had surely seen him before.  No--yes--no--yes--it
was he:  the snowy white beard, the mild eyes, the nose flattened
to a jelly, and level with the rest of the venerable face,
proclaimed him at once to be--Saadut Alee Beg Bimbukchee, Holkar's
Prime Vizier; whose nose, as the reader may recollect, his Highness
had flattened with his kaleawn during my interview with him in the
Pitan's disguise.  I now knew my fate but too well--I was in the
hands of Holkar.

Saadut Alee Beg Bimbukchee slowly advanced towards me, and with a
mild air of benevolence which distinguished that excellent man (he
was torn to pieces by wild horses the year after, on account of a
difference with Holkar), he came to my bedside and, taking gently
my hand, said, "Life and death, my son, are not ours.  Strength is
deceitful, valour is unavailing, fame is only wind--the nightingale
sings of the rose all night--where is the rose in the morning?
Booch, booch! it is withered by a frost.  The rose makes remarks
regarding the nightingale, and where is that delightful song-bird?
Pena-bekhoda, he is netted, plucked, spitted, and roasted!  Who
knows how misfortune comes?  It has come to Gahagan Gujputi!"

"It is well," said I, stoutly, and in the Malay language.  "Gahagan
Gujputi will bear it like a man."

"No doubt--like a wise man and a brave one; but there is no lane so
long to which there is not a turning, no night so black to which
there comes not a morning.  Icy winter is followed by merry
springtime--grief is often succeeded by joy."

"Interpret, O riddler!" said I; "Gahagan Khan is no reader of
puzzles--no prating mollah.  Gujputi loves not words, but swords."

"Listen then, O Gujputi:  you are in Holkar's power."

"I know it."

"You will die by the most horrible tortures to-morrow morning."

"I dare say."

"They will tear your teeth from your jaws, your nails from your
fingers, and your eyes from your head."

"Very possibly."

"They will flay you alive, and then burn you."

"Well; they can't do any more."

"They will seize upon every man and woman in yonder fort"--it was
not then taken!--"and repeat upon them the same tortures."

"Ha! Belinda!  Speak--how can all this be avoided?"

"Listen.  Gahagan loves the moon-face called Belinda."

"He does, Vizier, to distraction."

"Of what rank is he in the Koompani's army?"

"A captain."

"A miserable captain--oh, shame!  Of what creed is he?"

"I am an Irishman, and a Catholic."

"But he has not been very particular about his religious duties?"

"Alas, no!"

"He has not been to his mosque for these twelve years?"

"'Tis too true."

"Hearken now, Gahagan Khan.  His Highness Prince Holkar has sent me
to thee.  You shall have the moon-face for your wife--your second
wife, that is;--the first shall be the incomparable Puttee Rooge,
who loves you to madness;--with Puttee Rooge, who is the wife, you
shall have the wealth and rank of Bobbachy Bahawder, of whom his
Highness intends to get rid.  You shall be second in command of his
Highness's forces.  Look, here is his commission signed with the
celestial seal, and attested by the sacred names of the forty-nine
Imaums.  You have but to renounce your religion and your service,
and all these rewards are yours."

He produced a parchment, signed as he said, and gave it to me (it
was beautifully written in Indian ink:  I had it for fourteen
years, but a rascally valet, seeing it very dirty, washed it,
forsooth, and washed off every bit of the writing).  I took it
calmly, and said, "This is a tempting offer.  O Vizier, how long
wilt thou give me to consider of it?"

After a long parley, he allowed me six hours, when I promised to
give him an answer.  My mind, however, was made up--as soon as he
was gone, I threw myself on the sofa and fell asleep.

* * *

At the end of the six hours the Vizier came back:  two people were
with him; one, by his martial appearance, I knew to be Holkar, the
other I did not recognise.  It was about midnight.

"Have you considered?" said the Vizier, as he came to my couch.

"I have," said I, sitting up,--I could not stand, for my legs were
tied, and my arms fixed in a neat pair of steel handcuffs.  "I
have," said I, "unbelieving dogs!  I have.  Do you think to pervert
a Christian gentleman from his faith and honour?  Ruffian
blackamoors! do your worst; heap tortures on this body, they cannot
last long.  Tear me to pieces:  after you have torn me into a
certain number of pieces, I shall not feel it; and if I did, if
each torture could last a life, if each limb were to feel the
agonies of a whole body, what then?  I would bear all--all--all--
all--all--ALL!"  My breast heaved--my form dilated--my eye flashed
as I spoke these words.  "Tyrants!" said I, "dulce et decorum est
pro patria mori."  Having thus clinched the argument, I was silent.

The venerable.  Grand Vizier turned away; I saw a tear trickling
down his cheeks.

"What a constancy!" said he.  "Oh, that such beauty and such
bravery should be doomed so soon to quit the earth!"

His tall companion only sneered and said, "AND BELINDA--?"

"Ha!" said I, "ruffian, be still!--Heaven will protect her spotless
innocence.  Holkar, I know thee, and thou knowest me too!  Who,
with his single sword, destroyed thy armies?  Who, with his pistol,
cleft in twain thy nose-ring?  Who slew thy generals?  Who slew thy
elephants?  Three hundred mighty beasts went forth to battle:  of
these I slew one hundred and thirty-five!  Dog, coward, ruffian,
tyrant, unbeliever!  Gahagan hates thee, spurns thee, spits on
thee!"

Holkar, as I made these uncomplimentary remarks, gave a scream of
rage, and, drawing his scimitar, rushed on to despatch me at once
(it was the very thing I wished for), when the third person sprang
forward and, seizing his arm, cried -

"Papa! oh, save him!"  It was Puttee Rooge!  "Remember," continued
she, "his misfortunes--remember, oh, remember my--love!"--and here
she blushed, and putting one finger into her mouth, and hanging
down her head, looked the very picture of modest affection.

Holkar sulkily sheathed his scimitar, and muttered, "'Tis better as
it is; had I killed him now, I had spared him the torture.  None of
this shameless fooling, Puttee Rooge," continued the tyrant,
dragging her away.  "Captain Gahagan dies three hours from hence."
Puttee Rooge gave one scream and fainted--her father and the Vizier
carried her off between them; nor was I loth to part with her, for,
with all her love, she was as ugly as the deuce.

They were gone--my fate was decided.  I had but three hours more of
life:  so I flung myself again on the sofa, and fell profoundly
asleep.  As it may happen to any of my readers to be in the same
situation, and to be hanged themselves, let me earnestly entreat
them to adopt this plan of going to sleep, which I for my part have
repeatedly found to be successful.  It saves unnecessary annoyance,
it passes away a great deal of unpleasant time, and it prepares one
to meet like a man the coming catastrophe.

* * *

Three o'clock came:  the sun was at this time making his appearance
in the heavens, and with it came the guards, who were appointed to
conduct me to the torture.  I woke, rose, was carried out, and was
set on the very white donkey on which Loll Mahommed was conducted
through the camp after he was bastinadoed.  Bobbachy Bahawder rode
behind me, restored to his rank and state; troops of cavalry hemmed
us in on all sides; my ass was conducted by the common executioner:
a crier went forward, shouting out, "Make way for the destroyer of
the faithful--he goes to bear the punishment of his crimes."  We
came to the fatal plain:  it was the very spot whence I had borne
away the elephant, and in full sight of the fort.  I looked towards
it.  Thank Heaven!  King George's banner waved on it still--a crowd
were gathered on the walls--the men, the dastards who had deserted
me--and women, too.  Among the latter I thought I distinguished ONE
who--O gods! the thought turned me sick--I trembled and looked pale
for the first time.

"He trembles! he turns pale," shouted out Bobbachy Bahawder,
ferociously exulting over his conquered enemy.

"Dog!" shouted I--(I was sitting with my head to the donkey's tail,
and so looked the Bobbachy full in the face)--"not so pale as you
looked when I felled you with this arm--not so pale as your women
looked when I entered your harem!"  Completely chop-fallen, the
Indian ruffian was silent:  at any rate, I had done for HIM.

We arrived at the place of execution.  A stake, a couple of feet
thick and eight high, was driven in the grass:  round the stake,
about seven feet from the ground, was an iron ring, to which were
attached two fetters; in these my wrists were placed.  Two or three
executioners stood near, with strange-looking instruments:  others
were blowing at a fire, over which was a cauldron, and in the
embers were stuck prongs and other instruments of iron.

The crier came forward and read my sentence.  It was the same in
effect as that which had been hinted to me the day previous by the
Grand Vizier.  I confess I was too agitated to catch every word
that was spoken.

Holkar himself, on a tall dromedary, was at a little distance.  The
Grand Vizier came up to me--it was his duty to stand by, and see
the punishment performed.  "It is yet time!" said he.

I nodded my head, but did not answer.

The Vizier cast up to heaven a look of inexpressible anguish, and
with a voice choking with emotion, said, "EXECUTIONER--DO--YOUR--
DUTY!"

The horrid man advanced--he whispered sulkily in the ears of the
Grand Vizier, "Guggly ka ghee, hum khedgeree," said he, "THE OIL
DOES NOT BOIL YET--wait one minute."  The assistants blew, the fire
blazed, the oil was heated.  The Vizier drew a few feet aside:
taking a large ladle full of the boiling liquid, he advanced -

* * *

"Whish! bang, bang! pop!" the executioner was dead at my feet, shot
through the head; the ladle of scalding oil had been dashed in the
face of the unhappy Grand Vizier, who lay on the plain, howling.
"Whish! bang! pop!  Hurrah!--charge!--forwards!--cut them down!--no
quarter!"

I saw--yes, no, yes, no, yes!--I saw regiment upon regiment of
galloping British horsemen riding over the ranks of the flying
natives.  First of the host, I recognised, O Heaven! my AHMEDNUGGAR
IRREGULARS!  On came the gallant line of black steeds and horsemen;
swift swift before them rode my officers in yellow--Glogger,
Pappendick, and Stuffle; their sabres gleamed in the sun, their
voices rung in the air.  "D- them!" they cried, "give it them,
boys!"  A strength supernatural thrilled through my veins at that
delicious music:  by one tremendous effort, I wrested the post from
its foundation, five feet in the ground.  I could not release my
hands from the fetters, it is true; but, grasping the beam tightly,
I sprung forward--with one blow I levelled the five executioners in
the midst of the fire, their fall upsetting the scalding oil-can;
with the next, I swept the bearers of Bobbachy's palanquin off
their legs; with the third, I caught that chief himself in the
small of the back, and sent him flying on to the sabres of my
advancing soldiers!

The next minute, Glogger and Stuffle were in my arms, Pappendick
leading on the Irregulars.  Friend and foe in that wild chase had
swept far away.  We were alone:  I was freed from my immense bar;
and ten minutes afterwards, when Lord Lake trotted up with his
staff, he found me sitting on it.

"Look at Gahagan," said his Lordship.  "Gentlemen, did I not tell
you we should be sure to find him AT HIS POST?"

The gallant old nobleman rode on:  and this was the famous BATTLE
OF FURRUCKABAD, or SURPRISE OF FUTTYGHUR, fought on the 17th of
November, 1804.

* * *

About a month afterwards, the following announcement appeared in
the Boggleywollah Hurkaru and other Indian papers:-

"Married, on the 25th of December, at Futtyghur, by the Rev. Dr.
Snorter, Captain Goliah O'Grady Gahagan, Commanding Irregular
Horse, Ahmednuggar, to Belinda, second daughter of Major-General
Bulcher, C.B.  His Excellency the Commander-in-Chief gave away the
bride; and, after a splendid dejeuner, the happy pair set off to
pass the Mango season at Hurrygurrybang.  Venus must recollect,
however, that Mars must not always be at her side.  The Irregulars
are nothing without their leader."

Such was the paragraph--such the event--the happiest in the
existence of

G. O'G. G., M.H.E.I.C.S., C.I.H.A.



Footnotes:

{1}  So admirable are the performances of these watches, which will
stand in any climate, that I repeatedly heard poor Macgillicuddy
relate the following fact.  The hours, as it is known, count in
Italy from one to twenty-four:  THE DAY MAC LANDED AT NAPLES HIS
REPEATER RUNG THE ITALIAN HOURS, FROM ONE TO TWENTY-FOUR; as soon
as he crossed the Alps it only sounded as usual.--G. O'G. G.

{2}  In my affair with Macgillicuddy, I was fool enough to go out
with small swords:- miserable weapons, only fit for tailors.--G.
O'G. G.

{3}  The Major certainly offered to leave an old snuff-box at Mr.
Cunningham's office; but it contained no extract from a newspaper,
and does not quite prove that he killed a rhinoceros and stormed
fourteen entrenchments at the siege of Allyghur.

{4}  The double-jointed camel of Bactria, which the classic reader
may recollect is mentioned by Suidas (in his Commentary on the
Flight of Darius), is so called by the Mahrattas.

{5}  There is some trifling inconsistency on the Major's part.
Shah Allum was notoriously blind:  how, then, could he have seen
Gahagan?  The thing is manifestly impossible.

{6}  I do not wish to brag of my style of writing, or to pretend
that my genius as a writer has not been equalled in former times;
but if, in the works of Byron, Scott, Goethe, or Victor Hugo, the
reader can find a more beautiful sentence than the above, I will be
obliged to him, that is all--I simply say, I will be obliged to
him.--G. O'G. G., M.H.E.I.C.S., C.I.H.A.

{7}  The Major has put the most approved language into the mouths
of his Indian characters.  Bismillah, Barikallah, and so on,
according to the novelists, form the very essence of Eastern
conversation.

========================================
========================================

Transcribed from the 1911 John Murray edition by David Price, email
ccx074@coventry.ac.uk





THE HISTORY OF SAMUEL TITMARSH
AND THE
THE GREAT HOGGARTY DIAMOND


LONDON
JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET, W.
1911




CHAPTER I


GIVES AN ACCOUNT OF OUR VILLAGE AND THE FIRST GLIMPSE OF THE DIAMOND

When I came up to town for my second year, my aunt Hoggarty made me a
present of a diamond-pin; that is to say, it was not a diamond-pin then,
but a large old-fashioned locket, of Dublin manufacture in the year 1795,
which the late Mr. Hoggarty used to sport at the Lord Lieutenant's balls
and elsewhere.  He wore it, he said, at the battle of Vinegar Hill, when
his club pigtail saved his head from being taken off,--but that is
neither here nor there.

In the middle of the brooch was Hoggarty in the scarlet uniform of the
corps of Fencibles to which he belonged; around it were thirteen locks of
hair, belonging to a baker's dozen of sisters that the old gentleman had;
and, as all these little ringlets partook of the family hue of brilliant
auburn, Hoggarty's portrait seemed to the fanciful view like a great fat
red round of beef surrounded by thirteen carrots.  These were dished up
on a plate of blue enamel, and it was from the GREAT HOGGARTY DIAMOND (as
we called it in the family) that the collection of hairs in question
seemed as it were to spring.

My aunt, I need not say, is rich; and I thought I might be her heir as
well as another.  During my month's holiday, she was particularly pleased
with me; made me drink tea with her often (though there was a certain
person in the village with whom on those golden summer evenings I should
have liked to have taken a stroll in the hayfields); promised every time
I drank her bohea to do something handsome for me when I went back to
town,--nay, three or four times had me to dinner at three, and to whist
or cribbage afterwards.  I did not care for the cards; for though we
always played seven hours on a stretch, and I always lost, my losings
were never more than nineteenpence a night: but there was some infernal
sour black-currant wine, that the old lady always produced at dinner, and
with the tray at ten o'clock, and which I dared not refuse; though upon
my word and honour it made me very unwell.

Well, I thought after all this obsequiousness on my part, and my aunt's
repeated promises, that the old lady would at least make me a present of
a score of guineas (of which she had a power in the drawer); and so
convinced was I that some such present was intended for me, that a young
lady by the name of Miss Mary Smith, with whom I had conversed on the
subject, actually netted me a little green silk purse, which she gave me
(behind Hicks's hayrick, as you turn to the right up Churchyard
Lane)--which she gave me, I say, wrapped up in a bit of silver paper.
There was something in the purse, too, if the truth must be known.  First
there was a thick curl of the glossiest blackest hair you ever saw in
your life, and next there was threepence: that is to say, the half of a
silver sixpence hanging by a little necklace of blue riband.  Ah, but I
knew where the other half of the sixpence was, and envied that happy bit
of silver!

The last day of my holiday I was obliged, of course, to devote to Mrs.
Hoggarty.  My aunt was excessively gracious; and by way of a treat
brought out a couple of bottles of the black currant, of which she made
me drink the greater part.  At night when all the ladies assembled at her
party had gone off with their pattens and their maids, Mrs. Hoggarty, who
had made a signal to me to stay, first blew out three of the wax candles
in the drawing-room, and taking the fourth in her hand, went and unlocked
her escritoire.

I can tell you my heart beat, though I pretended to look quite
unconcerned.

"Sam my dear," said she, as she was fumbling with her keys, "take another
glass of Rosolio" (that was the name by which she baptised the cursed
beverage): "it will do you good."  I took it, and you might have seen my
hand tremble as the bottle went click--click against the glass.  By the
time I had swallowed it, the old lady had finished her operations at the
bureau, and was coming towards me, the wax-candle bobbing in one hand and
a large parcel in the other.

"Now's the time," thought I.

"Samuel, my dear nephew," said she, "your first name you received from
your sainted uncle, my blessed husband; and of all my nephews and nieces,
you are the one whose conduct in life has most pleased me."

When you consider that my aunt herself was one of seven married sisters,
that all the Hoggarties were married in Ireland and mothers of numerous
children, I must say that the compliment my aunt paid me was a very
handsome one.

"Dear aunt," says I, in a slow agitated voice, "I have often heard you
say there were seventy-three of us in all, and believe me I do think your
high opinion of me very complimentary indeed: I'm unworthy of it--indeed
I am."

"As for those odious Irish people," says my aunt, rather sharply, "don't
speak of them, I hate them, and every one of their mothers" (the fact is,
there had been a lawsuit about Hoggarty's property); "but of all my other
kindred, you, Samuel, have been the most dutiful and affectionate to me.
Your employers in London give the best accounts of your regularity and
good conduct.  Though you have had eighty pounds a year (a liberal
salary), you have not spent a shilling more than your income, as other
young men would; and you have devoted your month's holidays to your old
aunt, who, I assure you, is grateful."

"Oh, ma'am!" said I.  It was all that I could utter.

"Samuel," continued she, "I promised you a present, and here it is.  I
first thought of giving you money; but you are a regular lad; and don't
want it.  You are above money, dear Samuel.  I give you what I value most
in life--the p,--the po, the po-ortrait of my sainted Hoggarty" (tears),
"set in the locket which contains the valuable diamond that you have
often heard me speak of.  Wear it, dear Sam, for my sake; and think of
that angel in heaven, and of your dear Aunt Susy."

She put the machine into my hands: it was about the size of the lid of a
shaving-box: and I should as soon have thought of wearing it as of
wearing a cocked-hat and pigtail.  I was so disgusted and disappointed
that I really could not get out a single word.

When I recovered my presence of mind a little, I took the locket out of
the bit of paper (the locket indeed! it was as big as a barndoor
padlock), and slowly put it into my shirt.  "Thank you, Aunt," said I,
with admirable raillery.  "I shall always value this present for the sake
of you, who gave it me; and it will recall to me my uncle, and my
thirteen aunts in Ireland."

"I don't want you to wear it in _that_ way!" shrieked Mrs. Hoggarty,
"with the hair of those odious carroty women.  You must have their hair
removed."

"Then the locket will be spoiled, Aunt."

"Well, sir, never mind the locket; have it set afresh."

"Or suppose," said I, "I put aside the setting altogether: it is a little
too large for the present fashion; and have the portrait of my uncle
framed and placed over my chimney-piece, next to yours.  It's a sweet
miniature."

"That miniature," said Mrs. Hoggarty, solemnly, "was the great Mulcahy's
_chef-d'oeuvre_" (pronounced _shy dewver_, a favourite word of my aunt's;
being, with the words _bongtong_ and _ally mode de Parry_, the extent of
her French vocabulary).  "You know the dreadful story of that poor poor
artist.  When he had finished that wonderful likeness for the late Mrs.
Hoggarty of Castle Hoggarty, county Mayo, she wore it in her bosom at the
Lord Lieutenant's ball, where she played a game of piquet with the
Commander-in-Chief.  What could have made her put the hair of her vulgar
daughters round Mick's portrait, I can't think; but so it was, as you see
it this day.  'Madam,' says the Commander-in-Chief, 'if that is not my
friend Mick Hoggarty, I'm a Dutchman!'  Those were his Lordship's very
words.  Mrs. Hoggarty of Castle Hoggarty took off the brooch and showed
it to him.

"'Who is the artist?' says my Lord.  'It's the most wonderful likeness I
ever saw in my life!'

"'Mulcahy,' says she, 'of Ormond's Quay.'

"'Begad, I patronise him!' says my Lord; but presently his face darkened,
and he gave back the picture with a dissatisfied air.  'There is one
fault in that portrait,' said his Lordship, who was a rigid
disciplinarian; 'and I wonder that my friend Mick, as a military man,
should have overlooked it.'

"'What's that?' says Mrs. Hoggarty of Castle Hoggarty.

"'Madam, he has been painted WITHOUT HIS SWORD-BELT!'  And he took up the
cards again in a passion, and finished the game without saying a single
word.

"The news was carried to Mr. Mulcahy the next day, and that unfortunate
artist _went mad immediately_!  He had set his whole reputation upon this
miniature, and declared that it should be faultless.  Such was the effect
of the announcement upon his susceptible heart!  When Mrs. Hoggarty died,
your uncle took the portrait and always wore it himself.  His sisters
said it was for the sake of the diamond; whereas, ungrateful things! it
was merely on account of their hair, and his love for the fine arts.  As
for the poor artist, my dear, some people said it was the profuse use of
spirit that brought on delirium tremens; but I don't believe it.  Take
another glass of Rosolio."

The telling of this story always put my aunt into great good-humour, and
she promised at the end of it to pay for the new setting of the diamond;
desiring me to take it on my arrival in London to the great jeweller, Mr.
Polonius, and send her the bill.  "The fact is," said she, "that the gold
in which the thing is set is worth five guineas at the very least, and
you can have the diamond reset for two.  However, keep the remainder,
dear Sam, and buy yourself what you please with it."

With this the old lady bade me adieu.  The clock was striking twelve as I
walked down the village, for the story of Mulcahy always took an hour in
the telling, and I went away not quite so downhearted as when the present
was first made to me.  "After all," thought I, "a diamond-pin is a
handsome thing, and will give me a _distingue_ air, though my clothes be
never so shabby"--and shabby they were without any doubt.  "Well," I
said, "three guineas, which I shall have over, will buy me a couple of
pairs of what-d'ye-call-'ems;" of which, _entre nous_, I was in great
want, having just then done growing, whereas my pantaloons were made a
good eighteen months before.

Well, I walked down the village, my hands in my breeches pockets; I had
poor Mary's purse there, having removed the little things which she gave
me the day before, and placed them--never mind where: but look you, in
those days I had a heart, and a warm one too.  I had Mary's purse ready
for my aunt's donation, which never came, and with my own little stock of
money besides, that Mrs. Hoggarty's card parties had lessened by a good
five-and-twenty shillings, I calculated that, after paying my fare, I
should get to town with a couple of seven-shilling pieces in my pocket.

I walked down the village at a deuce of a pace; so quick that, if the
thing had been possible, I should have overtaken ten o'clock that had
passed by me two hours ago, when I was listening to Mrs. H.'s long
stories over her terrible Rosolio.  The truth is, at ten I had an
appointment under a certain person's window, who was to have been looking
at the moon at that hour, with her pretty quilled nightcap on, and her
blessed hair in papers.

There was the window shut, and not so much as a candle in it; and though
I hemmed and hawed, and whistled over the garden paling, and sang a song
of which Somebody was very fond, and even threw a pebble at the window,
which hit it exactly at the opening of the lattice,--I woke no one except
a great brute of a house-dog, that yelled, and howled, and bounced so at
me over the rails, that I thought every moment he would have had my nose
between his teeth.

So I was obliged to go off as quickly as might be; and the next morning
Mamma and my sisters made breakfast for me at four, and at five came the
"True Blue" light six-inside post-coach to London, and I got up on the
roof without having seen Mary Smith.

As we passed the house, it _did_ seem as if the window curtain in her
room was drawn aside just a little bit.  Certainly the window was open,
and it had been shut the night before: but away went the coach; and the
village, cottage, and the churchyard, and Hicks's hayricks were soon out
of sight.

* * * * *

"My hi, what a pin!" said a stable-boy, who was smoking a cigar, to the
guard, looking at me and putting his finger to his nose.

The fact is, that I had never undressed since my aunt's party; and being
uneasy in mind and having all my clothes to pack up, and thinking of
something else, had quite forgotten Mrs. Hoggarty's brooch, which I had
stuck into my shirt-frill the night before.




CHAPTER II


TELLS HOW THE DIAMOND IS BROUGHT UP TO LONDON, AND PRODUCES WONDERFUL
EFFECTS BOTH IN THE CITY AND AT THE WEST END

The circumstances recorded in this story took place some score of years
ago, when, as the reader may remember, there was a great mania in the
City of London for establishing companies of all sorts; by which many
people made pretty fortunes.

I was at this period, as the truth must be known, thirteenth clerk of
twenty-four young gents who did the immense business of the Independent
West Diddlesex Fire and Life Insurance Company, at their splendid stone
mansion in Cornhill.  Mamma had sunk a sum of four hundred pounds in the
purchase of an annuity at this office, which paid her no less than six-
and-thirty pounds a year, when no other company in London would give her
more than twenty-four.  The chairman of the directors was the great Mr.
Brough, of the house of Brough and Hoff, Crutched Friars, Turkey
Merchants.  It was a new house, but did a tremendous business in the fig
and sponge way, and more in the Zante currant line than any other firm in
the City.

Brough was a great man among the Dissenting connection, and you saw his
name for hundreds at the head of every charitable society patronised by
those good people.  He had nine clerks residing at his office in Crutched
Friars; he would not take one without a certificate from the schoolmaster
and clergyman of his native place, strongly vouching for his morals and
doctrine; and the places were so run after, that he got a premium of four
or five hundred pounds with each young gent, whom he made to slave for
ten hours a day, and to whom in compensation he taught all the mysteries
of the Turkish business.  He was a great man on 'Change, too; and our
young chaps used to hear from the stockbrokers' clerks (we commonly dined
together at the "Cock and Woolpack," a respectable house, where you get a
capital cut of meat, bread, vegetables, cheese, half a pint of porter,
and a penny to the waiter, for a shilling)--the young stockbrokers used
to tell us of immense bargains in Spanish, Greek, and Columbians, that
Brough made.  Hoff had nothing to do with them, but stopped at home
minding exclusively the business of the house.  He was a young chap, very
quiet and steady, of the Quaker persuasion, and had been taken into
partnership by Brough for a matter of thirty thousand pounds: and a very
good bargain too.  I was told in the strictest confidence that the house
one year with another divided a good seven thousand pounds: of which
Brough had half, Hoff two-sixths, and the other sixth went to old Tudlow,
who had been Mr. Brough's clerk before the new partnership began.  Tudlow
always went about very shabby, and we thought him an old miser.  One of
our gents, Bob Swinney by name, used to say that Tudlow's share was all
nonsense, and that Brough had it all; but Bob was always too knowing by
half, used to wear a green cutaway coat, and had his free admission to
Covent Garden Theatre.  He was always talking down at the shop, as we
called it (it wasn't a shop, but as splendid an office as any in
Cornhill)--he was always talking about Vestris and Miss Tree, and singing

   "The bramble, the bramble,
   The jolly jolly bramble!"

one of Charles Kemble's famous songs in "Maid Marian;" a play that was
all the rage then, taken from a famous story-book by one Peacock, a clerk
in the India House; and a precious good place he has too.

When Brough heard how Master Swinney abused him, and had his admission to
the theatre, he came one day down to the office where we all were, four-
and-twenty of us, and made one of the most beautiful speeches I ever
heard in my life.  He said that for slander he did not care, contumely
was the lot of every public man who had austere principles of his own,
and acted by them austerely; but what he _did_ care for was the character
of every single gentleman forming a part of the Independent West
Diddlesex Association.  The welfare of thousands was in their keeping;
millions of money were daily passing through their hands; the City--the
country looked upon them for order, honesty, and good example.  And if he
found amongst those whom he considered as his children--those whom he
loved as his own flesh and blood--that that order was departed from, that
that regularity was not maintained, that that good example was not kept
up (Mr. B. always spoke in this emphatic way)--if he found his children
departing from the wholesome rules of morality, religion, and decorum--if
he found in high or low--in the head clerk at six hundred a year down to
the porter who cleaned the steps--if he found the slightest taint of
dissipation, he would cast the offender from him--yea, though he were his
own son, he would cast him from him!

As he spoke this, Mr. Brough burst into tears; and we who didn't know
what was coming, looked at each other as pale as parsnips: all except
Swinney, who was twelfth clerk, and made believe to whistle.  When Mr. B.
had wiped his eyes and recovered himself, he turned round; and oh, how my
heart thumped as he looked me full in the face!  How it was relieved,
though, when he shouted out in a thundering voice--

"Mr. ROBERT SWINNEY!"

"Sir to you," says Swinney, as cool as possible, and some of the chaps
began to titter.

"Mr. SWINNEY!" roared Brough, in a voice still bigger than before, "when
you came into this office--this family, sir, for such it is, as I am
proud to say--you found three-and-twenty as pious and well-regulated
young men as ever laboured together--as ever had confided to them the
wealth of this mighty capital and famous empire.  You found, sir,
sobriety, regularity, and decorum; no profane songs were uttered in this
place sacred to--to business; no slanders were whispered against the
heads of the establishment--but over them I pass: I can afford, sir, to
pass them by--no worldly conversation or foul jesting disturbed the
attention of these gentlemen, or desecrated the peaceful scene of their
labours.  You found Christians and gentlemen, sir!"

"I paid for my place like the rest," said Swinney.  "Didn't my governor
take sha-?"

"Silence, sir!  Your worthy father did take shares in this establishment,
which will yield him one day an immense profit.  He _did_ take shares,
sir, or you never would have been here.  I glory in saying that every one
of my young friends around me has a father, a brother, a dear relative or
friend, who is connected in a similar way with our glorious enterprise;
and that not one of them is there but has an interest in procuring, at a
liberal commission, other persons to join the ranks of our Association.
_But_, sir, I am its chief.  You will find, sir, your appointment signed
by me; and in like manner, I, John Brough, annul it.  Go from us,
sir!--leave us--quit a family that can no longer receive you in its
bosom!  Mr. Swinney, I have wept--I have prayed, sir, before I came to
this determination; I have taken counsel, sir, and am resolved.  _Depart
from out of us_!

"Not without three months' salary, though, Mr. B.: that cock won't
fight!"

"They shall be paid to your father, sir."

"My father be hanged!  I tell you what, Brough, I'm of age; and if you
don't pay me my salary, I'll arrest you,--by Jingo, I will!  I'll have
you in quod, or my name's not Bob Swinney!"

"Make out a cheque, Mr. Roundhand, for the three months' salary of this
perverted young man."

"Twenty-one pun' five, Roundhand, and nothing for the stamp!" cried out
that audacious Swinney.  "There it is, sir, _re_-ceipted.  You needn't
cross it to my banker's.  And if any of you gents like a glass of punch
this evening at eight o'clock, Bob Swinney's your man, and nothing to
pay.  If Mr. Brough _would_ do me the honour to come in and take a whack?
Come, don't say no, if you'd rather not!"

We couldn't stand this impudence, and all burst out laughing like mad.

"Leave the room!" yelled Mr. Brough, whose face had turned quite blue;
and so Bob took his white hat off the peg, and strolled away with his
"tile," as he called it, very much on one side.  When he was gone, Mr.
Brough gave us another lecture, by which we all determined to profit; and
going up to Roundhand's desk put his arm round his neck, and looked over
the ledger.

"What money has been paid in to-day, Roundhand?" he said, in a very kind
way.

"The widow, sir, came with her money; nine hundred and four ten and
six--say 904_l_. 10_s_. 6_d_.  Captain Sparr, sir, paid his shares up;
grumbles, though, and says he's no more: fifty shares, two
instalments--three fifties, sir."

"He's always grumbling!"

"He says he has not a shilling to bless himself with until our dividend
day."

"Any more?"

Mr. Roundhand went through the book, and made it up nineteen hundred
pounds in all.  We were doing a famous business now; though when I came
into the office, we used to sit, and laugh, and joke, and read the
newspapers all day; bustling into our seats whenever a stray customer
came.  Brough never cared about our laughing and singing _then_, and was
hand and glove with Bob Swinney; but that was in early times, before we
were well in harness.

"Nineteen hundred pounds, and a thousand pounds in shares.  Bravo,
Roundhand--bravo, gentlemen!  Remember, every share you bring in brings
you five per cent. down on the nail!  Look to your friends--stick to your
desks--be regular--I hope none of you forget church.  Who takes Mr.
Swinney's place?"

"Mr. Samuel Titmarsh, sir."

"Mr. Titmarsh, I congratulate you.  Give me your hand, sir: you are now
twelfth clerk of this Association, and your salary is consequently
increased five pounds a year.  How is your worthy mother, sir--your dear
and excellent parent?  In good health I trust?  And long--long, I
fervently pray, may this office continue to pay her annuity!  Remember,
if she has more money to lay out, there is higher interest than the last
for her, for she is a year older; and five per cent. for you, my boy!  Why
not you as well as another?  Young men will be young men, and a ten-pound
note does no harm.  Does it, Mr. Abednego?"

"Oh, no!" says Abednego, who was third clerk, and who was the chap that
informed against Swinney; and he began to laugh, as indeed we all did
whenever Mr. Brough made anything like a joke: not that they _were_
jokes; only we used to know it by his face.

"Oh, by-the-bye, Roundhand," says he, "a word with you on business.  Mrs.
Brough wants to know why the deuce you never come down to Fulham."

"Law, that's very polite!" said Mr. Roundhand, quite pleased.

"Name your day, my boy!  Say Saturday, and bring your night-cap with
you."

"You're very polite, I'm sure.  I should be delighted beyond anything,
but--"

"But--no buts, my boy!  Hark ye! the Chancellor of the Exchequer does me
the honour to dine with us, and I want you to see him; for the truth is,
I have bragged about you to his Lordship as the best actuary in the three
kingdoms."

Roundhand could not refuse such an invitation as _that_, though he had
told us how Mrs. R. and he were going to pass Saturday and Sunday at
Putney; and we who knew what a life the poor fellow led, were sure that
the head clerk would be prettily scolded by his lady when she heard what
was going on.  She disliked Mrs. Brough very much, that was the fact;
because Mrs. B. kept a carriage, and said she didn't know where
Pentonville was, and couldn't call on Mrs. Roundhand.  Though, to be
sure, her coachman might have found out the way.

"And oh, Roundhand!" continued our governor, "draw a cheque for seven
hundred, will you!  Come, don't stare, man; I'm not going to run away!
That's right,--seven hundred--and ninety, say, while you're about it!  Our
board meets on Saturday, and never fear I'll account for it to them
before I drive you down.  We shall take up the Chancellor at Whitehall."

So saying, Mr. Brough folded up the cheque, and shaking hands with Mr.
Roundhand very cordially, got into his carriage-and-four (he always drove
four horses even in the City, where it's so difficult), which was waiting
at the office-door for him.

Bob Swinney used to say that he charged two of the horses to the Company;
but there was never believing half of what that Bob said, he used to
laugh and joke so.  I don't know how it was, but I and a gent by the name
of Hoskins (eleventh clerk), who lived together with me in Salisbury
Square, Fleet Street--where we occupied a very genteel two-pair--found
our flute duet rather tiresome that evening, and as it was a very fine
night, strolled out for a walk West End way.  When we arrived opposite
Covent Garden Theatre we found ourselves close to the "Globe Tavern," and
recollected Bob Swinney's hospitable invitation.  We never fancied that
he had meant the invitation in earnest, but thought we might as well look
in: at any rate there could be no harm in doing so.

There, to be sure, in the back drawing-room, where he said he would be,
we found Bob at the head of a table, and in the midst of a great smoke of
cigars, and eighteen of our gents rattling and banging away at the table
with the bottoms of their glasses.

What a shout they made as we came in!  "Hurray!" says Bob, "here's two
more!  Two more chairs, Mary, two more tumblers, two more hot waters, and
two more goes of gin!  Who would have thought of seeing Tit, in the name
of goodness?"

"Why," said I, "we only came in by the merest chance."

At this word there was another tremendous roar: and it is a positive
fact, that every man of the eighteen had said he came by chance!  However,
chance gave us a very jovial night; and that hospitable Bob Swinney paid
every shilling of the score.

"Gentlemen!" says he, as he paid the bill, "I'll give you the health of
John Brough, Esquire, and thanks to him for the present of 21_l_. 5_s_.
which he made me this morning.  What do I say--21_l_. 5_s_.?  That and a
month's salary that I should have had to pay--forfeit--down on the nail,
by Jingo! for leaving the shop, as I intended to do to-morrow morning.
I've got a place--a tip-top place, I tell you.  Five guineas a week, six
journeys a year, my own horse and gig, and to travel in the West of
England in oil and spermaceti.  Here's confusion to gas, and the health
of Messrs. Gann and Co., of Thames Street, in the City of London!"

I have been thus particular in my account of the West Diddlesex Insurance
Office, and of Mr. Brough, the managing director (though the real names
are neither given to the office nor to the chairman, as you may be sure),
because the fate of me and my diamond pin was mysteriously bound up with
both: as I am about to show.

You must know that I was rather respected among our gents at the West
Diddlesex, because I came of a better family than most of them; had
received a classical education; and especially because I had a rich aunt,
Mrs. Hoggarty, about whom, as must be confessed, I used to boast a good
deal.  There is no harm in being respected in this world, as I have found
out; and if you don't brag a little for yourself, depend on it there is
no person of your acquaintance who will tell the world of your merits,
and take the trouble off your hands.

So that when I came back to the office after my visit at home, and took
my seat at the old day-book opposite the dingy window that looks into
Birchin Lane, I pretty soon let the fellows know that Mrs. Hoggarty,
though she had not given me a large sum of money, as I expected--indeed,
I had promised a dozen of them a treat down the river, should the
promised riches have come to me--I let them know, I say, that though my
aunt had not given me any money, she had given me a splendid diamond,
worth at least thirty guineas, and that some day I would sport it at the
shop.

"Oh, let's see it!" says Abednego, whose father was a mock-jewel and gold-
lace merchant in Hanway Yard; and I promised that he should have a sight
of it as soon as it was set.  As my pocket-money was run out too (by
coach-hire to and from home, five shillings to our maid at home, ten to
my aunt's maid and man, five-and-twenty shillings lost at whist, as I
said, and fifteen-and-six paid for a silver scissors for the dear little
fingers of Somebody), Roundhand, who was very good-natured, asked me to
dine, and advanced me 7_l_. 1_s_. 8_d_., a month's salary.  It was at
Roundhand's house, Myddelton Square, Pentonville, over a fillet of veal
and bacon and a glass of port, that I learned and saw how his wife ill-
treated him; as I have told before.  Poor fellow!--we under-clerks all
thought it was a fine thing to sit at a desk by oneself, and have 50_l_.
per month, as Roundhand had; but I've a notion that Hoskins and I,
blowing duets on the flute together in our second floor in Salisbury
Square, were a great deal more at ease than our head--and more _in
harmony_, too; though we made sad work of the music, certainly.

One day Gus Hoskins and I asked leave from Roundhand to be off at three
o'clock, as we had _particular business_ at the West End.  He knew it was
about the great Hoggarty diamond, and gave us permission; so off we set.
When we reached St. Martin's Lane, Gus got a cigar, to give himself as it
were a _distingue_ air, and pulled at it all the way up the Lane, and
through the alleys into Coventry Street, where Mr. Polonius's shop is, as
everybody knows.

The door was open, and a number of carriages full of ladies were drawing
up and setting down.  Gus kept his hands in his pockets--trousers were
worn very full then, with large tucks, and pigeon-holes for your boots,
or Bluchers, to come through (the fashionables wore boots, but we chaps
in the City, on 80_l_. a year, contented ourselves with Bluchers); and as
Gus stretched out his pantaloons as wide as he could from his hips, and
kept blowing away at his cheroot, and clamping with the iron heels of his
boots, and had very large whiskers for so young a man, he really looked
quite the genteel thing, and was taken by everybody to be a person of
consideration.

He would not come into the shop though, but stood staring at the gold
pots and kettles in the window outside.  I went in; and after a little
hemming and hawing--for I had never been at such a fashionable place
before--asked one of the gentlemen to let me speak to Mr. Polonius.

"What can I do for you, sir?" says Mr. Polonius, who was standing close
by, as it happened, serving three ladies,--a very old one and two young
ones, who were examining pearl necklaces very attentively.

"Sir," said I, producing my jewel out of my coat-pocket, "this jewel has,
I believe, been in your house before: it belonged to my aunt, Mrs.
Hoggarty, of Castle Hoggarty."  The old lady standing near looked round
as I spoke.

"I sold her a gold neck-chain and repeating watch in the year 1795," said
Mr. Polonius, who made it a point to recollect everything; "and a silver
punch-ladle to the Captain.  How is the Major--Colonel--General--eh,
sir?"

"The General," said I, "I am sorry to say"--though I was quite proud that
this man of fashion should address me so.--"Mr. Hoggarty is--no more.  My
aunt has made me a present, however, of this--this trinket--which, as you
see, contains her husband's portrait, that I will thank you, sir, to
preserve for me very carefully; and she wishes that you would set this
diamond neatly."

"Neatly and handsomely, of course, sir."

"Neatly, in the present fashion; and send down the account to her.  There
is a great deal of gold about the trinket, for which, of course, you will
make an allowance."

"To the last fraction of a sixpence," says Mr. Polonius, bowing, and
looking at the jewel.  "It's a wonderful piece of goods, certainly," said
he; "though the diamond's a neat little bit, certainly.  Do, my Lady,
look at it.  The thing is of Irish manufacture, bears the stamp of '95,
and will recall perhaps the times of your Ladyship's earliest youth."

"Get ye out, Mr. Polonius!" said the old lady, a little wizen-faced old
lady, with her face puckered up in a million of wrinkles.  "How _dar_
you, sir, to talk such nonsense to an old woman like me?  Wasn't I fifty
years old in '95, and a grandmother in '96?"  She put out a pair of
withered trembling hands, took up the locket, examined it for a minute,
and then burst out laughing: "As I live, it's the great Hoggarty
diamond!"

Good heavens! what was this talisman that had come into my possession?

"Look, girls," continued the old lady: "this is the great jew'l of all
Ireland.  This red-faced man in the middle is poor Mick Hoggarty, a
cousin of mine, who was in love with me in the year '84, when I had just
lost your poor dear grandpapa.  These thirteen sthreamers of red hair
represent his thirteen celebrated sisters,--Biddy, Minny, Thedy, Widdy
(short for Williamina), Freddy, Izzy, Tizzy, Mysie, Grizzy, Polly, Dolly,
Nell, and Bell--all married, all ugly, and all carr'ty hair.  And of
which are you the son, young man?--though, to do you justice, you're not
like the family."

Two pretty young ladies turned two pretty pairs of black eyes at me, and
waited for an answer: which they would have had, only the old lady began
rattling on a hundred stories about the thirteen ladies above named, and
all their lovers, all their disappointments, and all the duels of Mick
Hoggarty.  She was a chronicle of fifty-years-old scandal.  At last she
was interrupted by a violent fit of coughing; at the conclusion of which
Mr. Polonius very respectfully asked me where he should send the pin, and
whether I would like the hair kept.

"No," says I, "never mind the hair."

"And the pin, sir?"

I had felt ashamed about telling my address: "But, bang it!" thought I,
"why _should_ I?--

   'A king can make a belted knight,
      A marquess, duke, and a' that;
   An honest man's abune his might--
      Gude faith, he canna fa' that.'

Why need I care about telling these ladies where I live?"

"Sir," says I, "have the goodness to send the parcel, when done, to Mr.
Titmarsh, No. 3 Bell Lane, Salisbury Square, near St. Bride's Church,
Fleet Street.  Ring, if you please, the two-pair bell."

"_What_, sir?" said Mr. Polonius.

"_Hwat_!" shrieked the old lady.  "Mr. Hwat?  Mais, ma chere, c'est
impayable.  Come along--here's the carr'age!  Give me your arm, Mr. Hwat,
and get inside, and tell me all about your thirteen aunts."

She seized on my elbow and hobbled through the shop as fast as possible;
the young ladies following her, laughing.

"Now, jump in, do you hear?" said she, poking her sharp nose out of the
window.

"I can't, ma'am," says I; "I have a friend."

"Pooh, pooh! send 'um to the juice, and jump in!"  And before almost I
could say a word, a great powdered fellow in yellow-plush breeches pushed
me up the steps and banged the door to.

I looked just for one minute as the barouche drove away at Hoskins, and
never shall forget his figure.  There stood Gus, his mouth wide open, his
eyes staring, a smoking cheroot in his hand, wondering with all his might
at the strange thing that had just happened to me.

"Who _is_ that Titmarsh?" says Gus: "there's a coronet on the carriage,
by Jingo!"




CHAPTER III


HOW THE POSSESSOR OF THE DIAMOND IS WHISKED INTO A MAGNIFICENT CHARIOT,
AND HAS YET FURTHER GOOD LUCK

I sat on the back seat of the carriage, near a very nice young lady,
about my dear Mary's age--that is to say, seventeen and three-quarters;
and opposite us sat the old Countess and her other
grand-daughter--handsome too, but ten years older.  I recollect I had on
that day my blue coat and brass buttons, nankeen trousers, a white sprig
waist-coat, and one of Dando's silk hats, that had just come in in the
year '22, and looked a great deal more glossy than the best beaver.

"And who was that hidjus manster"--that was the way her Ladyship
pronounced,--"that ojous vulgar wretch, with the iron heels to his boots,
and the big mouth, and the imitation goold neck-chain, who _steered_ at
us so as we got into the carriage?"

How she should have known that Gus's chain was mosaic I can't tell; but
so it was, and we had bought it for five-and-twenty and sixpence only the
week before at M'Phail's, in St. Paul's Churchyard.  But I did not like
to hear my friend abused, and so spoke out for him--

"Ma'am," says I, "that young gentleman's name is Augustus Hoskins.  We
live together; and a better or more kind-hearted fellow does not exist."

"You are quite right to stand up for your friends, sir," said the second
lady; whose name, it appears, was Lady Jane, but whom the grandmamma
called Lady Jene.

"Well, upon me conscience, so he is now, Lady Jene; and I like sper't in
a young man.  So his name is Hoskins, is it?  I know, my dears, all the
Hoskinses in England.  There are the Lincolnshire Hoskinses, the
Shropshire Hoskinses: they say the Admiral's daughter, Bell, was in love
with a black footman, or boatswain, or some such thing; but the world's
so censorious.  There's old Doctor Hoskins of Bath, who attended poor
dear Drum in the quinsy; and poor dear old Fred Hoskins, the gouty
General: I remember him as thin as a lath in the year '84, and as active
as a harlequin, and in love with me--oh, how he was in love with me!"

"You seem to have had a host of admirers in those days, Grandmamma?" said
Lady Jane.

"Hundreds, my dear,--hundreds of thousands.  I was the toast of Bath, and
a great beauty, too: would you ever have thought it now, upon your
conscience and without flattery, Mr.-a-What-d'ye-call-'im?"

"Indeed, ma'am, I never should," I answered, for the old lady was as ugly
as possible; and at my saying this the two young ladies began screaming
with laughter, and I saw the two great-whiskered footmen grinning over
the back of the carriage.

"Upon my word, you're mighty candid, Mr. What's-your-name--mighty candid
indeed; but I like candour in young people.  But a beauty I was.  Just
ask your friend's uncle the General.  He's one of the Lincolnshire
Hoskinses--I knew he was by the strong family likeness.  Is he the eldest
son?  It's a pretty property, though sadly encumbered; for old Sir George
was the divvle of a man--a friend of Hanbury Williams, and Lyttleton, and
those horrid, monstrous, ojous people!  How much will he have now,
mister, when the Admiral dies?"

"Why, ma'am, I can't say; but the Admiral is not my friend's father."

"Not his father?--but he _is_, I tell you, and I'm never wrong.  Who is
his father, then?"

"Ma'am, Gus's father's a leatherseller in Skinner Street, Snow Hill,--a
very respectable house, ma'am.  But Gus is only third son, and so can't
expect a great share in the property."

The two young ladies smiled at this--the old lady said, "Hwat?"

"I like you, sir," Lady Jane said, "for not being ashamed of your
friends, whatever their rank of life may be.  Shall we have the pleasure
of setting you down anywhere, Mr. Titmarsh?"

"Noways particular, my Lady," says I.  "We have a holiday at our office
to-day--at least Roundhand gave me and Gus leave; and I shall be very
happy, indeed, to take a drive in the Park, if it's no offence."

"I'm sure it will give us--infinite pleasure," said Lady Jane; though
rather in a grave way.

"Oh, that it will!" says Lady Fanny, clapping her hands: "won't it,
Grandmamma?  And after we have been in the Park, we can walk in
Kensington Gardens, if Mr. Titmarsh will be good enough to accompany us."

"Indeed, Fanny, we will do no such thing," says Lady Jane.

"Indeed, but we will though!" shrieked out Lady Drum.  "Ain't I dying to
know everything about his uncle and thirteen aunts? and you're all
chattering so, you young women, that not a blessed syllable will you
allow me or my young friend here to speak."

Lady Jane gave a shrug with her shoulders, and did not say a single word
more.  Lady Fanny, who was as gay as a young kitten (if I may be allowed
so to speak of the aristocracy), laughed, and blushed, and giggled, and
seemed quite to enjoy her sister's ill-humour.  And the Countess began at
once, and entered into the history of the thirteen Misses Hoggarty, which
was not near finished when we entered the Park.

When there, you can't think what hundreds of gents on horseback came to
the carriage and talked to the ladies.  They had their joke for Lady
Drum, who seemed to be a character in her way; their bow for Lady Jane;
and, the young ones especially, their compliment for Lady Fanny.

Though she bowed and blushed, as a young lady should, Lady Fanny seemed
to be thinking of something else; for she kept her head out of the
carriage, looking eagerly among the horsemen, as if she expected to see
somebody.  Aha! my Lady Fanny, _I_ knew what it meant when a young pretty
lady like you was absent, and on the look-out, and only half answered the
questions put to her.  Let alone Sam Titmarsh--he knows what Somebody
means as well as another, I warrant.  As I saw these manoeuvres going on,
I could not help just giving a wink to Lady Jane, as much as to say I
knew what was what.  "I guess the young lady is looking for Somebody,"
says I.  It was then her turn to look queer, I assure you, and she
blushed as red as scarlet; but, after a minute, the good-natured little
thing looked at her sister, and both the young ladies put their
handkerchiefs up to their faces, and began laughing--laughing as if I had
said the funniest thing in the world.

"Il est charmant, votre monsieur," said Lady Jane to her grandmamma; and
on which I bowed, and said, "Madame, vous me faites beaucoup d'honneur:"
for I know the French language, and was pleased to find that these good
ladies had taken a liking to me.  "I'm a poor humble lad, ma'am, not used
to London society, and do really feel it quite kind of you to take me by
the hand so, and give me a drive in your fine carriage."

At this minute a gentleman on a black horse, with a pale face and a tuft
to his chin, came riding up to the carriage; and I knew by a little start
that Lady Fanny gave, and by her instantly looking round the other way,
that _Somebody_ was come at last.

"Lady Drum," said he, "your most devoted servant!  I have just been
riding with a gentleman who almost shot himself for love of the beautiful
Countess of Drum in the year--never mind the year."

"Was it Killblazes?" said the lady: "he's a dear old man, and I'm quite
ready to go off with him this minute.  Or was it that delight of an old
bishop?  He's got a lock of my hair now--I gave it him when he was Papa's
chaplain; and let me tell you it would be a hard matter to find another
now in the same place."

"Law, my Lady!" says I, "you don't say so?"

"But indeed I do, my good sir," says she; "for between ourselves, my
head's as bare as a cannon-ball--ask Fanny if it isn't.  Such a fright as
the poor thing got when she was a babby, and came upon me suddenly in my
dressing-room without my wig!"

"I hope Lady Fanny has recovered from the shock," said "Somebody,"
looking first at her, and then at me as if he had a mind to swallow me.
And would you believe it? all that Lady Fanny could say was, "Pretty
well, I thank you, my Lord;" and she said this with as much fluttering
and blushing as we used to say our Virgil at school--when we hadn't
learned it.

My Lord still kept on looking very fiercely at me, and muttered something
about having hoped to find a seat in Lady Drum's carriage, as he was
tired of riding; on which Lady Fanny muttered something, too, about "a
friend of Grandmamma's."

"You should say a friend of yours, Fanny," says Lady Jane: "I am sure we
should never have come to the Park if Fanny had not insisted upon
bringing Mr. Titmarsh hither.  Let me introduce the Earl of Tiptoff to
Mr. Titmarsh."  But, instead of taking off his hat, as I did mine, his
Lordship growled out that he hoped for another opportunity, and galloped
off again on his black horse.  Why the deuce I should have offended him I
never could understand.

But it seemed as if I was destined to offend all the men that day; for
who should presently come up but the Right Honourable Edmund Preston, one
of His Majesty's Secretaries of State (as I know very well by the almanac
in our office) and the husband of Lady Jane.

The Right Honourable Edmund was riding a grey cob, and was a fat pale-
faced man, who looked as if he never went into the open air.  "Who the
devil's that?" said he to his wife, looking surlily both at me and her.

"Oh, it's a friend of Grandmamma's and Jane's," said Lady Fanny at once,
looking, like a sly rogue as she was, quite archly at her sister--who in
her turn appeared quite frightened, and looked imploringly at her sister,
and never dared to breathe a syllable.  "Yes, indeed," continued Lady
Fanny, "Mr. Titmarsh is a cousin of Grandmamma's by the mother's side: by
the Hoggarty side.  Didn't you know the Hoggarties when you were in
Ireland, Edmund, with Lord Bagwig?  Let me introduce you to Grandmamma's
cousin, Mr. Titmarsh: Mr. Titmarsh, my brother, Mr. Edmund Preston."

There was Lady Jane all the time treading upon her sister's foot as hard
as possible, and the little wicked thing would take no notice; and I, who
had never heard of the cousinship, feeling as confounded as could be.  But
I did not know the Countess of Drum near so well as that sly minx her
grand-daughter did; for the old lady, who had just before called poor Gus
Hoskins her cousin, had, it appeared, the mania of fancying all the world
related to her, and said--

"Yes, we're cousins, and not very far removed.  Mick Hoggarty's
grandmother was Millicent Brady, and she and my Aunt Towzer were related,
as all the world knows; for Decimus Brady, of Ballybrady, married an own
cousin of Aunt Towzer's mother, Bell Swift--that was no relation of the
Dean's, my love, who came but of a so-so family--and isn't _that_ clear?"

"Oh, perfectly, Grandmamma," said Lady Jane, laughing, while the right
honourable gent still rode by us, looking sour and surly.

"And sure you knew the Hoggarties, Edmund?--the thirteen red-haired
girls--the nine graces, and four over, as poor Clanboy used to call them.
Poor Clan!--a cousin of yours and mine, Mr. Titmarsh, and sadly in love
with me he was too.  Not remember them _all_ now, Edmund?--not
remember?--not remember Biddy and Minny, and Thedy and Widdy, and Mysie
and Grizzy, and Polly and Dolly and the rest?"

"D--- the Miss Hoggarties, ma'am," said the right honourable gent; and he
said it with such energy, that his grey horse gave a sudden lash out that
well nigh sent him over his head.  Lady Jane screamed; Lady Fanny
laughed; old Lady Drum looked as if she did not care twopence, and said
"Serve you right for swearing, you ojous man you!"

"Hadn't you better come into the carriage, Edmund--Mr. Preston?" cried
out the lady, anxiously.

"Oh, I'm sure I'll slip out, ma'am," says I.

"Pooh--pooh! don't stir," said Lady Drum: "it's my carriage; and if Mr.
Preston chooses to swear at a lady of my years in that ojous vulgar
way--in that ojous vulgar way I repeat--I don't see why my friends should
be inconvenienced for him.  Let him sit on the dicky if he likes, or come
in and ride bodkin."  It was quite clear that my Lady Drum hated her
grandson-in-law heartily; and I've remarked somehow in families that this
kind of hatred is by no means uncommon.

Mr. Preston, one of His Majesty's Secretaries of State, was, to tell the
truth, in a great fright upon his horse, and was glad to get away from
the kicking plunging brute.  His pale face looked still paler than
before, and his hands and legs trembled, as he dismounted from the cob
and gave the reins to his servant.  I disliked the looks of the chap--of
the master, I mean--at the first moment he came up, when he spoke rudely
to that nice gentle wife of his; and I thought he was a cowardly fellow,
as the adventure of the cob showed him to be.  Heaven bless you! a baby
could have ridden it; and here was the man with his soul in his mouth at
the very first kick.

"Oh, quick! _do_ come in, Edmund," said Lady Fanny, laughing; and the
carriage steps being let down, and giving me a great scowl as he came in,
he was going to place himself in Lady Fanny's corner (I warrant you I
wouldn't budge from mine), when the little rogue cried out, "Oh, no! by
no means, Mr. Preston.  Shut the door, Thomas.  And oh! what fun it will
be to show all the world a Secretary of State riding bodkin!"

And pretty glum the Secretary of State looked, I assure you!

"Take my place, Edmund, and don't mind Fanny's folly," said Lady Jane,
timidly.

"Oh no!  Pray, madam, don't stir!  I'm comfortable, very comfortable; and
so I hope is this Mr.--this gentleman."

"Perfectly, I assure you," says I.  "I was going to offer to ride your
horse home for you, as you seemed to be rather frightened at it; but the
fact was, I was so comfortable here that really I _couldn't_ move."

Such a grin as old Lady Drum gave when I said that!--how her little eyes
twinkled, and her little sly mouth puckered up!  I couldn't help
speaking, for, look you, my blood was up.

"We shall always be happy of your company, Cousin Titmarsh," says she;
and handed me a gold snuff-box, out of which I took a pinch, and sneezed
with the air of a lord.

"As you have invited this gentleman into your carriage, Lady Jane
Preston, hadn't you better invite him home to dinner?" says Mr. Preston,
quite blue with rage.

"I invited him into my carriage," says the old lady; "and as we are going
to dine at your house, and you press it, I'm sure I shall be very happy
to see him there."

"I'm very sorry I'm engaged," said I.

"Oh, indeed, what a pity!" says Right Honourable Ned, still glowering at
his wife.  "What a pity that this gentleman--I forget his name--that your
friend, Lady Jane, is engaged!  I am sure you would have had such
gratification in meeting your relation in Whitehall."

Lady Drum was over-fond of finding out relations to be sure; but this
speech of Right Honourable Ned's was rather too much.  "Now, Sam," says
I, "be a man and show your spirit!"  So I spoke up at once, and said,
"Why, ladies, as the right honourable gent is so _very_ pressing, I'll
give up my engagement, and shall have sincere pleasure in cutting mutton
with him.  What's your hour, sir?"

He didn't condescend to answer, and for me I did not care; for, you see,
I did not intend to dine with the man, but only to give him a lesson of
manners.  For though I am but a poor fellow, and hear people cry out how
vulgar it is to eat peas with a knife, or ask three times for cheese, and
such like points of ceremony, there's something, I think, much more
vulgar than all this, and that is, insolence to one's inferiors.  I hate
the chap that uses it, as I scorn him of humble rank that affects to be
of the fashion; and so I determined to let Mr. Preston know a piece of my
mind.

When the carriage drove up to his house, I handed out the ladies as
politely as possible, and walked into the hall, and then, taking hold of
Mr. Preston's button at the door, I said, before the ladies and the two
big servants--upon my word I did--"Sir," says I, "this kind old lady
asked me into her carriage, and I rode in it to please her, not myself.
When you came up and asked who the devil I was, I thought you might have
put the question in a more polite manner; but it wasn't my business to
speak.  When, by way of a joke, you invited me to dinner, I thought I
would answer in a joke too, and here I am.  But don't be frightened; I'm
not a-going to dine with you: only if you play the same joke upon other
parties--on some of the chaps in our office, for example--I recommend you
to have a care, or they will _take you at your word_."

"Is that all, sir?" says Mr. Preston, still in a rage.  "If you have
done, will you leave this house, or shall my servants turn you out?  Turn
out this fellow! do you hear me?" and he broke away from me, and flung
into his study in a rage.

"He's an ojous horrid monsther of a man, that husband of yours!" said
Lady Drum, seizing hold of her elder grand-daughter's arm, "and I hate
him; and so come away, for the dinner'll be getting cold:" and she was
for hurrying away Lady Jane without more ado.  But that kind lady, coming
forward, looking very pale and trembling, said, "Mr. Titmarsh, I do hope
you'll not be angry--that is, that you'll forget what has happened, for,
believe me, it has given me very great--"

Very great what, I never could say, for here the poor thing's eyes filled
with tears; and Lady Drum crying out "Tut, tut! none of this nonsense,"
pulled her away by the sleeve, and went upstairs.  But little Lady Fanny
walked boldly up to me, and held me out her little hand, and gave mine
such a squeeze and said, "Good-bye, my dear Mr. Titmarsh," so very
kindly, that I'm blest if I did not blush up to the ears, and all the
blood in my body began to tingle.

So, when she was gone, I clapped my hat on my head, and walked out of the
hall-door, feeling as proud as a peacock and as brave as a lion; and all
I wished for was that one of those saucy grinning footmen should say or
do something to me that was the least uncivil, so that I might have the
pleasure of knocking him down, with my best compliments to his master.
But neither of them did me any such favour! and I went away and dined at
home off boiled mutton and turnips with Gus Hoskins quite peacefully.

I did not think it was proper to tell Gus (who, between ourselves, is
rather curious, and inclined to tittle-tattle) all the particulars of the
family quarrel of which I had been the cause and witness, and so just
said that the old lady--("They were the Drum arms," says Gus; "for I went
and looked them out that minute in the 'Peerage'")--that the old lady
turned out to be a cousin of mine, and that she had taken me to drive in
the Park.  Next day we went to the office as usual, when you may be sure
that Hoskins told everything of what had happened, and a great deal more;
and somehow, though I did not pretend to care sixpence about the matter,
I must confess that I _was_ rather pleased that the gents in our office
should hear of a part of my adventure.

But fancy my surprise, on coming home in the evening, to find Mrs. Stokes
the landlady, Miss Selina Stokes her daughter, and Master Bob Stokes her
son (an idle young vagabond that was always playing marbles on St.
Bride's steps and in Salisbury Square),--when I found them all bustling
and tumbling up the steps before me to our rooms on the second floor, and
there, on the table, between our two flutes on one side, my album, Gus's
"Don Juan" and "Peerage" on the other, I saw as follows:--

1.  A basket of great red peaches, looking like the cheeks of my dear
Mary Smith.

2.  A ditto of large, fat, luscious, heavy-looking grapes.

3.  An enormous piece of raw mutton, as I thought it was; but Mrs. Stokes
said it was the primest haunch of venison that ever she saw.

And three cards--viz.

DOWAGER COUNTESS OF DRUM.
LADY FANNY RAKES.

MR. PRESTON.
LADY JANE PRESTON.

EARL OF TIPTOFF.

"Sich a carriage!" says Mrs. Stokes (for that was the way the poor thing
spoke).  "Sich a carriage--all over coronites! sich liveries--two great
footmen, with red whiskers and yellow-plush small-clothes; and inside, a
very old lady in a white poke bonnet, and a young one with a great
Leghorn hat and blue ribands, and a great tall pale gentleman with a tuft
on his chin.

"'Pray, madam, does Mr. Titmarsh live here?' says the young lady, with
her clear voice.

"'Yes, my Lady,' says I; 'but he's at the office--the West Diddlesex Fire
and Life Office, Cornhill.'

"'Charles, get out the things,' says the gentleman, quite solemn.

"'Yes, my Lord,' says Charles; and brings me out the haunch in a
newspaper, and on the chany dish as you see it, and the two baskets of
fruit besides.

"'Have the kindness, madam,' says my Lord, 'to take these things to Mr.
Titmarsh's rooms, with our, with Lady Jane Preston's compliments, and
request his acceptance of them;' and then he pulled out the cards on your
table, and this letter, sealed with his Lordship's own crown."

And herewith Mrs. Stokes gave me a letter, which my wife keeps to this
day, by the way, and which runs thus:--

   "The Earl of Tiptoff has been commissioned by Lady Jane Preston to
   express her sincere regret and disappointment that she was not able
   yesterday to enjoy the pleasure of Mr. Titmarsh's company.  Lady Jane
   is about to leave town immediately: she will therefore be unable to
   receive her friends in Whitehall Place this season.  But Lord Tiptoff
   trusts that Mr. Titmarsh will have the kindness to accept some of the
   produce of her Ladyship's garden and park; with which, perhaps, he
   will entertain some of those friends in whose favour he knows so well
   how to speak."

Along with this was a little note, containing the words "Lady Drum at
home.  Friday evening, June 17."  And all this came to me because my aunt
Hoggarty had given me a diamond-pin!

I did not send back the venison: as why should I?  Gus was for sending it
at once to Brough, our director; and the grapes and peaches to my aunt in
Somersetshire.

"But no," says I; "we'll ask Bob Swinney and half-a-dozen more of our
gents; and we'll have a merry night of it on Saturday."  And a merry
night we had too; and as we had no wine in the cupboard, we had plenty of
ale, and gin-punch afterwards.  And Gus sat at the foot of the table, and
I at the head; and we sang songs, both comic and sentimental, and drank
toasts; and I made a speech that there is no possibility of mentioning
here, because, _entre nous_, I had quite forgotten in the morning
everything that had taken place after a certain period on the night
before.




CHAPTER IV


HOW THE HAPPY DIAMOND-WEARER DINES AT PENTONVILLE

I did not go to the office till half-an-hour after opening time on
Monday.  If the truth must be told, I was not sorry to let Hoskins have
the start of me, and tell the chaps what had taken place,--for we all
have our little vanities, and I liked to be thought well of by my
companions.

When I came in, I saw my business had been done, by the way in which the
chaps looked at me; especially Abednego, who offered me a pinch out of
his gold snuff-box the very first thing.  Roundhand shook me, too, warmly
by the hand, when he came round to look over my day-book, said I wrote a
capital hand (and indeed I believe I do, without any sort of flattery),
and invited me for dinner next Sunday, in Myddelton Square.  "You won't
have," said he, "quite such a grand turn-out as with _your friends at the
West End_"--he said this with a particular accent--"but Amelia and I are
always happy to see a friend in our plain way,--pale sherry, old port,
and cut and come again.  Hey?"

I said I would come and bring Hoskins too.

He answered that I was very polite, and that he should be very happy to
see Hoskins; and we went accordingly at the appointed day and hour; but
though Gus was eleventh clerk and I twelfth, I remarked that at dinner I
was helped first and best.  I had twice as many force-meat balls as
Hoskins in my mock-turtle, and pretty nearly all the oysters out of the
sauce-boat.  Once, Roundhand was going to help Gus before me; when his
wife, who was seated at the head of the table, looking very big and
fierce in red crape and a turban, shouted out, "ANTONY!" and poor R.
dropped the plate, and blushed as red as anything.  How Mrs. R. did talk
to me about the West End to be sure!  She had a "Peerage," as you may be
certain, and knew everything about the Drum family in a manner that quite
astonished me.  She asked me how much Lord Drum had a year; whether I
thought he had twenty, thirty, forty, or a hundred and fifty thousand a
year; whether I was invited to Drum Castle; what the young ladies wore,
and if they had those odious _gigot_ sleeves which were just coming in
then; and here Mrs. R. looked at a pair of large mottled arms that she
was very proud of.

"I say, Sam my boy!" cried, in the midst of our talk, Mr. Roundhand, who
had been passing the port-wine round pretty freely, "I hope you looked to
the main chance, and put in a few shares of the West Diddlesex,--hey?"

"Mr. Roundhand, have you put up the decanters downstairs?" cries the
lady, quite angry, and wishing to stop the conversation.

"No, Milly, I've emptied 'em," says R.

"Don't Milly me, sir! and have the goodness to go down and tell Lancy my
maid" (_a look at me_) "to make the tea in the study.  We have a
gentleman here who is not _used_ to Pentonville ways" (_another look_);
"but he won't mind the ways of _friends_."  And here Mrs. Roundhand
heaved her very large chest, and gave me a third look that was so severe,
that I declare to goodness it made me look quite foolish.  As to Gus, she
never so much as spoke to him all the evening; but he consoled himself
with a great lot of muffins, and sat most of the evening (it was a cruel
hot summer) whistling and talking with Roundhand on the verandah.  I
think I should like to have been with them,--for it was very close in the
room with that great big Mrs. Roundhand squeezing close up to one on the
sofa.

"Do you recollect what a jolly night we had here last summer?" I heard
Hoskins say, who was leaning over the balcony, and ogling the girls
coming home from church.  "You and me with our coats off, plenty of cold
rum-and-water, Mrs. Roundhand at Margate, and a whole box of Manillas?"

"Hush!" said Roundhand, quite eagerly; "Milly will hear."

But Milly didn't hear: for she was occupied in telling me an immense long
story about her waltzing with the Count de Schloppenzollern at the City
ball to the Allied Sovereigns; and how the Count had great large white
moustaches; and how odd she thought it to go whirling round the room with
a great man's arm round your waist.  "Mr. Roundhand has never allowed it
since our marriage--never; but in the year 'fourteen it was considered a
proper compliment, you know, to pay the sovereigns.  So twenty-nine young
ladies, of the best families in the City of London, I assure you, Mr.
Titmarsh--there was the Lord Mayor's own daughters; Alderman Dobbins's
gals; Sir Charles Hopper's three, who have the great house in Baker
Street; and your humble servant, who was rather slimmer in those
days--twenty-nine of us had a dancing-master on purpose, and practised
waltzing in a room over the Egyptian Hall at the Mansion House.  He was a
splendid man, that Count Schloppenzollern!"

"I am sure, ma'am," says I, "he had a splendid partner!" and blushed up
to my eyes when I said it.

"Get away, you naughty creature!" says Mrs. Roundhand, giving me a great
slap: "you're all the same, you men in the West End--all deceivers.  The
Count was just like you.  Heigho!  Before you marry, it's all honey and
compliments; when you win us, it's all coldness and indifference.  Look
at Roundhand, the great baby, trying to beat down a butterfly with his
yellow bandanna!  Can a man like _that_ comprehend me? can he fill the
void in my heart?"  (She pronounced it without the h; but that there
should be no mistake, laid her hand upon the place meant.)  "Ah, no!  Will
_you_ be so neglectful when _you_ marry, Mr. Titmarsh?"

As she spoke, the bells were just tolling the people out of church, and I
fell a-thinking of my dear dear Mary Smith in the country, walking home
to her grandmother's, in her modest grey cloak, as the bells were chiming
and the air full of the sweet smell of the hay, and the river shining in
the sun, all crimson, purple, gold, and silver.  There was my dear Mary a
hundred and twenty miles off, in Somersetshire, walking home from church
along with Mr. Snorter's family, with which she came and went; and I was
listening to the talk of this great leering vulgar woman.

I could not help feeling for a certain half of a sixpence that you have
heard me speak of; and putting my hand mechanically upon my chest, I tore
my fingers with the point of my new DIAMOND-PIN.  Mr. Polonius had sent
it home the night before, and I sported it for the first time at
Roundhand's to dinner.

"It's a beautiful diamond," said Mrs. Roundhand.  "I have been looking at
it all dinner-time.  How rich you must be to wear such splendid things!
and how can you remain in a vulgar office in the City--you who have such
great acquaintances at the West End?"

The woman had somehow put me in such a passion that I bounced off the
sofa, and made for the balcony without answering a word,--ay, and half
broke my head against the sash, too, as I went out to the gents in the
open air.  "Gus," says I, "I feel very unwell: I wish you'd come home
with me."  And Gus did not desire anything better; for he had ogled the
last girl out of the last church, and the night was beginning to fall.

"What! already?" said Mrs. Roundhand; "there is a lobster coming up,--a
trifling refreshment; not what he's accustomed to, but--"

I am sorry to say I nearly said, "D--- the lobster!" as Roundhand went
and whispered to her that I was ill.

"Ay," said Gus, looking very knowing.  "Recollect, Mrs. R., that he was
_at the West End_ on Thursday, asked to dine, ma'am, with the tip-top
nobs.  Chaps don't dine at the West End for nothing, do they, R.?  If you
play at _bowls_, you know--"

"You must look out for _rubbers_," said Roundhand, as quick as thought.

"Not in my house of a Sunday," said Mrs. R., looking very fierce and
angry.  "Not a card shall be touched here.  Are we in a Protestant land,
sir? in a Christian country?"

"My dear, you don't understand.  We were not talking of rubbers of
whist."

"There shall be _no_ game at all in the house of a Sabbath eve," said
Mrs. Roundhand; and out she flounced from the room, without ever so much
as wishing us good-night.

"Do stay," said the husband, looking very much frightened,--"do stay.  She
won't come back while you're here; and I do wish you'd stay so."

But we wouldn't: and when we reached Salisbury Square, I gave Gus a
lecture about spending his Sundays idly; and read out one of Blair's
sermons before we went to bed.  As I turned over in bed, I could not help
thinking about the luck the pin had brought me; and it was not over yet,
as you will see in the next chapter.




CHAPTER V


HOW THE DIAMOND INTRODUCES HIM TO A STILL MORE FASHIONABLE PLACE

To tell the truth, though, about the pin, although I mentioned it almost
the last thing in the previous chapter, I assure you it was by no means
the last thing in my thoughts.  It had come home from Mr. Polonius's, as
I said, on Saturday night; and Gus and I happened to be out enjoying
ourselves, half-price, at Sadler's Wells; and perhaps we took a little
refreshment on our way back: but that has nothing to do with my story.

On the table, however, was the little box from the jeweller's; and when I
took it out,--_my_, how the diamond did twinkle and glitter by the light
of our one candle!

"I'm sure it would light up the room of itself," says Gus.  "I've read
they do in--in history."

It was in the history of Cogia Hassan Alhabbal, in the "Arabian Nights,"
as I knew very well.  But we put the candle out, nevertheless, to try.

"Well, I declare to goodness it does illuminate the old place!" says Gus;
but the fact was, that there was a gas-lamp opposite our window, and I
believe that was the reason why we could see pretty well.  At least in my
bedroom, to which I was obliged to go without a candle, and of which the
window looked out on a dead wall, I could not see a wink, in spite of the
Hoggarty diamond, and was obliged to grope about in the dark for a
pincushion which Somebody gave me (I don't mind owning it was Mary
Smith), and in which I stuck it for the night.  But, somehow, I did not
sleep much for thinking of it, and woke very early in the morning; and,
if the truth must be told, stuck it in my night-gown, like a fool, and
admired myself very much in the glass.

Gus admired it as much as I did; for since my return, and especially
since my venison dinner and drive with Lady Drum, he thought I was the
finest fellow in the world, and boasted about his "West End friend"
everywhere.

As we were going to dine at Roundhand's, and I had no black satin stock
to set it off, I was obliged to place it in the frill of my best shirt,
which tore the muslin sadly, by the way.  However, the diamond had its
effect on my entertainers, as we have seen; rather too much perhaps on
one of them; and next day I wore it down at the office, as Gus would make
me do; though it did not look near so well in the second day's shirt as
on the first day, when the linen was quite clear and bright with
Somersetshire washing.

The chaps at the West Diddlesex all admired it hugely, except that
snarling Scotchman M'Whirter, fourth clerk,--out of envy because I did
not think much of a great yellow stone, named a carum-gorum, or some such
thing, which he had in a snuff-mull, as he called it,--all except
M'Whirter, I say, were delighted with it; and Abednego himself, who ought
to know, as his father was in the line, told me the jewel was worth at
least ten poundsh, and that his governor would give me as much for it.

"That's a proof," says Roundhand, "that Tit's diamond is worth at least
thirty."  And we all laughed, and agreed it was.

Now I must confess that all these praises, and the respect that wag paid
me, turned my head a little; and as all the chaps said I _must_ have a
black satin stock to set the stone off, was fool enough to buy a stock
that cost me five-and-twenty shillings, at Ludlam's in Piccadilly: for
Gus said I must go to the best place, to be sure, and have none of our
cheap and common East End stuff.  I might have had one for sixteen and
six in Cheapside, every whit as good; but when a young lad becomes vain,
and wants to be fashionable, you see he can't help being extravagant.

Our director, Mr. Brough, did not fail to hear of the haunch of venison
business, and my relationship with Lady Drum and the Right Honourable
Edmund Preston: only Abednego, who told him, said I was her Ladyship's
first cousin; and this made Brough think more of me, and no worse than
before.

Mr. B. was, as everybody knows, Member of Parliament for Rottenburgh; and
being considered one of the richest men in the City of London, used to
receive all the great people of the land at his villa at Fulham; and we
often read in the papers of the rare doings going on there.

Well, the pin certainly worked wonders: for not content merely with
making me a present of a ride in a countess's carriage, of a haunch of
venison and two baskets of fruit, and the dinner at Roundhand's above
described, my diamond had other honours in store for me, and procured me
the honour of an invitation to the house of our director, Mr. Brough.

Once a year, in June, that honourable gent gave a grand ball at his house
at Fulham; and by the accounts of the entertainment brought back by one
or two of our chaps who had been invited, it was one of the most
magnificent things to be seen about London.  You saw Members of
Parliament there as thick as peas in July, lords and ladies without end.
There was everything and everybody of the tip-top sort; and I have heard
that Mr. Gunter, of Berkeley Square, supplied the ices, supper, and
footmen,--though of the latter Brough kept a plenty, but not enough to
serve the host of people who came to him.  The party, it must be
remembered, was _Mrs_. Brough's party, not the gentleman's,--he being in
the Dissenting way, would scarcely sanction any entertainments of the
kind: but he told his City friends that his lady governed him in
everything; and it was generally observed that most of them would allow
their daughters to go to the ball if asked, on account of the immense
number of the nobility which our director assembled together: Mrs.
Roundhand, I know, for one, would have given one of her ears to go; but,
as I have said before, nothing would induce Brough to ask her.

Roundhand himself, and Gutch, nineteenth clerk, son of the brother of an
East Indian director, were the only two of our gents invited, as we knew
very well: for they had received their invitations many weeks before, and
bragged about them not a little.  But two days before the ball, and after
my diamond-pin had had its due effect upon the gents at the office,
Abednego, who had been in the directors' room, came to my desk with a
great smirk, and said, "Tit, Mr. B. says that he expects you will come
down with Roundhand to the ball on Thursday."  I thought Moses was
joking,--at any rate, that Mr. B.'s message was a queer one; for people
don't usually send invitations in that abrupt peremptory sort of way;
but, sure enough, he presently came down himself and confirmed it,
saying, as he was going out of the office, "Mr. Titmarsh, you will come
down on Thursday to Mrs. Brough's party, where you will see some
relations of yours."

"West End again!" says that Gus Hoskins; and accordingly down I went,
taking a place in a cab which Roundhand hired for himself, Gutch, and me,
and for which he very generously paid eight shillings.

There is no use to describe the grand gala, nor the number of lamps in
the lodge and in the garden, nor the crowd of carriages that came in at
the gates, nor the troops of curious people outside; nor the ices,
fiddlers, wreaths of flowers, and cold supper within.  The whole
description was beautifully given in a fashionable paper, by a reporter
who observed the same from the "Yellow Lion" over the way, and told it in
his journal in the most accurate manner; getting an account of the
dresses of the great people from their footmen and coachmen, when they
came to the alehouse for their porter.  As for the names of the guests,
they, you may be sure, found their way to the same newspaper: and a great
laugh was had at my expense, because among the titles of the great people
mentioned my name appeared in the list of the "Honourables."  Next day,
Brough advertised "a hundred and fifty guineas reward for an emerald
necklace lost at the party of John Brough, Esq., at Fulham;" though some
of our people said that no such thing was lost at all, and that Brough
only wanted to advertise the magnificence of his society; but this doubt
was raised by persons not invited, and envious no doubt.

Well, I wore my diamond, as you may imagine, and rigged myself in my best
clothes, viz. my blue coat and brass buttons before mentioned, nankeen
trousers and silk stockings, a white waistcoat, and a pair of white
gloves bought for the occasion.  But my coat was of country make, very
high in the waist and short in the sleeves, and I suppose must have
looked rather odd to some of the great people assembled, for they stared
at me a great deal, and a whole crowd formed to see me dance--which I did
to the best of my power, performing all the steps accurately and with
great agility, as I had been taught by our dancing-master in the country.

And with whom do you think I had the honour to dance?  With no less a
person than Lady Jane Preston; who, it appears, had not gone out of town,
and who shook me most kindly by the hand when she saw me, and asked me to
dance with her.  We had my Lord Tiptoff and Lady Fanny Rakes for our vis-
a-vis.

You should have seen how the people crowded to look at us, and admired my
dancing too, for I cut the very best of capers, quite different to the
rest of the gents (my Lord among the number), who walked through the
quadrille as if they thought it a trouble, and stared at my activity with
all their might.  But when I have a dance I like to enjoy myself: and
Mary Smith often said I was the very best partner at our assemblies.
While we were dancing, I told Lady Jane how Roundhand, Gutch, and I, had
come down three in a cab, besides the driver; and my account of our
adventures made her Ladyship laugh, I warrant you.  Lucky it was for me
that I didn't go back in the same vehicle; for the driver went and
intoxicated himself at the "Yellow Lion," threw out Gutch and our head
clerk as he was driving them back, and actually fought Gutch afterwards
and blacked his eye, because he said that Gutch's red waistcoat
frightened the horse.

Lady Jane, however, spared me such an uncomfortable ride home: for she
said she had a fourth place in her carriage, and asked me if I would
accept it; and positively, at two o'clock in the morning, there was I,
after setting the ladies and my Lord down, driven to Salisbury Square in
a great thundering carriage, with flaming lamps and two tall footmen, who
nearly knocked the door and the whole little street down with the noise
they made at the rapper.  You should have seen Gus's head peeping out of
window in his white nightcap!  He kept me up the whole night telling him
about the ball, and the great people I had seen there; and next day he
told at the office my stories, with his own usual embroideries upon them.

"Mr. Titmarsh," said Lady Fanny, laughing to me, "who is that great fat
curious man, the master of the house?  Do you know he asked me if you
were not related to us? and I said, 'Oh, yes, you were.'"

"Fanny!" says Lady Jane.

"Well," answered the other, "did not Grandmamma say Mr. Titmarsh was her
cousin?"

"But you know that Grandmamma's memory is not very good."

"Indeed, you're wrong, Lady Jane," says my Lord; "I think it's
prodigious."

"Yes, but not very--not very accurate."

"No, my Lady," says I; "for her Ladyship, the Countess of Drum, said, if
you remember, that my friend Gus Hoskins--"

"Whose cause you supported so bravely," cries Lady Fanny.

"--That my friend Gus is her Ladyship's cousin too, which cannot be, for
I know all his family: they live in Skinner Street and St. Mary Axe, and
are not--not quite so _respectable_ as _my_ relatives."

At this they all began to laugh; and my Lord said, rather haughtily--

"Depend upon it, Mr. Titmarsh, that Lady Drum is no more your cousin than
she is the cousin of your friend Mr. Hoskinson."

"Hoskins, my Lord--and so I told Gus; but you see he is very fond of me,
and _will_ have it that I am related to Lady D.: and say what I will to
the contrary, tells the story everywhere.  Though to be sure," added I
with a laugh, "it has gained me no small good in my time."  So I
described to the party our dinner at Mrs. Roundhand's, which all came
from my diamond-pin, and my reputation as a connection of the
aristocracy.  Then I thanked Lady Jane handsomely for her magnificent
present of fruit and venison, and told her that it had entertained a
great number of kind friends of mine, who had drunk her Ladyship's health
with the greatest gratitude.

"_A haunch of venison_!" cried Lady Jane, quite astonished; "indeed, Mr.
Titmarsh, I am quite at a loss to understand you."

As we passed a gas-lamp, I saw Lady Fanny laughing as usual, and turning
her great arch sparkling black eyes at Lord Tiptoff.

"Why, Lady Jane," said he, "if the truth must out, the great haunch of
venison trick was one of this young lady's performing.  You must know
that I had received the above-named haunch from Lord Guttlebury's park:
and knowing that Preston is not averse to Guttlebury venison, was telling
Lady Drum (in whose carriage I had a seat that day, as Mr. Titmarsh was
not in the way), that I intended the haunch for your husband's table.
Whereupon my Lady Fanny, clapping together her little hands, declared and
vowed that the venison should not go to Preston, but should be sent to a
gentleman about whose adventures on the day previous we had just been
talking--to Mr. Titmarsh, in fact; whom Preston, as Fanny vowed, had used
most cruelly, and to whom, she said, a reparation was due.  So my Lady
Fanny insists upon our driving straight to my rooms in the Albany (you
know I am only to stay in my bachelor's quarters a month longer)--"

"Nonsense!" says Lady Fanny.

"--Insists upon driving straight to my chambers in the Albany, extracting
thence the above-named haunch--"

"Grandmamma was very sorry to part with it," cries Lady Fanny.

"--And then she orders us to proceed to Mr. Titmarsh's house in the City,
where the venison was left, in company with a couple of baskets of fruit
bought at Grange's by Lady Fanny herself."

"And what was more," said Lady Fanny, "I made Grandmamma go into Fr--into
Lord Tiptoff's rooms, and dictated out of my own mouth the letter which
he wrote, and pinned up the haunch of venison that his hideous old
housekeeper brought us--I am quite jealous of her--I pinned up the haunch
of venison in a copy of the John Bull newspaper."

It had one of the Ramsbottom letters in it, I remember, which Gus and I
read on Sunday at breakfast, and we nearly killed ourselves with
laughing.  The ladies laughed too when I told them this; and good-natured
Lady Jane said she would forgive her sister, and hoped I would too: which
I promised to do as often as her Ladyship chose to repeat the offence.

I never had any more venison from the family; but I'll tell you _what_ I
had.  About a month after came a card of "Lord and Lady Tiptoff," and a
great piece of plum-cake; of which, I am sorry to say, Gus ate a great
deal too much.




CHAPTER VI


OF THE WEST DIDDLESEX ASSOCIATION, AND OF THE EFFECT THE DIAMOND HAD
THERE

Well, the magic of the pin was not over yet.  Very soon after Mrs.
Brough's grand party, our director called me up to his room at the West
Diddlesex, and after examining my accounts, and speaking awhile about
business, said, "That's a very fine diamond-pin, Master Titmarsh" (he
spoke in a grave patronising way), "and I called you on purpose to speak
to you upon the subject.  I do not object to seeing the young men of this
establishment well and handsomely dressed; but I know that their salaries
cannot afford ornaments like those, and I grieve to see you with a thing
of such value.  You have paid for it, sir,--I trust you have paid for it;
for, of all things, my dear--dear young friend, beware of debt."

I could not conceive why Brough was reading me this lecture about debt
and my having bought the diamond-pin, as I knew that he had been asking
about it already, and how I came by it--Abednego told me so.  "Why, sir,"
says I, "Mr. Abednego told me that he had told you that I had told him--"

"Oh, ay-by-the-bye, now I recollect, Mr. Titmarsh--I do recollect--yes;
though I suppose, sir, you will imagine that I have other more important
things to remember."

"Oh, sir, in course," says I.

"That one of the clerks _did_ say something about a pin--that one of the
other gentlemen had it.  And so your pin was given you, was it?"

"It was given me, sir, by my aunt, Mrs. Hoggarty of Castle Hoggarty,"
said I, raising my voice; for I was a little proud of Castle Hoggarty.

"She must be very rich to make such presents, Titmarsh?"

"Why, thank you, sir," says I, "she is pretty well off.  Four hundred a
year jointure; a farm at Slopperton, sir; three houses at Squashtail; and
three thousand two hundred loose cash at the banker's, as I happen to
know, sir,--_that's all_."

I did happen to know this, you see; because, while I was down in
Somersetshire, Mr. MacManus, my aunt's agent in Ireland, wrote to say
that a mortgage she had on Lord Brallaghan's property had just been paid
off, and that the money was lodged at Coutts's.  Ireland was in a very
disturbed state in those days; and my aunt wisely determined not to
invest her money in that country any more, but to look out for some good
security in England.  However, as she had always received six per cent.
in Ireland, she would not hear of a smaller interest; and had warned me,
as I was a commercial man, on coming to town, to look out for some means
by which she could invest her money at that rate at least.

"And how do you come to know Mrs. Hoggarty's property so accurately?"
said Mr. Brough; upon which I told him.

"Good heavens, sir! and do you mean that you, a clerk in the West
Diddlesex Insurance Office, applied to by a respectable lady as to the
manner in which she should invest property, never spoke to her about the
Company which you have the honour to serve?  Do you mean, sir, that you,
knowing there was a bonus of five per cent. for yourself upon shares
taken, did not press Mrs. Hoggarty to join us?"

"Sir," says I, "I'm an honest man, and would not take a bonus from my own
relation."

"Honest I know you are, my boy--give me your hand!  So am I honest--so is
every man in this Company honest; but we must be prudent as well.  We
have five millions of capital on our books, as you see--five _bona fide_
millions of _bona fide_ sovereigns paid up, sir,--there is no dishonesty
there.  But why should we not have twenty millions--a hundred millions?
Why should not this be the greatest commercial Association in the
world?--as it shall be, sir,--it shall, as sure as my name is John
Brough, if Heaven bless my honest endeavours to establish it!  But do you
suppose that it can be so, unless every man among us use his utmost
exertions to forward the success of the enterprise?  Never, sir,--never;
and, for me, I say so everywhere.  I glory in what I do.  There is not a
house in which I enter, but I leave a prospectus of the West Diddlesex.
There is not a single tradesman I employ, but has shares in it to some
amount.  My servants, sir,--my very servants and grooms, are bound up
with it.  And the first question I ask of anyone who applies to me for a
place is, Are you insured or a shareholder in the West Diddlesex? the
second, Have you a good character?  And if the first question is answered
in the negative, I say to the party coming to me, Then be a shareholder
before you ask for a place in my household.  Did you not see me--me, John
Brough, whose name is good for millions--step out of my coach-and-four
into this office, with four pounds nineteen, which I paid in to Mr.
Roundhand as the price of half a share for the porter at my lodge-gate?
Did you remark that I deducted a shilling from the five pound?"

"Yes, sir; it was the day you drew out eight hundred and seventy-three
ten and six--Thursday week," says I.

"And why did I deduct that shilling, sir?  Because it was _my
commission_--John Brough's commission; honestly earned by him, and openly
taken.  Was there any disguise about it?  No.  Did I do it for the love
of a shilling?  No," says Brough, laying his hand on his heart, "I did it
from _principle_,--from that motive which guides every one of my actions,
as I can look up to Heaven and say.  I wish all my young men to see my
example, and follow it: I wish--I pray that they may.  Think of that
example, sir.  That porter of mine has a sick wife and nine young
children: he is himself a sick man, and his tenure of life is feeble; he
has earned money, sir, in my service--sixty pounds and more--it is all
his children have to look to--all: but for that, in the event of his
death, they would be houseless beggars in the street.  And what have I
done for that family, sir?  I have put that money out of the reach of
Robert Gates, and placed it so that it shall be a blessing to his family
at his death.  Every farthing is invested in shares in this office; and
Robert Gates, my lodge-porter, is a holder of three shares in the West
Diddlesex Association, and, in that capacity, your master and mine.  Do
you think I want to _cheat_ Gates?"

"Oh, sir!" says I.

"To cheat that poor helpless man, and those tender innocent children!--you
can't think so, sir; I should be a disgrace to human nature if I did.  But
what boots all my energy and perseverance?  What though I place my
friends' money, my family's money, my own money--my hopes, wishes,
desires, ambitions--all upon this enterprise?  You young men will not do
so.  You, whom I treat with love and confidence as my children, make no
return to me.  When I toil, you remain still; when I struggle, you look
on.  Say the word at once,--you doubt me!  O heavens, that this should be
the reward of all my care and love for you!"

Here Mr. Brough was so affected that he actually burst into tears, and I
confess I saw in its true light the negligence of which I had been
guilty.

"Sir," says I, "I am very--very sorry: it was a matter of delicacy,
rather than otherwise, which induced me not to speak to my aunt about the
West Diddlesex."

"Delicacy, my dear dear boy--as if there can be any delicacy about making
your aunt's fortune!  Say indifference to me, say ingratitude, say
folly,--but don't say delicacy--no, no, not delicacy.  Be honest, my boy,
and call things by their right names--always do."

"It _was_ folly and ingratitude, Mr. Brough," says I: "I see it all now;
and I'll write to my aunt this very post."

"You had better do no such thing," says Brough, bitterly: "the stocks are
at ninety, and Mrs. Hoggarty can get three per cent. for her money."

"I _will_ write, sir,--upon my word and honour, I will write."

"Well, as your honour is passed, you must, I suppose; for never break
your word--no, not in a trifle, Titmarsh.  Send me up the letter when you
have done, and I'll frank it--upon my word and honour I will," says Mr.
Brough, laughing, and holding out his hand to me.

I took it, and he pressed mine very kindly--"You may as well sit down
here," says he, as he kept hold of it; "there is plenty of paper."

And so I sat down and mended a beautiful pen, and began and wrote,
"Independent West Diddlesex Association, June 1822," and "My dear Aunt,"
in the best manner possible.  Then I paused a little, thinking what I
should next say; for I have always found that difficulty about letters.
The date and My dear So-and-so one writes off immediately--it is the next
part which is hard; and I put my pen in my mouth, flung myself back in my
chair, and began to think about it.

"Bah!" said Brough, "are you going to be about this letter all day, my
good fellow?  Listen to me, and I'll dictate to you in a moment."  So he
began:--

   "My Dear Aunt,--Since my return from Somersetshire, I am very happy
   indeed to tell you that I have so pleased the managing director of our
   Association and the Board, that they have been good enough to appoint
   me third clerk--"

"Sir!" says I.

"Write what I say.  Mr. Roundhand, as has been agreed by the board
yesterday, quits the clerk's desk and takes the title of secretary and
actuary.  Mr. Highmore takes his place; Mr. Abednego follows him; and I
place you as third clerk--as

   "third clerk (write), with a salary of a hundred and fifty pounds per
   annum.  This news will, I know, gratify my dear mother and you, who
   have been a second mother to me all my life.

   "When I was last at home, I remember you consulted me as to the best
   mode of laying out a sum of money which was lying useless in your
   banker's hands.  I have since lost no opportunity of gaining what
   information I could: and situated here as I am, in the very midst of
   affairs, I believe, although very young, I am as good a person to
   apply to as many others of greater age and standing.

   "I frequently thought of mentioning to you our Association, but
   feelings of delicacy prevented me from doing so.  I did not wish that
   anyone should suppose that a shadow of self-interest could move me in
   any way.

   "But I believe, without any sort of doubt, that the West Diddlesex
   Association offers the best security that you can expect for your
   capital, and, at the same time, the highest interest you can anywhere
   procure.

   "The situation of the Company, as I have it from _the very best
   authority_ (underline that), is as follows:--

   "The subscribed and _bona fide_ capital is FIVE MILLIONS STERLING.

   "The body of directors you know.  Suffice it to say that the managing
   director is John Brough, Esq., of the firm of Brough and Hoff, a
   Member of Parliament, and a man as well known as Mr. Rothschild in the
   City of London.  His private fortune, I know for a fact, amounts to
   half a million; and the last dividends paid to the shareholders of the
   I. W. D. Association amounted to 6.125 per cent. per annum."

[That I know was the dividend declared by us.]

   "Although the shares in the market are at a very great premium, it is
   the privilege of the four first clerks to dispose of a certain number,
   5,000_l_. each at par; and if you, my dearest aunt, would wish for
   2,500_l_. worth, I hope you will allow me to oblige you by offering
   you so much of my new privileges.

   "Let me hear from you immediately upon the subject, as I have already
   an offer for the whole amount of my shares at market price."

"But I haven't, sir," says I.

"You have, sir.  _I_ will take the shares; but I want _you_.  I want as
many respectable persons in the Company as I can bring.  I want you
because I like you, and I don't mind telling you that I have views of my
own as well; for I am an honest man and say openly what I mean, and I'll
tell you _why_ I want you.  I can't, by the regulations of the Company,
have more than a certain number of votes, but if your aunt takes shares,
I expect--I don't mind owning it--that she will vote with me.  _Now_ do
you understand me?  My object is to be all in all with the Company; and
if I be, I will make it the most glorious enterprise that ever was
conducted in the City of London."

So I signed the letter and left it with Mr. B. to frank.

The next day I went and took my place at the third clerk's desk, being
led to it by Mr. B., who made a speech to the gents, much to the
annoyance of the other chaps, who grumbled about their services: though,
as for the matter of that, our services were very much alike: the Company
was only three years old, and the oldest clerk in it had not six months'
more standing in it than I.  "Look out," said that envious M'Whirter to
me.  "Have you got money, or have any of your relations money? or are any
of them going to put it into the concern?"

I did not think fit to answer him, but took a pinch out of his mull, and
was always kind to him; and he, to say the truth, was always most civil
to me.  As for Gus Hoskins, he began to think I was a superior being; and
I must say that the rest of the chaps behaved very kindly in the matter,
and said that if one man were to be put over their heads before another,
they would have pitched upon me, for I had never harmed any of them, and
done little kindnesses to several.

"I know," says Abednego, "how you got the place.  It was I who got it
you.  I told Brough you were a cousin of Preston's, the Lord of the
Treasury, had venison from him and all that; and depend upon it he
expects that you will be able to do him some good in that quarter."

I think there was some likelihood in what Abednego said, because our
governor, as we called him, frequently spoke to me about my cousin; told
me to push the concern in the West End of the town, get as many noblemen
as we could to insure with us, and so on.  It was in vain I said I could
do nothing with Mr. Preston.  "Bah! bah!" says Mr. Brough, "don't tell
_me_.  People don't send haunches of venison to you for nothing;" and I'm
convinced he thought I was a very cautious prudent fellow, for not
bragging about my great family, and keeping my connection with them a
secret.  To be sure he might have learned the truth from Gus, who lived
with me; but Gus would insist that I was hand in glove with all the
nobility, and boasted about me ten times as much as I did myself.

The chaps used to call me the "West Ender."

"See," thought I, "what I have gained by Aunt Hoggarty giving me a
diamond-pin!  What a lucky thing it is that she did not give me the
money, as I hoped she would!  Had I not had the pin--had I even taken it
to any other person but Mr. Polonius, Lady Drum would never have noticed
me; had Lady Drum never noticed me, Mr. Brough never would, and I never
should have been third clerk of the West Diddlesex."

I took heart at all this, and wrote off on the very evening of my
appointment to my dearest Mary Smith, giving her warning that a "certain
event," for which one of us was longing very earnestly, might come off
sooner than we had expected.  And why not?  Miss S.'s own fortune was
70_l_. a year, mine was 150_l_., and when we had 300_l_., we always vowed
we would marry.  "Ah!" thought I, "if I could but go to Somersetshire
now, I might boldly walk up to old Smith's door" (he was her grandfather,
and a half-pay lieutenant of the navy), "I might knock at the knocker and
see my beloved Mary in the parlour, and not be obliged to sneak behind
hayricks on the look-out for her, or pelt stones at midnight at her
window."

My aunt, in a few days, wrote a pretty gracious reply to my letter.  She
had not determined, she said, as to the manner in which she should employ
her three thousand pounds, but should take my offer into consideration;
begging me to keep my shares open for a little while, until her mind was
made up.

What, then, does Mr. Brough do?  I learned afterwards, in the year 1830,
when he and the West Diddlesex Association had disappeared altogether,
how he had proceeded.

"Who are the attorneys at Slopperton?" says he to me in a careless way.

"Mr. Ruck, sir," says I, "is the Tory solicitor, and Messrs. Hodge and
Smithers the Liberals."  I knew them very well, for the fact is, before
Mary Smith came to live in our parts, I was rather partial to Miss Hodge,
and her great gold-coloured ringlets; but Mary came and soon put _her_
nose out of joint, as the saying is.

"And you are of what politics?"

"Why, sir, we are Liberals."  I was rather ashamed of this, for Mr.
Brough was an out-and-out Tory; but Hodge and Smithers is a most
respectable firm.  I brought up a packet from them to Hickson, Dixon,
Paxton, and Jackson, _our_ solicitors, who are their London
correspondents.

Mr. Brough only said, "Oh, indeed!" and did not talk any further on the
subject, but began admiring my diamond-pin very much.

"Titmarsh, my dear boy," says he, "I have a young lady at Fulham who is
worth seeing, I assure you, and who has heard so much about you from her
father (for I like you, my boy, I don't care to own it), that she is
rather anxious to see you too.  Suppose you come down to us for a week?
Abednego will do your work."

"Law, sir! you are very kind," says I.

"Well, you shall come down; and I hope you will like my claret.  But hark
ye!  I don't think, my dear fellow, you are quite smart enough--quite
well enough dressed.  Do you understand me?"

"I've my blue coat and brass buttons at home, sir."

"What! that thing with the waist between your shoulders that you wore at
Mrs. Brough's party?"  (It _was_ rather high-waisted, being made in the
country two years before.)  "No--no, that will never do.  Get some new
clothes, sir,--two new suits of clothes."

"Sir!" says I, "I'm already, if the truth must be told, very short of
money for this quarter, and can't afford myself a new suit for a long
time to come."

"Pooh, pooh! don't let that annoy you.  Here's a ten-pound note--but no,
on second thoughts, you may as well go to my tailor's.  I'll drive you
down there: and never mind the bill, my good lad!"  And drive me down he
actually did, in his grand coach-and-four, to Mr. Von Stiltz, in Clifford
Street, who took my measure, and sent me home two of the finest coats
ever seen, a dress-coat and a frock, a velvet waist-coat, a silk ditto,
and three pairs of pantaloons, of the most beautiful make.  Brough told
me to get some boots and pumps, and silk stockings for evenings; so that
when the time came for me to go down to Fulham, I appeared as handsome as
any young nobleman, and Gus said that "I looked, by Jingo, like a regular
tip-top swell."

In the meantime the following letter had been sent down to Hodge and
Smithers:--

   "RAM ALLEY, CORNHILL, LONDON: _July_ 1822.

   "DEAR SIRS,

   * * * * *

   [This part being on private affairs relative to the cases of Dixon v.
   Haggerstony, Snodgrass v. Rubbidge and another, I am not permitted to
   extract.]

   * * * * *

   "Likewise we beg to hand you a few more prospectuses of the
   Independent West Diddlesex Fire and Life Insurance Company, of which
   we have the honour to be the solicitors in London.  We wrote to you
   last year, requesting you to accept the Slopperton and Somerset agency
   for the same, and have been expecting for some time back that either
   shares or assurances should be effected by you.

   "The capital of the Company, as you know, is five millions sterling
   (say 5,000,000_l_.), and we are in a situation to offer more than the
   usual commission to our agents of the legal profession.  We shall be
   happy to give a premium of 6 per cent. for shares to the amount of
   1,000_l_., 6.5 per cent. above a thousand, to be paid immediately upon
   the taking of the shares.

   "I am, dear Sirs, for self and partners,
   Yours most faithfully,
   SAMUEL JACKSON."

This letter, as I have said, came into my hands some time afterwards.  I
knew nothing of it in the year 1822, when, in my new suit of clothes, I
went down to pass a week at the Rookery, Fulham, residence of John
Brough, Esquire, M.P.




CHAPTER VII


HOW SAMUEL TITMARSH REACHED THE HIGHEST POINT OF PROSPERITY

If I had the pen of a George Robins, I might describe the Rookery
properly: suffice it, however, to say it is a very handsome country
place; with handsome lawns sloping down to the river, handsome
shrubberies and conservatories, fine stables, outhouses, kitchen-gardens,
and everything belonging to a first-rate _rus in urbe_, as the great
auctioneer called it when he hammered it down some years after.

I arrived on a Saturday at half-an-hour before dinner: a grave gentleman
out of livery showed me to my room; a man in a chocolate coat and gold
lace, with Brough's crest on the buttons, brought me a silver shaving-pot
of hot water on a silver tray; and a grand dinner was ready at six, at
which I had the honour of appearing in Von Stiltz's dress-coat and my new
silk stockings and pumps.

Brough took me by the hand as I came in, and presented me to his lady, a
stout fair-haired woman, in light blue satin; then to his daughter, a
tall, thin, dark-eyed girl, with beetle-brows, looking very ill-natured,
and about eighteen.

"Belinda my love," said her papa, "this young gentleman is one of my
clerks, who was at our ball."

"Oh, indeed!" says Belinda, tossing up her head.

"But not a common clerk, Miss Belinda,--so, if you please, we will have
none of your aristocratic airs with him.  He is a nephew of the Countess
of Drum; and I hope he will soon be very high in our establishment, and
in the city of London."

At the name of Countess (I had a dozen times rectified the error about
our relationship), Miss Belinda made a low curtsey, and stared at me very
hard, and said she would try and make the Rookery pleasant to any friend
of Papa's.  "We have not much _monde_ to-day," continued Miss Brough,
"and are only in _petit comite_; but I hope before you leave us you will
see some _societe_ that will make your _sejour_ agreeable."

I saw at once that she was a fashionable girl, from her using the French
language in this way.

"Isn't she a fine girl?" said Brough, whispering to me, and evidently as
proud of her as a man could be.  "Isn't she a fine girl--eh, you dog?  Do
you see breeding like that in Somersetshire?"

"No, sir, upon my word!" answered I, rather slily; for I was thinking all
the while how "Somebody" was a thousand times more beautiful, simple, and
ladylike.

"And what has my dearest love been doing all day?" said her papa.

"Oh, Pa!  I have _pinced_ the harp a little to Captain Fizgig's flute.
Didn't I, Captain Fizgig?"

Captain the Honourable Francis Fizgig said, "Yes, Brough, your fair
daughter _pinced_ the harp, and _touched_ the piano, and _egratigned_ the
guitar, and _ecorched_ a song or two; and we had the pleasure of a
_promenade a l'eau_,--of a walk upon the water."

"Law, Captain!" cries Mrs. Brough, "walk on the water?"

"Hush, Mamma, you don't understand French!" says Miss Belinda, with a
sneer.

"It's a sad disadvantage, madam," says Fizgig, gravely; "and I recommend
you and Brough here, who are coming out in the great world, to have some
lessons; or at least get up a couple of dozen phrases, and introduce them
into your conversation here and there.  I suppose, sir, you speak it
commonly at the office, Mr. What you call it?"  And Mr. Fizgig put his
glass into his eye and looked at me.

"We speak English, sir," says I, "knowing it better than French."

"Everybody has not had your opportunities," Miss Brough, continued the
gentleman.  "Everybody has not _voyage_ like _nous autres_, hey?  _Mais
que voulez-vous_, my good sir? you must stick to your cursed ledgers and
things.  What's the French for ledger, Miss Belinda?"

"How can you ask?  _Je n'en scais rien_, I'm sure."

"You should learn, Miss Brough," said her father.  "The daughter of a
British merchant need not be ashamed of the means by which her father
gets his bread.  _I'm_ not ashamed--I'm not proud.  Those who know John
Brough, know that ten years ago he was a poor clerk like my friend
Titmarsh here, and is now worth half-a-million.  Is there any man in the
House better listened to than John Brough?  Is there any duke in the land
that can give a better dinner than John Brough; or a larger fortune to
his daughter than John Brough?  Why, sir, the humble person now speaking
to you could buy out many a German duke!  But I'm not proud--no, no, not
proud.  There's my daughter--look at her--when I die, she will be
mistress of my fortune; but am I proud?  No!  Let him who can win her,
marry her, that's what I say.  Be it you, Mr. Fizgig, son of a peer of
the realm; or you, Bill Tidd.  Be it a duke or a shoeblack, what do I
care, hey?--what do I care?"

"O-o-oh!" sighed the gent who went by the name of Bill Tidd: a very pale
young man, with a black riband round his neck instead of a handkerchief,
and his collars turned down like Lord Byron.  He was leaning against the
mantelpiece, and with a pair of great green eyes ogling Miss Brough with
all his might.

"Oh, John--my dear John!" cried Mrs. Brough, seizing her husband's hand
and kissing it, "you are an angel, that you are!"

"Isabella, don't flatter me; I'm a _man_,--a plain downright citizen of
London, without a particle of pride, except in you and my daughter
here--my two Bells, as I call them!  This is the way that we live,
Titmarsh my boy: ours is a happy, humble, Christian home, and that's all.
Isabella, leave go my hand!"

"Mamma, you mustn't do so before company; it's odious!" shrieked Miss B.;
and Mamma quietly let the hand fall, and heaved from her ample bosom a
great large sigh.  I felt a liking for that simple woman, and a respect
for Brough too.  He couldn't be a bad man, whose wife loved him so.

Dinner was soon announced, and I had the honour of leading in Miss B.,
who looked back rather angrily, I thought, at Captain Fizgig, because
that gentleman had offered his arm to Mrs. Brough.  He sat on the right
of Mrs. Brough, and Miss flounced down on the seat next to him, leaving
me and Mr. Tidd to take our places at the opposite side of the table.

At dinner there was turbot and soup first, and boiled turkey afterwards
of course.  How is it that at all the great dinners they have this
perpetual boiled turkey?  It was real turtle-soup: the first time I had
ever tasted it; and I remarked how Mrs. B., who insisted on helping it,
gave all the green lumps of fat to her husband, and put several slices of
the breast of the bird under the body, until it came to his turn to be
helped.

"I'm a plain man," says John, "and eat a plain dinner.  I hate your
kickshaws, though I keep a French cook for those who are not of my way of
thinking.  I'm no egotist, look you; I've no prejudices; and Miss there
has her bechamels and fallals according to her taste.  Captain, try the
_volly-vong_."

We had plenty of champagne and old madeira with dinner, and great silver
tankards of porter, which those might take who chose.  Brough made
especially a boast of drinking beer; and, when the ladies retired, said,
"Gentlemen, Tiggins will give you an unlimited supply of wine: there's no
stinting here;" and then laid himself down in his easy-chair and fell
asleep.

"He always does so," whispered Mr. Tidd to me.

"Get some of that yellow-sealed wine, Tiggins," says the Captain.  "That
other claret we had yesterday is loaded, and disagrees with me
infernally!"

I must say I liked the yellow seal much better than Aunt Hoggarty's
Rosolio.

I soon found out what Mr. Tidd was, and what he was longing for.

"Isn't she a glorious creature?" says he to me.

"Who, sir?" says I.

"Miss Belinda, to be sure!" cried Tidd.  "Did mortal ever look upon eyes
like hers, or view a more sylph-like figure?"

"She might have a little more flesh, Mr. Tidd," says the Captain, "and a
little less eyebrow.  They look vicious, those scowling eyebrows, in a
girl.  _Qu'en dites-vous_, Mr. Titmarsh, as Miss Brough would say?"

"I think it remarkably good claret, sir," says I.

"Egad, you're the right sort of fellow!" says the Captain.  "_Volto
sciolto_, eh?  You respect our sleeping host yonder?"

"That I do, sir, as the first man in the city of London, and my managing
director."

"And so do I," says Tidd; "and this day fortnight, when I'm of age, I'll
prove my confidence too."

"As how?" says I.

"Why, sir, you must know that I come into--ahem--a considerable property,
sir, on the 14th of July, which my father made--in business."

"Say at once he was a tailor, Tidd."

"He _was_ a tailor, sir,--but what of that?  I've had a University
education, and have the feelings of a gentleman; as much--ay, perhaps,
and more, than some members of an effete aristocracy."

"Tidd, don't be severe!" says the Captain, drinking a tenth glass.

"Well, Mr. Titmarsh, when of age I come into a considerable property; and
Mr. Brough has been so good as to say he can get me twelve hundred a year
for my twenty thousand pounds, and I have promised to invest them."

"In the West Diddlesex, sir?" says I--"in our office?"

"No, in another company, of which Mr. Brough is director, and quite as
good a thing.  Mr. Brough is a very old friend of my family, sir, and he
has taken a great liking to me; and he says that with my talents I ought
to get into Parliament; and then--and then! after I have laid out my
patrimony, I may look to _matrimony_, you see!"

"Oh, you designing dog!" said the Captain.  "When I used to lick you at
school, who ever would have thought that I was thrashing a sucking
statesman?"

"Talk away, boys!" said Brough, waking out of his sleep; "I only sleep
with half an eye, and hear you all.  Yes, you shall get into Parliament,
Tidd my man, or my name's not Brough!  You shall have six per cent. for
your money, or never believe me!  But as for my daughter--ask _her_, and
not me. You, or the Captain, or Titmarsh, may have her, if you can get
her.  All I ask in a son-in-law is, that he should be, as every one of
you is, an honourable and high-minded man!"

Tidd at this looked very knowing; and as our host sank off to sleep
again, pointed archly at his eyebrows, and wagged his head at the
Captain.

"Bah!" says the Captain.  "I say what I think; and you may tell Miss
Brough if you like."  And so presently this conversation ended, and we
were summoned in to coffee.  After which the Captain sang songs with Miss
Brough; Tidd looked at her and said nothing; I looked at prints, and Mrs.
Brough sat knitting stockings for the poor.  The Captain was sneering
openly at Miss Brough and her affected ways and talk; but in spite of his
bullying contemptuous way I thought she seemed to have a great regard for
him, and to bear his scorn very meekly.

At twelve Captain Fizgig went off to his barracks at Knightsbridge, and
Tidd and I to our rooms.  Next day being Sunday, a great bell woke us at
eight, and at nine we all assembled in the breakfast-room, where Mr.
Brough read prayers, a chapter, and made an exhortation afterwards, to us
and all the members of the household; except the French cook, Monsieur
Nontong-paw, whom I could see, from my chair, walking about in the
shrubberies in his white night-cap, smoking a cigar.

Every morning on week-days, punctually at eight, Mr. Brough went through
the same ceremony, and had his family to prayers; but though this man was
a hypocrite, as I found afterwards, I'm not going to laugh at the family
prayers, or say he was a hypocrite _because_ he had them.  There are many
bad and good men who don't go through the ceremony at all; but I am sure
the good men would be the better for it, and am not called upon to settle
the question with respect to the bad ones; and therefore I have passed
over a great deal of the religious part of Mr. Brough's behaviour:
suffice it, that religion was always on his lips; that he went to church
thrice every Sunday, when he had not a party; and if he did not talk
religion with us when we were alone, had a great deal to say upon the
subject upon occasions, as I found one day when we had a Quaker and
Dissenter party to dine, and when his talk was as grave as that of any
minister present.  Tidd was not there that day,--for nothing could make
him forsake his Byron riband or refrain from wearing his collars turned
down; so Tidd was sent with the buggy to Astley's.  "And hark ye,
Titmarsh my boy," said he, "leave your diamond pin upstairs: our friends
to-day don't like such gewgaws; and though for my part I am no enemy to
harmless ornaments, yet I would not shock the feelings of those who have
sterner opinions.  You will see that my wife and Miss Brough consult my
wishes in this respect."  And so they did,--for they both came down to
dinner in black gowns and tippets; whereas Miss B. had commonly her dress
half off her shoulders.

The Captain rode over several times to see us; and Miss Brough seemed
always delighted to see _him_.  One day I met him as I was walking out
alone by the river, and we had a long talk together.

"Mr. Titmarsh," says he, "from what little I have seen of you, you seem
to be an honest straight-minded young fellow; and I want some information
that you can give.  Tell me, in the first place, if you will--and upon my
honour it shall go no farther--about this Insurance Company of yours?  You
are in the City, and see how affairs are going on.  Is your concern a
stable one?"

"Sir," said I, "frankly then, and upon my honour too, I believe it is.  It
has been set up only four years, it is true; but Mr. Brough had a great
name when it was established, and a vast connection.  Every clerk in the
office has, to be sure, in a manner, paid for his place, either by taking
shares himself, or by his relations taking them.  I got mine because my
mother, who is very poor, devoted a small sum of money that came to us to
the purchase of an annuity for herself and a provision for me.  The
matter was debated by the family and our attorneys, Messrs. Hodge and
Smithers, who are very well known in our part of the country; and it was
agreed on all hands that my mother could not do better with her money for
all of us than invest it in this way.  Brough alone is worth half a
million of money, and his name is a host in itself.  Nay, more: I wrote
the other day to an aunt of mine, who has a considerable sum of money in
loose cash, and who had consulted me as to the disposal of it, to invest
it in our office.  Can I give you any better proof of my opinion of its
solvency?"

"Did Brough persuade you in any way?"

"Yes, he certainly spoke to me: but he very honestly told me his motives,
and tells them to us all as honestly.  He says, 'Gentlemen, it is my
object to increase the connection of the office, as much as possible.  I
want to crush all the other offices in London.  Our terms are lower than
any office, and we can bear to have them lower, and a great business will
come to us that way.  But we must work ourselves as well.  Every single
shareholder and officer of the establishment must exert himself, and
bring us customers,--no matter for how little they are engaged--engage
them: that is the great point.'  And accordingly our Director makes all
his friends and servants shareholders: his very lodge-porter yonder is a
shareholder; and he thus endeavours to fasten upon all whom he comes
near.  I, for instance, have just been appointed over the heads of our
gents, to a much better place than I held.  I am asked down here, and
entertained royally: and why?  Because my aunt has three thousand pounds
which Mr. Brough wants her to invest with us."

"That looks awkward, Mr. Titmarsh."

"Not a whit, sir: he makes no disguise of the matter.  When the question
is settled one way or the other, I don't believe Mr. Brough will take any
further notice of me.  But he wants me now.  This place happened to fall
in just at the very moment when he had need of me; and he hopes to gain
over my family through me.  He told me as much as we drove down.  'You
are a man of the world, Titmarsh,' said he; 'you know that I don't give
you this place because you are an honest fellow, and write a good hand.
If I had a lesser bribe to offer you at the moment, I should only have
given you that; but I had no choice, and gave you what was in my power.'"

"That's fair enough; but what can make Brough so eager for such a small
sum as three thousand pounds?"

"If it had been ten, sir, he would have been not a bit more eager.  You
don't know the city of London, and the passion which our great men in the
share-market have for increasing their connection.  Mr. Brough, sir,
would canvass and wheedle a chimney-sweep in the way of business.  See,
here is poor Tidd and his twenty thousand pounds.  Our Director has taken
possession of him just in the same way.  He wants all the capital he can
lay his hands on."

"Yes, and suppose he runs off with the capital?"

"Mr. Brough, of the firm of Brough and Hoff, sir?  Suppose the Bank of
England runs off!  But here we are at the lodge-gate.  Let's ask Gates,
another of Mr. Brough's victims."  And we went in and spoke to old Gates.

"Well, Mr. Gates," says I, beginning the matter cleverly, "you are one of
my masters, you know, at the West Diddlesex yonder?"

"Yees, sure," says old Gates, grinning.  He was a retired servant, with a
large family come to him in his old age.

"May I ask you what your wages are, Mr. Gates, that you can lay by so
much money, and purchase shares in our Company?"

Gates told us his wages; and when we inquired whether they were paid
regularly, swore that his master was the kindest gentleman in the world:
that he had put two of his daughters into service, two of his sons to
charity schools, made one apprentice, and narrated a hundred other
benefits that he had received from the family.  Mrs. Brough clothed half
the children; master gave them blankets and coats in winter, and soup and
meat all the year round.  There never was such a generous family, sure,
since the world began.

"Well, sir," said I to the Captain, "does that satisfy you?  Mr. Brough
gives to these people fifty times as much as he gains from them; and yet
he makes Mr. Gates take shares in our Company."

"Mr. Titmarsh," says the Captain, "you are an honest fellow; and I
confess your argument sounds well.  Now tell me, do you know anything
about Miss Brough and her fortune?"

"Brough will leave her everything--or says so."  But I suppose the
Captain saw some particular expression in my countenance, for he laughed
and said--

"I suppose, my dear fellow, you think she's dear at the price.  Well, I
don't know that you are far wrong."

"Why, then, if I may make so bold, Captain Fizgig, are you always at her
heels?"

"Mr. Titmarsh," says the Captain, "I owe twenty thousand pounds;" and he
went back to the house directly, and proposed for her.

I thought this rather cruel and unprincipled conduct on the gentleman's
part; for he had been introduced to the family by Mr. Tidd, with whom he
had been at school, and had supplanted Tidd entirely in the great
heiress's affections.  Brough stormed, and actually swore at his daughter
(as the Captain told me afterwards) when he heard that the latter had
accepted Mr. Fizgig; and at last, seeing the Captain, made him give his
word that the engagement should be kept secret for a few months.  And
Captain F. only made a confidant of me, and the mess, as he said: but
this was after Tidd had paid his twenty thousand pounds over to our
governor, which he did punctually when he came of age.  The same day,
too, he proposed for the young lady, and I need not say was rejected.
Presently the Captain's engagement began to be whispered about: all his
great relations, the Duke of Doncaster, the Earl of Cinqbars, the Earl of
Crabs, &c. came and visited the Brough family; the Hon. Henry Ringwood
became a shareholder in our Company, and the Earl of Crabs offered to be.
Our shares rose to a premium; our Director, his lady, and daughter were
presented at Court; and the great West Diddlesex Association bid fair to
be the first Assurance Office in the kingdom.

A very short time after my visit to Fulham, my dear aunt wrote to me to
say that she had consulted with her attorneys, Messrs. Hodge and
Smithers, who strongly recommended that she should invest the sum as I
advised.  She had the sum invested, too, in my name, paying me many
compliments upon my honesty and talent; of which, she said, Mr. Brough
had given her the most flattering account.  And at the same time my aunt
informed me that at her death the shares should be my own.  This gave me
a great weight in the Company, as you may imagine.  At our next annual
meeting, I attended in my capacity as a shareholder, and had great
pleasure in hearing Mr. Brough, in a magnificent speech, declare a
dividend of six per cent., that we all received over the counter.

"You lucky young scoundrel!" said Brough to me; "do you know what made me
give you your place?"

"Why, my aunt's money, to be sure, sir," said I.

"No such thing.  Do you fancy I cared for those paltry three thousand
pounds?  I was told you were nephew of Lady Drum; and Lady Drum is
grandmother of Lady Jane Preston; and Mr. Preston is a man who can do us
a world of good.  I knew that they had sent you venison, and the deuce
knows what; and when I saw Lady Jane at my party shake you by the hand,
and speak to you so kindly, I took all Abednego's tales for gospel.
_That_ was the reason you got the place, mark you, and not on account of
your miserable three thousand pounds.  Well, sir, a fortnight after you
were with us at Fulham, I met Preston in the House, and made a merit of
having given the place to his cousin.  'Confound the insolent scoundrel!'
said he; '_he_ my cousin!  I suppose you take all old Drum's stories for
true?  Why, man, it's her mania: she never is introduced to a man but she
finds out a cousinship, and would not fail of course with that cur of a
Titmarsh!'  'Well,' said I, laughing, 'that cur has got a good place in
consequence, and the matter can't be mended.'  So you see," continued our
Director, "that you were indebted for your place, not to your aunt's
money, but--"

"But to MY AUNT'S DIAMOND PIN!"

"Lucky rascal!" said Brough, poking me in the side and going out of the
way.  And lucky, in faith, I thought I was.




CHAPTER VIII


RELATES THE HAPPIEST DAY OF SAMUEL TITMARSH'S LIFE

I don't know how it was that in the course of the next six months Mr.
Roundhand, the actuary, who had been such a profound admirer of Mr.
Brough and the West Diddlesex Association, suddenly quarrelled with both,
and taking his money out of the concern, he disposed of his 5,000_l_.
worth of shares to a pretty good profit, and went away, speaking
everything that was evil both of the Company and the Director.

Mr. Highmore now became secretary and actuary, Mr. Abednego was first
clerk, and your humble servant was second in the office at a salary of
250_l_. a year.  How unfounded were Mr. Roundhand's aspersions of the
West Diddlesex appeared quite clearly at our meeting in January, 1823,
when our Chief Director, in one of the most brilliant speeches ever
heard, declared that the half-yearly dividend was 4_l_. per cent., at the
rate of 8_l_. per cent. per annum; and I sent to my aunt 120_l_. sterling
as the amount of the interest of the stock in my name.

My excellent aunt, Mrs. Hoggarty, delighted beyond measure, sent me back
10_l_. for my own pocket, and asked me if she had not better sell
Slopperton and Squashtail, and invest all her money in this admirable
concern.

On this point I could not surely do better than ask the opinion of Mr.
Brough.  Mr. B. told me that shares could not be had but at a premium;
but on my representing that I knew of 5,000_l_. worth in the market at
par, he said--"Well, if so, he would like a fair price for his, and would
not mind disposing of 5,000_l_. worth, as he had rather a glut of West
Diddlesex shares, and his other concerns wanted feeding with ready
money."  At the end of our conversation, of which I promised to report
the purport to Mrs. Hoggarty, the Director was so kind as to say that he
had determined on creating a place of private secretary to the Managing
Director, and that I should hold that office with an additional salary of
150_l_.

I had 250_l_. a year, Miss Smith had 70_l_. per annum to her fortune.
What had I said should be my line of conduct whenever I could realise
300_l_. a year?

Gus of course, and all the gents in our office through him, knew of my
engagement with Mary Smith.  Her father had been a commander in the navy
and a very distinguished officer; and though Mary, as I have said, only
brought me a fortune of 70_l_. a year, and I, as everybody said, in my
present position in the office and the City of London, might have
reasonably looked out for a lady with much more money, yet my friends
agreed that the connection was very respectable, and I was content: as
who would not have been with such a darling as Mary?  I am sure, for my
part, I would not have taken the Lord Mayor's own daughter in place of
Mary, even with a plum to her fortune.

Mr. Brough of course was made aware of my approaching marriage, as of
everything else relating to every clerk in the office; and I do believe
Abednego told him what we had for dinner every day.  Indeed, his
knowledge of our affairs was wonderful.

He asked me how Mary's money was invested.  It was in the three per cent.
consols--2,333_l_. 6_s_. 8_d_.

"Remember," says he, "my lad, Mrs. Sam Titmarsh that is to be may have
seven per cent. for her money at the very least, and on better security
than the Bank of England; for is not a Company of which John Brough is
the head better than any other company in England?" and to be sure I
thought he was not far wrong, and promised to speak to Mary's guardians
on the subject before our marriage.  Lieutenant Smith, her grandfather,
had been at the first very much averse to our union.  (I must confess
that, one day finding me alone with her, and kissing, I believe, the tips
of her little fingers, he had taken me by the collar and turned me out of
doors.)  But Sam Titmarsh, with a salary of 250_l_. a year, a promised
fortune of 150_l_. more, and the right-hand man of Mr. John Brough of
London, was a very different man from Sam the poor clerk, and the poor
clergyman's widow's son; and the old gentleman wrote me a kind letter
enough, and begged me to get him six pairs of lamb's-wool stockings and
four ditto waistcoats from Romanis', and accepted them too as a present
from me when I went down in June--in happy June of 1823--to fetch my dear
Mary away.

Mr. Brough was likewise kindly anxious about my aunt's Slopperton and
Squashtail property, which she had not as yet sold, as she talked of
doing; and, as Mr. B. represented, it was a sin and a shame that any
person in whom he took such interest, as he did in all the relatives of
his dear young friend, should only have three per cent. for her money,
when she could have eight elsewhere.  He always called me Sam now,
praised me to the other young men (who brought the praises regularly to
me), said there was a cover always laid for me at Fulham, and repeatedly
took me thither.  There was but little company when I went; and M'Whirter
used to say he only asked me on days when he had his vulgar
acquaintances.  But I did not care for the great people, not being born
in their sphere; and indeed did not much care for going to the house at
all.  Miss Belinda was not at all to my liking.  After her engagement
with Captain Fizgig, and after Mr. Tidd had paid his 20,000_l_. and
Fizgig's great relations had joined in some of our Director's companies,
Mr. Brough declared he believed that Captain Fizgig's views were
mercenary, and put him to the proof at once, by saying that he must take
Miss Brough without a farthing, or not have her at all.  Whereupon
Captain Fizgig got an appointment in the colonies, and Miss Brough became
more ill-humoured than ever.  But I could not help thinking she was rid
of a bad bargain, and pitying poor Tidd, who came back to the charge
again more love-sick than ever, and was rebuffed pitilessly by Miss
Belinda.  Her father plainly told Tidd, too, that his visits were
disagreeable to Belinda, and though he must always love and value him, he
begged him to discontinue his calls at the Rookery.  Poor fellow! he had
paid his 20,000_l_. away for nothing! for what was six per cent. to him
compared to six per cent. and the hand of Miss Belinda Brough?

Well, Mr. Brough pitied the poor love-sick swain, as he called me, so
much, and felt such a warm sympathy in my well-being, that he insisted on
my going down to Somersetshire with a couple of months' leave; and away I
went, as happy as a lark, with a couple of brand-new suits from Von
Stiltz's in my trunk (I had them made, looking forward to a certain
event), and inside the trunk Lieutenant Smith's fleecy hosiery; wrapping
up a parcel of our prospectuses and two letters from John Brough, Esq.,
to my mother our worthy annuitant, and to Mrs. Hoggarty our excellent
shareholder.  Mr. Brough said I was all that the fondest father could
wish, that he considered me as his own boy, and that he earnestly begged
Mrs. Hoggarty not to delay the sale of her little landed property, as
land was high now and _must fall_; whereas the West Diddlesex Association
shares were (comparatively) low, and must inevitably, in the course of a
year or two, double, treble, quadruple their present value.

In this way I was prepared, and in this way I took leave of my dear Gus.
As we parted in the yard of the "Bolt-in-Tun," Fleet Street, I felt that
I never should go back to Salisbury Square again, and had made my little
present to the landlady's family accordingly.  She said I was the
respectablest gentleman she had ever had in her house: nor was that
saying much, for Bell Lane is in the Rules of the Fleet, and her lodgers
used commonly to be prisoners on Rule from that place.  As for Gus, the
poor fellow cried and blubbered so that he could not eat a morsel of the
muffins and grilled ham with which I treated him for breakfast in the
"Bolt-in-Tun" coffee-house; and when I went away was waving his hat and
his handkerchief so in the archway of the coach-office that I do believe
the wheels of the "True Blue" went over his toes, for I heard him roaring
as we passed through the arch.  Ah! how different were my feelings as I
sat proudly there on the box by the side of Jim Ward, the coachman, to
those I had the last time I mounted that coach, parting from my dear Mary
and coming to London with my DIAMOND PIN!

When arrived near home (at Grumpley, three miles from our village, where
the "True Blue" generally stops to take a glass of ale at the Poppleton
Arms) it was as if our Member, Mr. Poppleton himself, was come into the
country, so great was the concourse of people assembled round the inn.
And there was the landlord of the inn and all the people of the village.
Then there was Tom Wheeler, the post-boy, from Mrs. Rincer's
posting-hotel in our town; he was riding on the old bay posters, and
they, Heaven bless us! were drawing my aunt's yellow chariot, in which
she never went out but thrice in a year, and in which she now sat in her
splendid cashmere shawl and a new hat and feather.  She waved a white
handkerchief out of the window, and Tom Wheeler shouted out "Huzza!" as
did a number of the little blackguard boys of Grumpley: who, to be sure,
would huzza for anything.  What a change on Tom Wheeler's part, however!
I remembered only a few years before how he had whipped me from the box
of the chaise, as I was hanging on for a ride behind.

Next to my aunt's carriage came the four-wheeled chaise of Lieutenant
Smith, R.N., who was driving his old fat pony with his lady by his side.
I looked in the back seat of the chaise, and felt a little sad at seeing
that _Somebody_ was not there.  But, O silly fellow! there was Somebody
in the yellow chariot with my aunt, blushing like a peony, I declare, and
looking so happy!--oh, so happy and pretty!  She had a white dress, and a
light blue and yellow scarf, which my aunt said were the Hoggarty
colours; though what the Hoggartys had to do with light blue and yellow,
I don't know to this day.

Well, the "True Blue" guard made a great bellowing on his horn as his
four horses dashed away; the boys shouted again; I was placed bodkin
between Mrs. Hoggarty and Mary; Tom Wheeler cut into his bays; the
Lieutenant (who had shaken me cordially by the hand, and whose big dog
did not make the slightest attempt at biting me this time) beat his pony
till its fat sides lathered again; and thus in this, I may say,
unexampled procession, I arrived in triumph at our village.

My dear mother and the girls,--Heaven bless them!--nine of them in their
nankeen spencers (I had something pretty in my trunk for each of
them)--could not afford a carriage, but had posted themselves on the road
near the village; and there was such a waving of hands and handkerchiefs:
and though my aunt did not much notice them, except by a majestic toss of
the head, which is pardonable in a woman of her property, yet Mary Smith
did even more than I, and waved her hands as much as the whole nine.  Ah!
how my dear mother cried and blessed me when we met, and called me her
soul's comfort and her darling boy, and looked at me as if I were a
paragon of virtue and genius: whereas I was only a very lucky young
fellow, that by the aid of kind friends had stepped rapidly into a very
pretty property.

I was not to stay with my mother,--that had been arranged beforehand; for
though she and Mrs. Hoggarty were not remarkably good friends, yet Mother
said it was for my benefit that I should stay with my aunt, and so give
up the pleasure of having me with her: and though hers was much the
humbler house of the two, I need not say I preferred it far to Mrs.
Hoggarty's more splendid one; let alone the horrible Rosolio, of which I
was obliged now to drink gallons.

It was to Mrs. H.'s then we were driven: she had prepared a great dinner
that evening, and hired an extra waiter, and on getting out of the
carriage, she gave a sixpence to Tom Wheeler, saying that was for
himself, and that she would settle with Mrs. Rincer for the horses
afterwards.  At which Tom flung the sixpence upon the ground, swore most
violently, and was very justly called by my aunt an "impertinent fellow."

She had taken such a liking to me that she would hardly bear me out of
her sight.  We used to sit for morning after morning over her accounts,
debating for hours together the propriety of selling the Slopperton
property; but no arrangement was come to yet about it, for Hodge and
Smithers could not get the price she wanted.  And, moreover, she vowed
that at her decease she would leave every shilling to me.

Hodge and Smithers, too, gave a grand party, and treated me with marked
consideration; as did every single person of the village.  Those who
could not afford to give dinners gave teas, and all drank the health of
the young couple; and many a time after dinner or supper was my Mary made
to blush by the allusions to the change in her condition.

The happy day for that ceremony was now fixed, and the 24th July, 1823,
saw me the happiest husband of the prettiest girl in Somersetshire.  We
were married from my mother's house, who would insist upon that at any
rate, and the nine girls acted as bridesmaids; ay! and Gus Hoskins came
from town express to be my groomsman, and had my old room at my mother's,
and stayed with her for a week, and cast a sheep's-eye upon Miss Winny
Titmarsh too, my dear fourth sister, as I afterwards learned.

My aunt was very kind upon the marriage ceremony, indeed.  She had
desired me some weeks previous to order three magnificent dresses for
Mary from the celebrated Madame Mantalini of London, and some elegant
trinkets and embroidered pocket-handkerchiefs from Howell and James's.
These were sent down to me, and were to be _my_ present to the bride; but
Mrs. Hoggarty gave me to understand that I need never trouble myself
about the payment of the bill, and I thought her conduct very generous.
Also she lent us her chariot for the wedding journey, and made with her
own hands a beautiful crimson satin reticule for Mrs. Samuel Titmarsh,
her dear niece.  It contained a huswife completely furnished with
needles, &c., for she hoped Mrs. Titmarsh would never neglect her needle;
and a purse containing some silver pennies, and a very curious pocket-
piece.  "As long as you keep these, my dear," said Mrs. Hoggarty, "you
will never want; and fervently--fervently do I pray that you will keep
them."  In the carriage-pocket we found a paper of biscuits and a bottle
of Rosolio.  We laughed at this, and made it over to Tom Wheeler--who,
however, did not seem to like it much better than we.

I need not say I was married in Mr. Von Stiltz's coat (the third and
fourth coats, Heaven help us! in a year), and that I wore sparkling in my
bosom the GREAT HOGGARTY DIAMOND.




CHAPTER IX


BRINGS BACK SAM, HIS WIFE, AUNT, AND DIAMOND, TO LONDON

We pleased ourselves during the honeymoon with forming plans for our life
in London, and a pretty paradise did we build for ourselves!  Well, we
were but forty years old between us; and, for my part, I never found any
harm come of castle-building, but a great deal of pleasure.

Before I left London I had, to say the truth, looked round me for a
proper place, befitting persons of our small income; and Gus Hoskins and
I, who hunted after office-hours in couples, bad fixed on a very snug
little cottage in Camden Town, where there was a garden that certain
_small people_ might play in when they came: a horse and gig-house, if
ever we kept one,--and why not, in a few years?--and a fine healthy air,
at a reasonable distance from 'Change; all for 30_l_. a year.  I had
described this little spot to Mary as enthusiastically as Sancho
describes Lizias to Don Quixote; and my dear wife was delighted with the
prospect of housekeeping there, vowed she would cook all the best dishes
herself (especially jam-pudding, of which I confess I am very fond), and
promised Gus that he should dine with us at Clematis Bower every Sunday:
only he must not smoke those horrid cigars.  As for Gus, he vowed he
would have a room in the neighbourhood too, for he could not bear to go
back to Bell Lane, where we two had been so happy together; and so good-
natured Mary said she would ask my sister Winny to come and keep her
company.  At which Hoskins blushed, and said, "Pooh! nonsense now."

But all our hopes of a happy snug Clematis Lodge were dashed to the
ground on our return from our little honeymoon excursion; when Mrs.
Hoggarty informed us that she was sick of the country, and was determined
to go to London with her dear nephew and niece, and keep house for them,
and introduce them to her friends in the metropolis.

What could we do?  We wished her at--Bath: certainly not in London.  But
there was no help for it; and we were obliged to bring her: for, as my
mother said, if we offended her, her fortune would go out of our family;
and were we two young people not likely to want it?

So we came to town rather dismally in the carriage, posting the whole
way; for the carriage must be brought, and a person of my aunt's rank in
life could not travel by the stage.  And I had to pay 14_l_. for the
posters, which pretty nearly exhausted all my little hoard of cash.

First we went into lodgings,--into three sets in three weeks.  We
quarrelled with the first landlady, because my aunt vowed that she cut a
slice off the leg of mutton which was served for our dinner; from the
second lodgings we went because aunt vowed the maid would steal the
candles; from the third we went because Aunt Hoggarty came down to
breakfast the morning after our arrival with her face shockingly swelled
and bitten by--never mind what.  To cut a long tale short, I was half mad
with the continual choppings and changings, and the long stories and
scoldings of my aunt.  As for her great acquaintances, none of them were
in London; and she made it a matter of quarrel with me that I had not
introduced her to John Brough, Esquire, M.P., and to Lord and Lady
Tiptoff, her relatives.

Mr. Brough was at Brighton when we arrived in town; and on his return I
did not care at first to tell our Director that I had brought my aunt
with me, or mention my embarrassments for money.  He looked rather
serious when perforce I spoke of the latter to him and asked for an
advance; but when he heard that my lack of money had been occasioned by
the bringing of my aunt to London, his tone instantly changed.  "That, my
dear boy, alters the question; Mrs. Hoggarty is of an age when all things
must be yielded to her.  Here are a hundred pounds; and I beg you to draw
upon me whenever you are in the least in want of money."  This gave me
breathing-time until she should pay her share of the household expenses.
And the very next day Mr. and Mrs. John Brough, in their splendid
carriage-and-four, called upon Mrs. Hoggarty and my wife at our lodgings
in Lamb's Conduit Street.

It was on the very day when my poor aunt appeared with her face in that
sad condition; and she did not fail to inform Mrs. Brough of the cause,
and to state that at Castle Hoggarty, or at her country place in
Somersetshire, she had never heard or thought of such vile odious things.

"Gracious heavens!" shouted John Brough, Esquire, "a lady of your rank to
suffer in this way!--the excellent relative of my dear boy, Titmarsh!
Never, madam--never let it be said that Mrs. Hoggarty of Castle Hoggarty
should be subject to such horrible humiliation, while John Brough has a
home to offer her,--a humble, happy, Christian home, madam; though
unlike, perhaps, the splendour to which you have been accustomed in the
course of your distinguished career.  Isabella my love!--Belinda! speak
to Mrs. Hoggarty.  Tell her that John Brough's house is hers from garret
to cellar.  I repeat it, madam, from garret to cellar.  I desire--I
insist--I order, that Mrs. Hoggarty of Castle Hoggarty's trunks should be
placed this instant in my carriage!  Have the goodness to look to them
yourself, Mrs. Titmarsh, and see that your dear aunt's comforts are
better provided for than they have been."

Mary went away rather wondering at this order.  But, to be sure, Mr.
Brough was a great man, and her Samuel's benefactor; and though the silly
child absolutely began to cry as she packed and toiled at Aunt's enormous
valises, yet she performed the work, and came down with a smiling face to
my aunt, who was entertaining Mr. and Mrs. Brough with a long and
particular account of the balls at the Castle, in Dublin, in Lord
Charleville's time.

"I have packed the trunks, Aunt, but I am not strong enough to bring them
down," said Mary.

"Certainly not, certainly not," said John Brough, perhaps a little
ashamed.  "Hallo!  George, Frederic, Augustus, come upstairs this
instant, and bring down the trunks of Mrs. Hoggarty of Castle Hoggarty,
which this young lady will show you."

Nay, so great was Mr. Brough's condescension, that when some of his
fashionable servants refused to meddle with the trunks, he himself seized
a pair of them with both bands, carried them to the carriage, and shouted
loud enough for all Lamb's Conduit Street to hear, "John Brough is not
proud--no, no; and if his footmen are too high and mighty, he'll show
them a lesson of humility."

Mrs. Brough was for running downstairs too, and taking the trunks from
her husband; but they were too heavy for her, so she contented herself
with sitting on one, and asking all persons who passed her, whether John
Brough was not an angel of a man?

In this way it was that my aunt left us.  I was not aware of her
departure, for I was at the office at the time; and strolling back at
five with Gus, saw my dear Mary smiling and bobbing from the window, and
beckoning to us both to come up.  This I thought was very strange,
because Mrs. Hoggarty could not abide Hoskins, and indeed had told me
repeatedly that either she or he must quit the house.  Well, we went
upstairs, and there was Mary, who had dried her tears and received us
with the most smiling of faces, and laughed and clapped her hands, and
danced, and shook Gus's hand.  And what do you think the little rogue
proposed?  I am blest if she did not say she would like to go to
Vauxhall!

As dinner was laid for three persons only, Gus took his seat with fear
and trembling; and then Mrs. Sam Titmarsh related the circumstances which
had occurred, and how Mrs. Hoggarty had been whisked away to Fulham in
Mr. Brough's splendid carriage-and-four.  "Let her go," I am sorry to
say, said I; and indeed we relished our veal-cutlets and jam-pudding a
great deal more than Mrs. Hoggarty did her dinner off plate at the
Rookery.

We had a very merry party to Vauxhall, Gus insisting on standing treat;
and you may be certain that my aunt, whose absence was prolonged for
three weeks, was heartily welcome to remain away, for we were much
merrier and more comfortable without her.  My little Mary used to make my
breakfast before I went to office of mornings; and on Sundays we had a
holiday, and saw the dear little children eat their boiled beef and
potatoes at the Foundling, and heard the beautiful music: but, beautiful
as it is, I think the children were a more beautiful sight still, and the
look of their innocent happy faces was better than the best sermon.  On
week-days Mrs. Titmarsh would take a walk about five o'clock in the
evening on the _left_-hand side of Lamb's Conduit Street (as you go to
Holborn)--ay, and sometimes pursue her walk as far as Snow Hill, when two
young gents from the I. W. D. Fire and Life were pretty sure to meet her;
and then how happily we all trudged off to dinner!  Once we came up as a
monster of a man, with high heels and a gold-headed cane, and whiskers
all over his face, was grinning under Mary's bonnet, and chattering to
her, close to Day and Martin's Blacking Manufactory (not near such a
handsome thing then as it is now)--there was the man chattering and
ogling his best, when who should come up but Gus and I?  And in the
twinkling of a pegpost, as Lord Duberley says, my gentleman was seized by
the collar of his coat and found himself sprawling under a stand of
hackney-coaches; where all the watermen were grinning at him.  The best
of it was, he left his _head of hair and whiskers_ in my hand: but Mary
said, "Don't be hard upon him, Samuel; it's only a Frenchman."  And so we
gave him his wig back, which one of the grinning stable-boys put on and
carried to him as he lay in the straw.

He shrieked out something about "arretez," and "Francais," and "champ-
d'honneur;" but we walked on, Gus putting his thumb to his nose and
stretching out his finger at Master Frenchman.  This made everybody
laugh; and so the adventure ended.

About ten days after my aunt's departure came a letter from her, of which
I give a copy:--

   "My Dear Nephew,--It was my earnest whish e'er this to have returned
   to London, where I am sure you and my niece Titmarsh miss me very
   much, and where she, poor thing, quite inexperienced in the ways of
   'the great metropulus,' in aconamy, and indeed in every qualaty
   requasit in a good wife and the mistress of a famaly, can hardly
   manidge, I am sure, without me.

   "Tell her _on no account_ to pay more than 6.5_d_. for the prime
   pieces, 4.75_d_. for soup meat; and that the very best of London
   butter is to be had for 8.5_d_.; of course, for pudns and the kitchin
   you'll employ a commoner sort.  My trunks were sadly packed by Mrs.
   Titmarsh, and the hasp of the portmantyou-lock has gone through my
   yellow satn.  I have darned it, and woar it already twice, at two
   ellygant (though quiat) evening-parties given by my _hospatable_ host;
   and my pegreen velvet on Saturday at a grand dinner, when Lord
   Scaramouch handed me to table.  Everything was in the most _sumptious
   style_.  Soup top and bottom (white and brown), removed by turbit and
   sammon with _immense boles of lobster-sauce_.  Lobsters alone cost
   15_s_.  Turbit, three guineas.  The hole sammon, weighing, I'm sure,
   15 lbs., and _never seen_ at table again; not a bitt of pickled sammon
   the hole weak afterwards.  This kind of extravigance would _just suit_
   Mrs. Sam Titmarsh, who, as I always say, burns _the candle at both
   ends_.  Well, young people, it is lucky for you you have an old aunt
   who knows better, and has a long purse; without witch, I dare say,
   _some_ folks would be glad to see her out of doors.  I don't mean you,
   Samuel, who have, I must say, been a dutiful nephew to me.  Well, I
   dare say I shan't live long, and some folks won't be sorry to have me
   in my grave.

   "Indeed, on Sunday I was taken in my stomick very ill, and thought it
   might have been the lobster-sauce; but Doctor Blogg, who was called
   in, said it was, he very much feared, _cumsumptive_; but gave me some
   pills and a draft wh made me better.  Please call upon him--he lives
   at Pimlico, and you can walk out there after office hours--and present
   him with 1_l_. 1_s_., with my compliments.  I have no money here but a
   10_l_. note, the rest being locked up in my box at Lamb's Cundit
   Street.

   "Although the flesh is not neglected in Mr. B.'s sumptious
   establishment, I can assure you the _sperrit_ is likewise cared for.
   Mr. B. reads and igspounds every morning; and o but his exorcises
   refresh the hungry sole before breakfast!  Everything is in the
   handsomest style,--silver and goold plate at breakfast, lunch, and
   dinner; and his crest and motty, a beehive, with the Latn word
   _Industria_, meaning industry, on _everything_--even on the chany
   juggs and things in my bedd-room.  On Sunday we were favoured by a
   special outpouring from the Rev. Grimes Wapshot, of the Amabaptist
   Congrigation here, and who egshorted for 3 hours in the afternoon in
   Mr. B.'s private chapel.  As the widow of a Hoggarty, I have always
   been a staunch supporter of the established Church of England and
   Ireland; but I must say Mr. Wapshot's stirring way was far superior to
   that of the Rev. Bland Blenkinsop of the Establishment, who lifted up
   his voice after dinner for a short discourse of two hours.

   "Mrs. Brough is, between ourselves, a poor creature, and has no
   sperrit of her own.  As for Miss B., she is so saucy that once I
   promised to box her years; and would have left the house, had not Mr.
   B. taken my part, and Miss made me a suitable apollogy.

   "I don't know when I shall return to town, being made really so
   welcome here.  Dr. Blogg says the air of Fulham is the best in the
   world for my simtums; and as the ladies of the house do not choose to
   walk out with me, the Rev. Grimes Wapshot has often been kind enough
   to lend me his arm, and 'tis sweet with such a guide to wander both to
   Putney and Wandsworth, and igsamin the wonderful works of nature.  I
   have spoke to him about the Slopperton property, and he is not of Mr.
   B.'s opinion that I should sell it; but on this point I shall follow
   my own counsel.

   "Meantime you must gett into more comfortable lodgings, and lett my
   bedd be warmed every night, and of rainy days have a fire in the
   grate: and let Mrs. Titmarsh look up my blue silk dress, and turn it
   against I come; and there is my purple spencer she can have for
   herself; and I hope she does not wear those three splendid gowns you
   gave her, but keep them until _better times_.  I shall soon introduse
   her to my friend Mr. Brough, and others of my acquaintances; and am
   always

   "Your loving AUNT.

   "I have ordered a chest of the Rosolio to be sent from Somersetshire.
   When it comes, please to send half down here (paying the carriage, of
   course).  'Twill be an acceptable present to my kind entertainer, Mr.
   B."

This letter was brought to me by Mr. Brough himself at the office, who
apologised to me for having broken the seal by inadvertence; for the
letter had been mingled with some more of his own, and he opened it
without looking at the superscription.  Of course he had not read it, and
I was glad of that; for I should not have liked him to see my aunt's
opinion of his daughter and lady.

The next day, a gentleman at "Tom's Coffee-house," Cornhill, sent me word
at the office that he wanted particularly to speak to me: and I stopped
thither, and found my old friend Smithers, of the house of Hodge and
Smithers, just off the coach, with his carpet-bag between his legs.

"Sam my boy," said he, "you are your aunt's heir, and I have a piece of
news for you regarding her property which you ought to know.  She wrote
us down a letter for a chest of that home-made wine of hers which she
calls Rosolio, and which lies in our warehouse along with her furniture."

"Well," says I, smiling, "she may part with as much Rosolio as she likes
for me.  I cede all my right."

"Psha!" says Smithers, "it's not that; though her furniture puts us to a
deuced inconvenience, to be sure--it's not that: but, in the postscript
of her letter, she orders us to advertise the Slopperton and Squashtail
estates for immediate sale, as she purposes placing her capital
elsewhere."

I know that the Slopperton and Squashtail property had been the source of
a very pretty income to Messrs.  Hodge and Smithers, for Aunt was always
at law with her tenants, and paid dearly for her litigious spirit; so
that Mr. Smithers's concern regarding the sale of it did not seem to me
to be quite disinterested.

"And did you come to London, Mr. Smithers, expressly to acquaint me with
this fact?  It seems to me you had much better have obeyed my aunt's
instructions at once, or go to her at Fulham, and consult with her on
this subject."

"'Sdeath, Mr. Titmarsh! don't you see that if she makes a sale of her
property, she will hand over the money to Brough; and if Brough gets the
money he--"

"Will give her seven per cent. for it instead of three,--there's no harm
in that."

"But there's such a thing as security, look you.  He is a warm man,
certainly--very warm--quite respectable--most undoubtedly respectable.
But who knows?  A panic may take place; and then these five hundred
companies in which he is engaged may bring him to ruin.  There's the
Ginger Beer Company, of which Brough is a director: awkward reports are
abroad concerning it.  The Consolidated Baffin's Bay Muff and Tippet
Company--the shares are down very low, and Brough is a director there.
The Patent Pump Company--shares at 65, and a fresh call, which nobody
will pay."

"Nonsense, Mr. Smithers!  Has not Mr. Brough five hundred thousand
pounds' worth of shares in the INDEPENDENT WEST DIDDLESEX, and is THAT at
a discount?  Who recommended my aunt to invest her money in that
speculation, I should like to know?"  I had him there.

"Well, well, it is a very good speculation, certainly, and has brought
you three hundred a year, Sam my boy; and you may thank us for the
interest we took in you (indeed, we loved you as a son, and Miss Hodge
has not recovered a certain marriage yet).  You don't intend to rebuke us
for making your fortune, do you?"

"No, hang it, no!" says I, and shook hands with him, and accepted a glass
of sherry and biscuits, which he ordered forthwith.

Smithers returned, however, to the charge.  "Sam," he said, "mark my
words, and take your aunt _away from the Rookery_.  She wrote to Mrs. S.
a long account of a reverend gent with whom she walks out there,--the
Reverend Grimes Wapshot.  That man has an eye upon her.  He was tried at
Lancaster in the year '14 for forgery, and narrowly escaped with his
neck.  Have a care of him--he has an eye to her money."

"Nay," said I, taking out Mrs. Hoggarty's letter: "read for yourself."

He read it over very carefully, seemed to be amused by it; and as he
returned it to me, "Well, Sam," he said, "I have only two favours to ask
of you: one is, not to mention that I am in town to any living soul; and
the other is to give me a dinner in Lamb's Conduit Street with your
pretty wife."

"I promise you both gladly," I said, laughing.  "But if you dine with us,
your arrival in town must be known, for my friend Gus Hoskins dines with
us likewise; and has done so nearly every day since my aunt went."

He laughed too, and said, "We must swear Gus to secrecy over a bottle."
And so we parted till dinner-time.

The indefatigable lawyer pursued his attack after dinner, and was
supported by Gus and by my wife too; who certainly was disinterested in
the matter--more than disinterested, for she would have given a great
deal to be spared my aunt's company.  But she said she saw the force of
Mr. Smithers's arguments, and I admitted their justice with a sigh.
However, I rode my high horse, and vowed that my aunt should do what she
liked with her money; and that I was not the man who would influence her
in any way in the disposal of it.

After tea, the two gents walked away together, and Gus told me that
Smithers had asked him a thousand questions about the office, about
Brough, about me and my wife, and everything concerning us.  "You are a
lucky fellow, Mr. Hoskins, and seem to be the friend of this charming
young couple," said Smithers; and Gus confessed he was, and said he had
dined with us fifteen times in six weeks, and that a better and more
hospitable fellow than I did not exist.  This I state not to trumpet my
own praises,--no, no; but because these questions of Smithers's had a
good deal to do with the subsequent events narrated in this little
history.

Being seated at dinner the next day off the cold leg of mutton that
Smithers had admired so the day before, and Gus as usual having his legs
under our mahogany, a hackney-coach drove up to the door, which we did
not much heed; a step was heard on the floor, which we hoped might be for
the two-pair lodger, when who should burst into the room but Mrs.
Hoggarty herself!  Gus, who was blowing the froth off a pot of porter
preparatory to a delicious drink of the beverage, and had been making us
die of laughing with his stories and jokes, laid down the pewter pot as
Mrs. H. came in, and looked quite sick and pale.  Indeed we all felt a
little uneasy.

My aunt looked haughtily in Mary's face, then fiercely at Gus, and
saying, "It is too true--my poor boy--_already_!" flung herself
hysterically into my arms, and swore, almost choking, that she would
never never leave me.

I could not understand the meaning of this extraordinary agitation on
Mrs. Hoggarty's part, nor could any of us.  She refused Mary's hand when
the poor thing rather nervously offered it; and when Gus timidly said, "I
think, Sam, I'm rather in the way here, and perhaps--had better go," Mrs.
H. looked him full in the face, pointed to the door majestically with her
forefinger, and said, "I think, sir, you _had_ better go."

"I hope Mr. Hoskins will stay as long as he pleases," said my wife, with
spirit.

"_Of course_ you hope so, madam," answered Mrs. Hoggarty, very sarcastic.
But Mary's speech and my aunt's were quite lost upon Gus; for he had
instantly run to his hat, and I heard him tumbling downstairs.

The quarrel ended, as usual, by Mary's bursting into a fit of tears, and
by my aunt's repeating the assertion that it was not too late, she
trusted; and from that day forth she would never never leave me.

"What could have made Aunt return and be so angry?" said I to Mary that
night, as we were in our own room; but my wife protested she did not
know: and it was only some time after that I found out the reason of this
quarrel, and of Mrs. H.'s sudden reappearance.

The horrible fat coarse little Smithers told me the matter as a very good
joke, only the other year, when he showed me the letter of Hickson,
Dixon, Paxton and Jackson, which has before been quoted in my Memoirs.

"Sam my boy," said he, "you were determined to leave Mrs. Hoggarty in
Brough's clutches at the Rookery, and I was determined to have her away.
I resolved to kill two of your mortal enemies with one stone as it were.
It was quite clear to me that the Reverend Grimes Wapshot had an eye to
your aunt's fortune; and that Mr. Brough had similar predatory intentions
regarding her.  Predatory is a mild word, Sam: if I had said robbery at
once, I should express my meaning clearer.

"Well, I took the Fulham stage, and arriving, made straight for the
lodgings of the reverend gentleman.  'Sir,' said I, on finding that
worthy gent,--he was drinking warm brandy-and-water, Sam, at two o'clock
in the day, or at least the room smelt very strongly of that
beverage--'Sir,' says I, 'you were tried for forgery in the year '14, at
Lancaster assizes.'

"'And acquitted, sir.  My innocence was by Providence made clear,' said
Wapshot.

"'But you were not acquitted of embezzlement in '16, sir,' says I, 'and
passed two years in York Gaol in consequence.'  I knew the fellow's
history, for I had a writ out against him when he was a preacher at
Clifton.  I followed up my blow.  'Mr. Wapshot,' said I, 'you are making
love to an excellent lady now at the house of Mr. Brough: if you do not
promise to give up all pursuit of her, I will expose you.'

"'I _have_ promised,' said Wapshot, rather surprised, and looking more
easy.  'I have given my solemn promise to Mr. Brough, who was with me
this very morning, storming, and scolding, and swearing.  Oh, sir, it
would have frightened you to hear a Christian babe like him swear as he
did.'

"'Mr. Brough been here?' says I, rather astonished.

"'Yes; I suppose you are both here on the same scent,' says Wapshot.  'You
want to marry the widow with the Slopperton and Squashtail estate, do
you?  Well, well, have your way.  I've promised not to have anything more
to do with the widow and a Wapshot's honour is sacred.'

"'I suppose, sir,' says I, 'Mr. Brough has threatened to kick you out of
doors, if you call again.'

"'You _have_ been with him, I see,' says the reverend gent, with a shrug:
then I remembered what you had told me of the broken seal of your letter,
and have not the slightest doubt that Brough opened and read every word
of it.

"Well, the first bird was bagged: both I and Brough had had a shot at
him.  Now I had to fire at the whole Rookery; and off I went, primed and
loaded, sir,--primed and loaded.

"It was past eight when I arrived, and I saw, after I passed the lodge-
gates, a figure that I knew, walking in the shrubbery--that of your
respected aunt, sir: but I wished to meet the amiable ladies of the house
before I saw her; because look, friend Titmarsh, I saw by Mrs. Hoggarty's
letter, that she and they were at daggers drawn, and hoped to get her out
of the house at once by means of a quarrel with them."

I laughed, and owned that Mr. Smithers was a very cunning fellow.

"As luck would have it," continued he, "Miss Brough was in the drawing-
room twangling on a guitar, and singing most atrociously out of tune; but
as I entered at the door, I cried 'Hush!' to the footman, as loud as
possible, stood stock-still, and then walked forward on tip-toe lightly.
Miss B. could see in the glass every movement that I made; she pretended
not to see, however, and finished the song with a regular roulade.

"'Gracious Heaven!' said I, 'do, madam, pardon me for interrupting that
delicious harmony,--for coming unaware upon it, for daring uninvited to
listen to it.'

"'Do you come for Mamma, sir?' said Miss Brough, with as much
graciousness as her physiognomy could command.  'I am Miss Brough, sir.'

"'I wish, madam, you would let me not breathe a word regarding my
business until you have sung another charming strain.'

"She did not sing, but looked pleased, and said, 'La! sir, what is your
business?'

"'My business is with a lady, your respected father's guest in this
house.'

"'Oh, Mrs. Hoggarty!' says Miss Brough, flouncing towards the bell, and
ringing it.  'John, send to Mrs. Hoggarty, in the shrubbery; here is a
gentleman who wants to see her.'

"'I know,' continued I, 'Mrs. Hoggarty's peculiarities as well as anyone,
madam; and aware that those and her education are not such as to make her
a fit companion for you.  I know you do not like her: she has written to
us in Somersetshire that you do not like her.'

"'What! she has been abusing us to her friends, has she?' cried Miss
Brough (it was the very point I wished to insinuate).  'If she does not
like us, why does she not leave us?'

"'She _has_ made rather a long visit,' said I; 'and I am sure that her
nephew and niece are longing for her return.  Pray, madam, do not move,
for you may aid me in the object for which I come.'

"The object for which I came, sir, was to establish a regular
battle-royal between the two ladies; at the end of which I intended to
appeal to Mrs. Hoggarty, and say that she ought really no longer to stay
in a house with the members of which she had such unhappy differences.
Well, sir, the battle-royal was fought,--Miss Belinda opening the fire,
by saying she understood Mrs. Hoggarty had been calumniating her to her
friends.  But though at the end of it Miss rushed out of the room in a
rage, and vowed she would leave her home unless that odious woman left
it, your dear aunt said, 'Ha, ha!  I know the minx's vile stratagems;
but, thank Heaven! I have a good heart, and my religion enables me to
forgive her.  I shall not leave her excellent papa's house, or vex by my
departure that worthy admirable man.'

"I then tried Mrs. H. on the score of compassion.  'Your niece,' said I,
'Mrs. Titmarsh, madam, has been of late, Sam says, rather
poorly,--qualmish of mornings, madam,--a little nervous, and low in
spirits,--symptoms, madam, that are scarcely to be mistaken in a young
married person.'

"Mrs. Hoggarty said she had an admirable cordial that she would send Mrs.
Samuel Titmarsh, and she was perfectly certain it would do her good.

"With very great unwillingness I was obliged now to bring my last reserve
into the field, and may tell you what that was, Sam my boy, now that the
matter is so long passed.  'Madam,' said I, 'there's a matter about which
I must speak, though indeed I scarcely dare.  I dined with your nephew
yesterday, and met at his table a young man--a young man of low manners,
but evidently one who has blinded your nephew, and I too much fear has
succeeded in making an impression upon your niece.  His name is Hoskins,
madam; and when I state that he who was never in the house during your
presence there, has dined with your too confiding nephew sixteen times in
three weeks, I may leave you to imagine what I dare not--dare not imagine
myself.'

"The shot told.  Your aunt bounced up at once, and in ten minutes more
was in my carriage, on our way back to London.  There, sir, was not that
generalship?"

"And you played this pretty trick off at my wife's expense, Mr.
Smithers," said I.

"At your wife's expense, certainly; but for the benefit of both of you."

"It's lucky, sir, that you are an old man," I replied, "and that the
affair happened ten years ago; or, by the Lord, Mr. Smithers, I would
have given you such a horsewhipping as you never heard of!"

But this was the way in which Mrs. Hoggarty was brought back to her
relatives; and this was the reason why we took that house in Bernard
Street, the doings at which must now he described.




CHAPTER X


OF SAM'S PRIVATE AFFAIRS AND OF THE FIRM OF BROUGH AND HOFF

We took a genteel house in Bernard Street, Russell Square, and my aunt
sent for all her furniture from the country; which would have filled two
such houses, but which came pretty cheap to us young housekeepers, as we
had only to pay the carriage of the goods from Bristol.

When I brought Mrs. H. her third half-year's dividend, having not for
four months touched a shilling of her money, I must say she gave me
50_l_. of the 80_l_., and told me that was ample pay for the board and
lodging of a poor old woman like her, who did not eat more than a
sparrow.

I have myself, in the country, seen her eat nine sparrows in a pudding;
but she was rich and I could not complain.  If she saved 600_l_. a year,
at the least, by living with us, why, all the savings would one day come
to me; and so Mary and I consoled ourselves, and tried to manage matters
as well as we might.  It was no easy task to keep a mansion in Bernard
Street and save money out of 470_l_. a year, which was my income.  But
what a lucky fellow I was to have such an income!

As Mrs. Hoggarty left the Rookery in Smithers's carriage, Mr. Brough,
with his four greys, was entering the lodge-gate; and I should like to
have seen the looks of these two gentlemen, as the one was carrying the
other's prey off, out of his own very den, under his very nose.

He came to see her the next day, and protested that he would not leave
the house until she left it with him: that he had heard of his daughter's
infamous conduct, and had seen her in tears--"in tears, madam, and on her
knees, imploring Heaven to pardon her!"  But Mr. B. was obliged to leave
the house without my aunt, who had a _causa major_ for staying, and
hardly allowed poor Mary out of her sight,--opening every one of the
letters that came into the house directed to my wife, and suspecting hers
to everybody.  Mary never told me of all this pain for many many years
afterwards; but had always a smiling face for her husband when he came
home from his work.  As for poor Gus, my aunt had so frightened him, that
he never once showed his nose in the place all the time we lived there;
but used to be content with news of Mary, of whom he was as fond as he
was of me.

Mr. Brough, when my aunt left him, was in a furious ill-humour with me.
He found fault with me ten times a day, and openly, before the gents of
the office; but I let him one day know pretty smartly that I was not only
a servant, but a considerable shareholder in the company; that I defied
him to find fault with my work or my regularity; and that I was not
minded to receive any insolent language from him or any man.  He said it
was always so: that he had never cherished a young man in his bosom, but
the ingrate had turned on him; that he was accustomed to wrong and
undutifulness from his children, and that he would pray that the sin
might be forgiven me.  A moment before he had been cursing and swearing
at me, and speaking to me as if I had been his shoeblack.  But, look you,
I was not going to put up with any more of Madam Brough's airs, or of
his.  With me they might act as they thought fit; but I did not choose
that my wife should be passed over by them, as she had been in the matter
of the visit to Fulham.

Brough ended by warning me of Hodge and Smithers.  "Beware of these men,"
said he; "but for my honesty, your aunt's landed property would have been
sacrificed by these cormorants: and when, for her benefit--which you,
obstinate young man, will not perceive--I wished to dispose of her land,
her attorneys actually had the audacity--the unchristian avarice I may
say--to ask ten per cent. commission on the sale."

There might be some truth in this, I thought: at any rate, when rogues
fall out, honest men come by their own: and now I began to suspect, I am
sorry to say, that both the attorney and the Director had a little of the
rogue in their composition.  It was especially about my wife's fortune
that Mr. B. showed _his_ cloven foot: for proposing, as usual, that I
should purchase shares with it in our Company, I told him that my wife
was a minor, and as such her little fortune was vested out of my control
altogether.  He flung away in a rage at this; and I soon saw that he did
not care for me any more, by Abednego's manner to me.  No more holidays,
no more advances of money, had I: on the contrary, the private clerkship
at 150_l_. was abolished, and I found myself on my 250_l_. a year again.
Well, what then? it was always a good income, and I did my duty, and
laughed at the Director.

About this time, in the beginning of 1824, the Jamaica Ginger Beer
Company shut up shop--exploded, as Gus said, with a bang!  The Patent
Pump shares were down to 15_l_. upon a paid-up capital of 65_l_.  Still
ours were at a high premium; and the Independent West Diddlesex held its
head up as proudly as any office in London.  Roundhand's abuse had had
some influence against the Director, certainly; for he hinted at
malversation of shares: but the Company still stood as united as the Hand-
in-Hand, and as firm as the Rock.

To return to the state of affairs in Bernard Street, Russell Square: my
aunt's old furniture crammed our little rooms; and my aunt's enormous old
jingling grand piano, with crooked legs and half the strings broken,
occupied three-fourths of the little drawing-room.  Here used Mrs. H. to
sit, and play us, for hours, sonatas that were in fashion in Lord
Charleville's time; and sung with a cracked voice, till it was all that
we could do to refrain from laughing.

And it was queer to remark the change that had taken place in Mrs.
Hoggarty's character now: for whereas she was in the country among the
topping persons of the village, and quite content with a tea-party at six
and a game of twopenny whist afterwards,--in London she would never dine
till seven; would have a fly from the mews to drive in the Park twice a
week; cut and uncut, and ripped up and twisted over and over, all her old
gowns, flounces, caps, and fallals, and kept my poor Mary from morning
till night altering them to the present mode.  Mrs. Hoggarty, moreover,
appeared in a new wig; and, I am sorry to say, turned out with such a
pair of red cheeks as Nature never gave her, and as made all the people
in Bernard Street stare, where they are not as yet used to such fashions.

Moreover, she insisted upon our establishing a servant in livery,--a boy,
that is, of about sixteen,--who was dressed in one of the old liveries
that she had brought with her from Somersetshire, decorated with new
cuffs and collars, and new buttons: on the latter were represented the
united crests of the Titmarshes and Hoggartys, viz., a tomtit rampant and
a hog in armour.  I thought this livery and crest-button rather absurd, I
must confess; though my family is very ancient.  And heavens! what a roar
of laughter was raised in the office one day, when the little servant in
the big livery, with the immense cane, walked in and brought me a message
from Mrs. Hoggarty of Castle Hoggarty!  Furthermore, all letters were
delivered on a silver tray.  If we had had a baby, I believe Aunt would
have had it down on the tray: but there was as yet no foundation for Mr.
Smithers's insinuation upon that score, any more than for his other
cowardly fabrication before narrated.  Aunt and Mary used to walk gravely
up and down the New Road, with the boy following with his great
gold-headed stick; but though there was all this ceremony and parade, and
Aunt still talked of her acquaintances, we did not see a single person
from week's end to week's end, and a more dismal house than ours could
hardly be found in London town.

On Sundays, Mrs. Hoggarty used to go to St. Pancras Church, then just
built, and as handsome as Covent Garden Theatre; and of evenings, to a
meeting-house of the Anabaptists: and that day, at least, Mary and I had
to ourselves,--for we chose to have seats at the Foundling, and heard the
charming music there, and my wife used to look wistfully in the pretty
children's faces,--and so, for the matter of that, did I.  It was not,
however, till a year after our marriage that she spoke in a way which
shall be here passed over, but which filled both her and me with
inexpressible joy.

I remember she had the news to give me on the very day when the Muff and
Tippet Company shut up, after swallowing a capital of 300,000_l_. as some
said, and nothing to show for it except a treaty with some Indians, who
had afterwards tomahawked the agent of the Company.  Some people said
there were no Indians, and no agent to be tomahawked at all; but that the
whole had been invented in a house in Crutched Friars.  Well, I pitied
poor Tidd, whose 20,000_l_. were thus gone in a year, and whom I met in
the City that day with a most ghastly face.  He had 1,000_l_. of debts,
he said, and talked of shooting himself; but he was only arrested, and
passed a long time in the Fleet.  Mary's delightful news, however, soon
put Tidd and the Muff and Tippet Company out of my head; as you may
fancy.

Other circumstances now occurred in the City of London which seemed to
show that our Director was--what is not to be found in Johnson's
Dictionary--rather shaky.  Three of his companies had broken; four more
were in a notoriously insolvent state; and even at the meetings of the
directors of the West Diddlesex, some stormy words passed, which ended in
the retirement of several of the board.  Friends of Mr. B.'s filled up
their places: Mr. Puppet, Mr. Straw, Mr. Query, and other respectable
gents, coming forward and joining the concern.  Brough and Hoff dissolved
partnership; and Mr. B. said he had quite enough to do to manage the I.
W. D., and intended gradually to retire from the other affairs.  Indeed,
such an Association as ours was enough work for any man, let alone the
parliamentary duties which Brough was called on to perform, and the
seventy-two lawsuits which burst upon him as principal director of the
late companies.

Perhaps I should here describe the desperate attempts made by Mrs.
Hoggarty to introduce herself into genteel life.  Strange to say,
although we had my Lord Tiptoff's word to the contrary, she insisted upon
it that she and Lady Drum were intimately related; and no sooner did she
read in the _Morning Post_ of the arrival of her Ladyship and her
granddaughters in London, than she ordered the fly before mentioned, and
left cards at their respective houses: her card, that is--"MRS. HOGGARTY
of CASTLE HOGGARTY," magnificently engraved in Gothic letters and
flourishes; and ours, viz., "Mr. and Mrs. S. Titmarsh," which she had
printed for the purpose.

She would have stormed Lady Jane Preston's door and forced her way
upstairs, in spite of Mary's entreaties to the contrary, had the footman
who received her card given her the least encouragement; but that
functionary, no doubt struck by the oddity of her appearance, placed
himself in the front of the door, and declared that he had positive
orders not to admit any strangers to his lady.  On which Mrs. Hoggarty
clenched her fist out of the coach-window, and promised that she would
have him turned away.

Yellowplush only burst out laughing at this; and though Aunt wrote a most
indignant letter to Mr. Edmund Preston, complaining of the insolence of
the servants of that right honourable gent, Mr. Preston did not take any
notice of her letter, further than to return it, with a desire that he
might not be troubled with such impertinent visits for the future.  A
pretty day we had of it when this letter arrived, owing to my aunt's
disappointment and rage in reading the contents; for when Solomon brought
up the note on the silver tea-tray as usual, my aunt, seeing Mr.
Preston's seal and name at the corner of the letter (which is the common
way of writing adopted by those official gents)--my aunt, I say, seeing
his name and seal, cried, "_Now_, Mary, who is right?" and betted my wife
a sixpence that the envelope contained an invitation to dinner.  She
never paid the sixpence, though she lost, but contented herself by
abusing Mary all day, and said I was a poor-spirited sneak for not
instantly horsewhipping Mr. P.  A pretty joke, indeed!  They would have
hanged me in those days, as they did the man who shot Mr. Perceval.

And now I should be glad to enlarge upon that experience in genteel life
which I obtained through the perseverance of Mrs. Hoggarty; but it must
be owned that my opportunities were but few, lasting only for the brief
period of six months: and also, genteel society has been fully described
already by various authors of novels, whose names need not here be set
down, but who, being themselves connected with the aristocracy, viz., as
members of noble families, or as footmen or hangers-on thereof, naturally
understand their subject a great deal better than a poor young fellow
from a fire-office can.

There was our celebrated adventure in the Opera House, whither Mrs. H.
would insist upon conducting us; and where, in a room of the
establishment called the crush-room, where the ladies and gents after the
music and dancing await the arrival of their carriages (a pretty figure
did our little Solomon cut, by the way, with his big cane, among the
gentlemen of the shoulder-knot assembled in the lobby!)--where, I say, in
the crush-room, Mrs. H. rushed up to old Lady Drum, whom I pointed out to
her, and insisted upon claiming relationship with her Ladyship.  But my
Lady Drum had only a memory when she chose, as I may say, and had
entirely on this occasion thought fit to forget her connection with the
Titmarshes and Hoggarties.  Far from recognising us, indeed, she called
Mrs. Hoggarty an "ojus 'oman," and screamed out as loud as possible for a
police-officer.

This and other rebuffs made my aunt perceive the vanities of this wicked
world, as she said, and threw her more and more into really serious
society.  She formed several very valuable acquaintances, she said, at
the Independent Chapel; and among others, lighted upon her friend of the
Rookery, Mr. Grimes Wapshot.  We did not know then the interview which he
had had with Mr. Smithers, nor did Grimes think proper to acquaint us
with the particulars of it; but though I did acquaint Mrs. H. with the
fact that her favourite preacher had been tried for forgery, _she_
replied that she considered the story an atrocious calumny; and _he_
answered by saying that Mary and I were in lamentable darkness, and that
we should infallibly find the way to a certain bottomless pit, of which
he seemed to know a great deal.  Under the reverend gentleman's guidance
and advice, she, after a time, separated from St. Pancras
altogether--"_sat under him_," as the phrase is, regularly thrice a
week--began to labour in the conversion of the poor of Bloomsbury and St.
Giles's, and made a deal of baby-linen for distribution among those
benighted people.  She did not make any, however, for Mrs. Sam Titmarsh,
who now showed signs that such would be speedily necessary, but let Mary
(and my mother and sisters in Somersetshire) provide what was requisite
for the coming event.  I am not, indeed, sure that she did not say it was
wrong on our parts to make any such provision, and that we ought to let
the morrow provide for itself.  At any rate, the Reverend Grimes Wapshot
drank a deal of brandy-and-water at our house, and dined there even
oftener than poor Gus used to do.

But I had little leisure to attend to him and his doings; for I must
confess at this time I was growing very embarrassed in my circumstances,
and was much harassed both as a private and public character.

As regards the former, Mrs. Hoggarty had given me 50_l_.; but out of that
50_l_. I had to pay a journey post from Somersetshire, all the carriage
of her goods from the country, the painting, papering, and carpeting of
my house, the brandy and strong liquors drunk by the Reverend Grimes and
his friends (for the reverend gent said that Rosolio did not agree with
him); and finally, a thousand small bills and expenses incident to all
housekeepers in the town of London.

Add to this, I received just at the time when I was most in want of cash,
Madame Mantalini's bill, Messrs.  Howell and James's ditto, the account
of Baron Von Stiltz, and the bill of Mr. Polonius for the setting of the
diamond pin.  All these bills arrived in a week, as they have a knack of
doing; and fancy my astonishment in presenting them to Mrs. Hoggarty,
when she said, "Well, my dear, you are in the receipt of a very fine
income.  If you choose to order dresses and jewels from first-rate shops,
you must pay for them; and don't expect that _I_ am to abet your
extravagance, or give you a shilling more than the munificent sum I pay
you for board and lodging!"

How could I tell Mary of this behaviour of Mrs. Hoggarty, and Mary in
such a delicate condition?  And bad as matters were at home, I am sorry
to say at the office they began to look still worse.

Not only did Roundhand leave, but Highmore went away.  Abednego became
head clerk: and one day old Abednego came to the place and was shown into
the directors' private room; when he left it, he came trembling,
chattering, and cursing downstairs; and had begun, "Shentlemen--" a
speech to the very clerks in the office, when Mr. Brough, with an
imploring look, and crying out, "Stop till Saturday!" at length got him
into the street.

On Saturday Abednego junior left the office for ever, and I became head
clerk with 400_l_. a year salary.  It was a fatal week for the office,
too.  On Monday, when I arrived and took my seat at the head desk, and my
first read of the newspaper, as was my right, the first thing I read was,
"Frightful fire in Houndsditch!  Total destruction of Mr. Meshach's
sealing-wax manufactory and of Mr. Shadrach's clothing depot, adjoining.
In the former was 20,000_l_. worth of the finest Dutch wax, which the
voracious element attacked and devoured in a twinkling.  The latter
estimable gentleman had just completed forty thousand suits of clothes
for the cavalry of H.H. the Cacique of Poyais."

Both of these Jewish gents, who were connections of Mr. Abednego, were
insured in our office to the full amount of their loss.  The calamity was
attributed to the drunkenness of a scoundrelly Irish watchman, who was
employed on the premises, and who upset a bottle of whisky in the
warehouse of Messrs. Shadrach, and incautiously looked for the liquor
with a lighted candle.  The man was brought to our office by his
employers; and certainly, as we all could testify, was _even then_ in a
state of frightful intoxication.

As if this were not sufficient, in the obituary was announced the demise
of Alderman Pash--Alderman Cally-Pash we used to call him in our lighter
hours, knowing his propensity to green fat: but such a moment as this was
no time for joking!  He was insured by our house for 5,000_l_.  And now I
saw very well the truth of a remark of Gus's--viz., that life-assurance
companies go on excellently for a year or two after their establishment,
but that it is much more difficult to make them profitable when the
assured parties begin to die.

The Jewish fires were the heaviest blows we had had; for though the
Waddingley Cotton-mills had been burnt in 1822, at a loss to the Company
of 80,000_l_., and though the Patent Erostratus Match Manufactory had
exploded in the same year at a charge of 14,000_l_., there were those who
said that the loss had not been near so heavy as was supposed--nay, that
the Company had burnt the above-named establishments as advertisements
for themselves.  Of these facts I can't be positive, having never seen
the early accounts of the concern.

Contrary to the expectation of all us gents, who were ourselves as dismal
as mutes, Mr. Brough came to the office in his coach-and-four, laughing
and joking with a friend as he stepped out at the door.

"Gentlemen!" said he, "you have read the papers; they announce an event
which I most deeply deplore.  I mean the demise of the excellent Alderman
Pash, one of our constituents.  But if anything can console me for the
loss of that worthy man, it is to think that his children and widow will
receive, at eleven o'clock next Saturday, 5,000_l_. from my friend Mr.
Titmarsh, who is now head clerk here.  As for the accident which has
happened to Messrs. Shadrach and Meshach,--in _that_, at least, there is
nothing that can occasion any person sorrow.  On Saturday next, or as
soon as the particulars of their loss can be satisfactorily ascertained,
my friend Mr. Titmarsh will pay to them across the counter a sum of
forty, fifty, eighty, one hundred thousand pounds--according to the
amount of their loss.  _They_, at least, will be remunerated; and though
to our proprietors the outlay will no doubt be considerable, yet we can
afford it, gentlemen.  John Brough can afford it himself, for the matter
of that, and not be very much embarrassed; and we must learn to bear ill-
fortune as we have hitherto borne good, and show ourselves to be men
always!"

Mr. B. concluded with some allusions, which I confess I don't like to
give here; for to speak of Heaven in connection with common worldly
matters, has always appeared to me irreverent; and to bring it to bear
witness to the lie in his mouth, as a religious hypocrite does, is such a
frightful crime, that one should be careful even in alluding to it.

Mr. Brough's speech somehow found its way into the newspapers of that
very evening; nor can I think who gave a report of it, for none of our
gents left the office that day until the evening papers had appeared.  But
there was the speech--ay, and at the week's end, although Roundhand was
heard on 'Change that day declaring he would bet five to one that
Alderman Pash's money would never be paid,--at the week's end the money
was paid by me to Mrs. Pash's solicitor across the counter, and no doubt
Roundhand lost his money.

Shall I tell how the money was procured?  There can be no harm in
mentioning the matter now after twenty years' lapse of time; and
moreover, it is greatly to the credit of two individuals now dead.

As I was head clerk, I had occasion to be frequently in Brough's room,
and he now seemed once more disposed to take me into his confidence.

"Titmarsh my boy," said he one day to me, after looking me hard in the
face, "did you ever hear of the fate of the great Mr. Silberschmidt of
London?"  Of course I had.  Mr. Silberschmidt, the Rothschild of his day
(indeed I have heard the latter famous gent was originally a clerk in
Silberschmidt's house)--Silberschmidt, fancying he could not meet his
engagements, committed suicide; and had he lived till four o'clock that
day, would have known that he was worth 400,000_l_.  "To tell you frankly
the truth," says Mr. B., "I am in Silberschmidt's case.  My late partner,
Hoff, has given bills in the name of the firm to an enormous amount, and
I have been obliged to meet them.  I have been cast in fourteen actions,
brought by creditors of that infernal Ginger Beer Company; and all the
debts are put upon my shoulders, on account of my known wealth.  Now,
unless I have time, I cannot pay; and the long and short of the matter is
that if I cannot procure 5,000_l_. before Saturday, _our concern is
ruined_!"

"What! the West Diddlesex ruined?" says I, thinking of my poor mother's
annuity.  "Impossible! our business is splendid!"

"We must have 5,000_l_. on Saturday, and we are saved; and if you will,
as you can, get it for me, I will give you 10,000_l_. for the money!"

B. then showed me to a fraction the accounts of the concern, and his own
private account; proving beyond the possibility of a doubt, that with the
5,000_l_. our office must be set a-going; and without it, that the
concern must stop.  No matter how he proved the thing; but there is, you
know, a dictum of a statesman that, give him but leave to use figures,
and he will prove anything.

I promised to ask Mrs. Hoggarty once more for the money, and she seemed
not to be disinclined.  I told him so; and that day he called upon her,
his wife called upon her, his daughter called upon her, and once more the
Brough carriage-and-four was seen at our house.

But Mrs. Brough was a bad manager; and, instead of carrying matters with
a high hand, fairly burst into tears before Mrs. Hoggarty, and went down
on her knees and besought her to save dear John.  This at once aroused my
aunt's suspicions; and instead of lending the money, she wrote off to Mr.
Smithers instantly to come up to her, desired me to give her up the
3,000_l_. scrip shares that I possessed, called me an atrocious cheat and
heartless swindler, and vowed I had been the cause of her ruin.

How was Mr. Brough to get the money?  I will tell you.  Being in his room
one day, old Gates the Fulham porter came and brought him from Mr. Balls,
the pawnbroker, a sum of 1,200_l_.  Missus told him, he said, to carry
the plate to Mr. Balls; and having paid the money, old Gates fumbled a
great deal in his pockets, and at last pulled out a 5_l_. note, which he
said his daughter Jane had just sent him from service, and begged Mr. B.
would let him have another share in the Company.  "He was mortal sure it
would go right yet.  And when he heard master crying and cursing as he
and missus were walking in the shrubbery, and saying that for the want of
a few pounds--a few shillings--the finest fortune in Europe was to be
overthrown, why Gates and his woman thought that they should come
for'ard, to be sure, with all they could, to help the kindest master and
missus ever was."

This was the substance of Gates's speech; and Mr. Brough shook his hand
and--took the 5_l_.  "Gates," said he, "that 5_l_. note shall be the best
outlay you ever made in your life!" and I have no doubt it was,--but it
was in heaven that poor old Gates was to get the interest of his little
mite.

Nor was this the only instance.  Mrs. Brough's sister, Miss Dough, who
had been on bad terms with the Director almost ever since he had risen to
be a great man, came to the office with a power of attorney, and said,
"John, Isabella has been with me this morning, and says you want money,
and I have brought you my 4,000_l_.; it is all I have, John, and pray God
it may do you good--you and my dear sister, who was the best sister in
the world to me--till--till a little time ago."

And she laid down the paper: I was called up to witness it, and Brough,
with tears in his eyes, told me her words; for he could trust me, he
said.  And thus it was that I came to be present at Gates's interview
with his master, which took place only an hour afterwards.  Brave Mrs.
Brough! how she was working for her husband!  Good woman, and kind! but
_you_ had a true heart, and merited a better fate!  Though wherefore say
so?  The woman, to this day, thinks her husband an angel, and loves him a
thousand times better for his misfortunes.

On Saturday, Alderman Pash's solicitor was paid by me across the counter,
as I said.  "Never mind your aunt's money, Titmarsh my boy," said Brough:
"never mind her having resumed her shares.  You are a true honest fellow;
you have never abused me like that pack of curs downstairs, and I'll make
your fortune yet!"

* * * * *

The next week, as I was sitting with my wife, with Mr. Smithers, and with
Mrs. Hoggarty, taking our tea comfortably, a knock was heard at the door,
and a gentleman desired to speak to me in the parlour.  It was Mr.
Aminadab of Chancery Lane, who arrested me as a shareholder of the
Independent West Diddlesex Association, at the suit of Von Stiltz of
Clifford Street, tailor and draper.

I called down Smithers, and told him for Heaven's sake not to tell Mary.

"Where is Brough?" says Mr. Smithers.

"Why," says Mr. Aminadab, "he's once more of the firm of Brough and Off,
sir--he breakfasted at Calais this morning!"




CHAPTER XI


IN WHICH IT APPEARS THAT A MAN MAY POSSESS A DIAMOND AND YET BE VERY HARD
PRESSED FOR A DINNER

On that fatal Saturday evening, in a hackney-coach, fetched from the
Foundling, was I taken from my comfortable house and my dear little wife;
whom Mr. Smithers was left to console as he might.  He said that I was
compelled to take a journey upon business connected with the office; and
my poor Mary made up a little portmanteau of clothes, and tied a
comforter round my neck, and bade my companion particularly to keep the
coach windows shut: which injunction the grinning wretch promised to
obey.  Our journey was not long: it was only a shilling fare to Cursitor
Street, Chancery Lane, and there I was set down.

The house before which the coach stopped seemed to be only one of half-a-
dozen in that street which were used for the same purpose.  No man, be he
ever so rich, can pass by those dismal houses, I think, without a
shudder.  The front windows are barred, and on the dingy pillar of the
door was a shining brass-plate, setting forth that "Aminadab, Officer to
the Sheriff of Middlesex," lived therein.  A little red-haired Israelite
opened the first door as our coach drove up, and received me and my
baggage.

As soon as we entered the door, he barred it, and I found myself in the
face of another huge door, which was strongly locked; and, at last,
passing through that, we entered the lobby of the house.

There is no need to describe it.  It is very like ten thousand other
houses in our dark City of London.  There was a dirty passage and a dirty
stair, and from the passage two dirty doors let into two filthy rooms,
which had strong bars at the windows, and yet withal an air of horrible
finery that makes me uncomfortable to think of even yet.  On the walls
hung all sorts of trumpery pictures in tawdry frames (how different from
those capital performances of my cousin Michael Angelo!); on the
mantelpiece huge French clocks, vases, and candlesticks; on the
sideboards, enormous trays of Birmingham plated ware: for Mr. Aminadab
not only arrested those who could not pay money, but lent it to those who
could; and had already, in the way of trade, sold and bought these
articles many times over.

I agreed to take the back-parlour for the night, and while a Hebrew
damsel was arranging a little dusky sofa-bedstead (woe betide him who has
to sleep on it!) I was invited into the front parlour, where Mr.
Aminadab, bidding me take heart, told me I should have a dinner for
nothing with a party who had just arrived.  I did not want for dinner,
but I was glad not to be alone--not alone, even till Gus came; for whom I
despatched a messenger to his lodgings hard by.

I found there, in the front parlour, at eight o'clock in the evening,
four gentlemen, just about to sit down to dinner.  Surprising! there was
Mr. B., a gentleman of fashion, who had only within half-an-hour arrived
in a post-chaise with his companion, Mr. Lock, an officer of Horsham
gaol.  Mr. B. was arrested in this wise:--He was a careless good-humoured
gentleman, and had indorsed bills to a large amount for a friend; who, a
man of high family and unquestionable honour, had pledged the latter,
along with a number of the most solemn oaths, for the payment of the
bills in question.  Having indorsed the notes, young Mr. B., with a
proper thoughtlessness, forgot all about them, and so, by some chance,
did the friend whom he obliged; for, instead of being in London with the
money for the payment of his obligations, this latter gentleman was
travelling abroad, and never hinted one word to Mr. B. that the notes
would fall upon him.  The young gentleman was at Brighton lying sick of a
fever; was taken from his bed by a bailiff, and carried, on a rainy day,
to Horsham gaol; had a relapse of his complaint, and when sufficiently
recovered, was brought up to London to the house of Mr. Aminadab; where I
found him--a pale, thin, good-humoured, _lost_ young man: he was lying on
a sofa, and had given orders for the dinner to which I was invited.  The
lad's face gave one pain to look at; it was impossible not to see that
his hours were numbered.

Now Mr. B. has not anything to do with my humble story; but I can't help
mentioning him, as I saw him.  He sent for his lawyer and his doctor; the
former settled speedily his accounts with the bailiff, and the latter
arranged all his earthly accounts: for after he went from the spunging-
house he never recovered from the shock of the arrest, and in a few weeks
he _died_.  And though this circumstance took place many years ago, I
can't forget it to my dying day; and often see the author of Mr. B.'s
death,--a prosperous gentleman, riding a fine horse in the Park, lounging
at the window of a club; with many friends, no doubt, and a good
reputation.  I wonder whether the man sleeps easily and eats with a good
appetite?  I wonder whether he has paid Mr. B.'s heirs the sum which that
gentleman paid, and _died for_?

If Mr. B.'s history has nothing to do with mine, and is only inserted
here for the sake of a moral, what business have I to mention particulars
of the dinner to which I was treated by that gentleman, in the spunging-
house in Cursitor Street?  Why, for the moral too; and therefore the
public must be told of what really and truly that dinner consisted.

There were five guests, and three silver tureens of soup: viz.,
mock-turtle soup, ox-tail soup, and giblet soup.  Next came a great piece
of salmon, likewise on a silver dish, a roast goose, a roast saddle of
mutton, roast game, and all sorts of adjuncts.  In this way can a
gentleman live in a spunging-house if he be inclined; and over this
repast (which, in truth, I could not touch, for, let alone having dined,
my heart was full of care)--over this meal my friend Gus Hoskins found
me, when he received the letter that I had despatched to him.

Gus, who had never been in a prison before, and whose heart failed him as
the red-headed young Moses opened and shut for him the numerous iron
outer doors, was struck dumb to see me behind a bottle of claret, in a
room blazing with gilt lamps; the curtains were down too, and you could
not see the bars at the windows; and Mr. B., Mr. Lock the Brighton
officer, Mr. Aminadab, and another rich gentleman of his trade and
religious persuasion, were chirping as merrily, and looked as
respectably, as any noblemen in the land.

"Have him in," said Mr. B., "if he's a friend of Mr. Titmarsh's; for,
cuss me, I like to see a rogue: and run me through, Titmarsh, but I think
you are one of the best in London.  You beat Brough; you do, by Jove! for
he looks like a rogue--anybody would swear to him; but you! by Jove, you
look the very picture of honesty!"

"A deep file," said Aminadab, winking and pointing me out to his friend
Mr. Jehoshaphat.

"A good one," says Jehoshaphat.

"In for three hundred thousand pound," says Aminadab: "Brough's right-
hand man, and only three-and-twenty."

"Mr. Titmarsh, sir, your 'ealth, sir," says Mr. Lock, in an ecstasy of
admiration.  "Your very good 'earth, sir, and better luck to you next
time."

"Pooh, pooh! _he's_ all right," says Aminadab; "let _him_ alone."

"In for _what_?" shouted I, quite amazed.  "Why, sir, you arrested me for
90_l_."

"Yes, but you are in for half a million,--you know you are.  _Them_ debts
I don't count--them paltry tradesmen's accounts.  I mean Brough's
business.  It's an ugly one; but you'll get through it.  We all know you;
and I lay my life that when you come through the court, Mrs. Titmarsh has
got a handsome thing laid by."

"Mrs. Titmarsh has a small property," says I.  "What then?"

The three gentlemen burst into a loud laugh, said I was a "rum chap"--a
"downy cove," and made other remarks which I could not understand then;
but the meaning of which I have since comprehended, for they took me to
be a great rascal, I am sorry to say, and supposed that I had robbed the
I. W. D. Association, and, in order to make my money secure, settled it
on my wife.

It was in the midst of this conversation that, as I said, Gus came in;
and whew! when he saw what was going on, he gave _such_ a whistle!

"Herr von Joel, by Jove!" says Aminadab.  At which all laughed.

"Sit down," says Mr. B.,--"sit down, and wet your whistle, my piper!  I
say, egad! you're the piper that played before Moses!  Had you there,
Dab.  Dab, get a fresh bottle of Burgundy for Mr. Hoskins."  And before
he knew where he was, there was Gus for the first time in his life
drinking Clos-Vougeot.  Gus said he had never tasted Bergamy before, at
which the bailiff sneered, and told him the name of the wine.

"_Old Clo_!  What?" says Gus; and we laughed: but the Hebrew gents did
not this time.

"Come, come, sir!" says Mr. Aminadab's friend, "ve're all shentlemen
here, and shentlemen never makish reflexunsh upon other gentlemen'sh
pershuashunsh."

After this feast was concluded, Gus and I retired to my room to consult
about my affairs.  With regard to the responsibility incurred as a
shareholder in the West Diddlesex, I was not uneasy; for though the
matter might cause me a little trouble at first, I knew I was not a
shareholder; that the shares were scrip shares, making the dividend
payable to the bearer; and my aunt had called back her shares, and
consequently I was free.  But it was very unpleasant to me to consider
that I was in debt nearly a hundred pounds to tradesmen, chiefly of Mrs.
Hoggarty's recommendation; and as she had promised to be answerable for
their bills, I determined to send her a letter reminding her of her
promise, and begging her at the same time to relieve me from Mr. Von
Stiltz's debt, for which I was arrested: and which was incurred not
certainly at her desire, but at Mr. Brough's; and would never have been
incurred by me but at the absolute demand of that gentleman.

I wrote to her, therefore, begging her to pay all these debts, and
promised myself on Monday morning again to be with my dear wife.  Gus
carried off the letter, and promised to deliver it in Bernhard Street
after church-time; taking care that Mary should know nothing at all of
the painful situation in which I was placed.  It was near midnight when
we parted, and I tried to sleep as well as I could in the dirty little
sofa-bedstead of Mr. Aminadab's back-parlour.

That morning was fine and sunshiny, and I heard all the bells ringing
cheerfully for church, and longed to be walking to the Foundling with my
wife: but there were the three iron doors between me and liberty, and I
had nothing for it but to read my prayers in my own room, and walk up and
down afterwards in the court at the back of the house.  Would you believe
it?  This very court was like a cage! Great iron bars covered it in from
one end to another; and here it was that Mr. Aminadab's gaol-birds took
the air.

They had seen me reading out of the prayer-book at the back-parlour
window, and all burst into a yell of laughter when I came to walk in the
cage.  One of them shouted out "Amen!" when I appeared; another called me
a muff (which means, in the slang language, a very silly fellow); a third
wondered that I took to my prayer-book _yet_.

"When do you mean, sir?" says I to the fellow--a rough man, a
horse-dealer.

"Why, when you are going _to be hanged_, you young hypocrite!" says the
man.  "But that is always the way with Brough's people," continued he.  "I
had four greys once for him--a great bargain, but he would not go to look
at them at Tattersall's, nor speak a word of business about them, because
it was a Sunday."

"Because there are hypocrites," sir, says I, "religion is not to be
considered a bad thing; and if Mr. Brough would not deal with you on a
Sunday, he certainly did his duty."

The men only laughed the more at this rebuke, and evidently considered me
a great criminal.  I was glad to be released from their society by the
appearance of Gus and Mr. Smithers.  Both wore very long faces.  They
were ushered into my room, and, without any orders of mine, a bottle of
wine and biscuits were brought in by Mr. Aminadab; which I really thought
was very kind of him.

"Drink a glass of wine, Mr. Titmarsh," says Smithers, "and read this
letter.  A pretty note was that which you sent to your aunt this morning,
and here you have an answer to it."

I drank the wine, and trembled rather as I read as follows:--

   "Sir,--If, because you knew I had desined to leave you my proparty,
   you wished to murdar me, and so stepp into it, you are dissapointed.
   Your _villiany_ and _ingratitude would_ have murdard me, had I not, by
   Heaven's grace, been inabled to look for consalation _elsewhere_.

   "For nearly a year I have been a _martar_ to you.  I gave up
   everything,--my happy home in the country, where all respected the
   name of Hoggarty; my valuble furnitur and wines; my plate, glass, and
   crockry; I brought all--all to make your home happy and rispectable.  I
   put up with the _airs and impertanencies_ of Mrs. Titmarsh; I loaded
   her and you with presents and bennafits.  I sacrafised myself; I gave
   up the best sociaty in the land, to witch I have been accustomed, in
   order to be a gardian and compannion to you, and prevent, if possible,
   that _waist and ixtravygance_ which I _prophycied_ would be your ruin.
   Such waist and ixtravygance never, never, never did I see.  Buttar
   waisted as if it had been dirt, coles flung away, candles burnt _at
   both ends_, tea and meat the same.  The butcher's bill in this house
   was enough to support six famalies.

   "And now you have the audassaty, being placed in prison justly for
   your crimes,--for cheating me of 3,000_l_., for robbing your mother of
   an insignificient summ, which to her, poor thing, was everything
   (though she will not feel her loss as I do, being all her life next
   door to a beggar), for incurring detts which you cannot pay, wherein
   you knew that your miserable income was quite unable to support your
   ixtravygance--you come upon me to pay your detts!  No, sir, it is
   quite enough that your mother should go on the parish, and that your
   wife should sweep the streets, to which you have indeed brought them;
   _I_, at least, though cheated by you of a large summ, and obliged to
   pass my days in comparative ruin, can retire, and have some of the
   comforts to which my rank entitles me.  The furnitur in this house is
   mine; and as I presume you intend _your lady_ to sleep in the streets,
   I give you warning that I shall remove it all tomorrow.

   "Mr. Smithers will tell you that I had intended to leave you my intire
   fortune.  I have this morning, in his presents, solamly toar up my
   will; and hereby renounce all connection with you and your beggarly
   family.

   "SUSAN HOGGARTY.

   "P.S.--I took a viper into my bosom, _and it stung me_."

I confess that, on the first reading of this letter, I was in such a fury
that I forgot almost the painful situation in which it plunged me, and
the ruin hanging over me.

"What a fool you were, Titmarsh, to write that letter!" said Mr.
Smithers.  "You have cut your own throat, sir,--lost a fine
property,--written yourself out of five hundred a year.  Mrs. Hoggarty,
my client, brought the will, as she says, downstairs, and flung it into
the fire before our faces."

"It's a blessing that your wife was from home," added Gus.  "She went to
church this morning with Dr. Salt's family, and sent word that she would
spend the day with them.  She was always glad to be away from Mrs. H.,
you know."

"She never knew on which side her bread was buttered," said Mr. Smithers.
"You should have taken the lady when she was in the humour, sir, and have
borrowed the money elsewhere.  Why, sir, I had almost reconciled her to
her loss in that cursed Company.  I showed her how I had saved out of
Brough's claws the whole of her remaining fortune; which he would have
devoured in a day, the scoundrel!  And if you would have left the matter
to me, Mr. Titmarsh, I would have had you reconciled completely to Mrs.
Hoggarty; I would have removed all your difficulties; I would have lent
you the pitiful sum of money myself."

"Will you?" says Gus; "that's a trump!" and he seized Smithers's hand,
and squeezed it so that the tears came into the attorney's eyes.

"Generous fellow!" said I; "lend me money, when you know what a situation
I am in, and not able to pay!"

"Ay, my good sir, there's the rub!" says Mr. Smithers.  "I said I _would_
have lent the money; and so to the acknowledged heir of Mrs. Hoggarty I
would--would at this moment; for nothing delights the heart of Bob
Smithers more than to do a kindness.  I would have rejoiced in doing it;
and a mere acknowledgment from that respected lady would have amply
sufficed.  But now, sir, the case is altered,--you have no security to
offer, as you justly observe."

"Not a whit, certainly."

"And without security, sir, of course can expect no money--of course not.
You are a man of the world, Mr. Titmarsh, and I see our notions exactly
agree."

"There's his wife's property," says Gus.

"Wife's property?  Bah!  Mrs. Sam Titmarsh is a minor, and can't touch a
shilling of it.  No, no, no meddling with minors for me!  But stop!--your
mother has a house and shop in our village.  Get me a mortgage of that--"

"I'll do no such thing, sir," says I.  "My mother has suffered quite
enough on my score already, and has my sisters to provide for; and I will
thank you, Mr. Smithers, not to breathe a syllable to her regarding my
present situation."

"You speak like a man of honour, sir," says Mr. Smithers, "and I will
obey your injunctions to the letter.  I will do more, sir.  I will
introduce you to a respectable firm here, my worthy friends, Messrs.
Higgs, Biggs, and Blatherwick, who will do everything in their power to
serve you.  And so, sir, I wish you a very good morning."

And with this Mr. Smithers took his hat and left the room; and after a
further consultation with my aunt, as I heard afterwards, quitted London
that evening by the mail.

I sent my faithful Gus off once more to break the matter gently to my
wife, fearing lest Mrs. Hoggarty should speak of it abruptly to her; as I
knew in her anger she would do.  But he came in an hour panting back, to
say that Mrs. H. had packed and locked her trunks, and had gone off in a
hackney-coach.  So, knowing that my poor Mary was not to return till
night, Hoskins remained with me till then; and, after a dismal day, left
me once more at nine, to carry the dismal tidings to her.

At ten o'clock on that night there was a great rattling and ringing at
the outer door, and presently my poor girl fell into my arms; and Gus
Hoskins sat blubbering in a corner, as I tried my best to console her.

* * * * *

The next morning I was favoured with a visit from Mr. Blatherwick; who,
hearing from me that I had only three guineas in my pocket, told me very
plainly that lawyers only lived by fees.  He recommended me to quit
Cursitor Street, as living there was very expensive.  And as I was
sitting very sad, my wife made her appearance (it was with great
difficulty that she could be brought to leave me the night previous)--

"The horrible men came at four this morning," said she; "four hours
before light."

"What horrible men?" says I.

"Your aunt's men," said she, "to remove the furniture they had it all
packed before I came away.  And I let them carry all," said she; "I was
too sad to look what was ours and what was not.  That odious Mr. Wapshot
was with them; and I left him seeing the last waggon-load from the door.
I have only brought away your clothes," added she, "and a few of mine;
and some of the books you used to like to read; and some--some things I
have been getting for the--for the baby.  The servants' wages were paid
up to Christmas; and I paid them the rest.  And see! just as I was going
away, the post came, and brought to me my half-year's income--35_l_.,
dear Sam.  Isn't it a blessing?"

"Will you pay my bill, Mr. What-d'ye-call-'im?" here cried Mr. Aminadab,
flinging open the door (he had been consulting with Mr. Blatherwick, I
suppose).  "I want the room for _a gentleman_.  I guess it's too dear for
the like of you."  And here--will you believe it?--the man handed me a
bill of three guineas for two days' board and lodging in his odious
house.

* * * * *

There was a crowd of idlers round the door as I passed out of it, and had
I been alone I should have been ashamed of seeing them; but, as it was, I
was only thinking of my dear dear wife, who was leaning trustfully on my
arm, and smiling like heaven into my face--ay, and _took_ heaven, too,
into the Fleet prison with me--or an angel out of heaven.  Ah! I had
loved her before, and happy it is to love when one is hopeful and young
in the midst of smiles and sunshine; but be _un_happy, and then see what
it is to be loved by a good woman!  I declare before Heaven, that of all
the joys and happy moments it has given me, that was the crowning
one--that little ride, with my wife's cheek on my shoulder, down Holborn
to the prison!  Do you think I cared for the bailiff that sat opposite?
No, by the Lord!  I kissed her, and hugged her--yes, and cried with her
likewise.  But before our ride was over her eyes dried up, and she
stepped blushing and happy out of the coach at the prison door, as if she
were a princess going to the Queen's Drawing-room.




CHAPTER XII


IN WHICH THE HERO'S AUNT'S DIAMOND MAKES ACQUAINTANCE WITH THE HERO'S
UNCLE

The failure of the great Diddlesex Association speedily became the theme
of all the newspapers, and every person concerned in it was soon held up
to public abhorrence as a rascal and a swindler.  It was said that Brough
had gone off with a million of money.  Even it was hinted that poor I had
sent a hundred thousand pounds to America, and only waited to pass
through the court in order to be a rich man for the rest of my days.  This
opinion had some supporters in the prison; where, strange to say, it
procured me consideration--of which, as may be supposed, I was little
inclined to avail myself.  Mr. Aminadab, however, in his frequent visits
to the Fleet, persisted in saying that I was a poor-spirited creature, a
mere tool in Brough's hands, and had not saved a shilling.  Opinions,
however, differed; and I believe it was considered by the turnkeys that I
was a fellow of exquisite dissimulation, who had put on the appearance of
poverty in order more effectually to mislead the public.

Messrs. Abednego and Son were similarly held up to public odium: and, in
fact, what were the exact dealings of these gentlemen with Mr. Brough I
have never been able to learn.  It was proved by the books that large
sums of money had been paid to Mr. Abednego by the Company; but he
produced documents signed by Mr. Brough, which made the latter and the
West Diddlesex Association his debtors to a still further amount.  On the
day I went to the Bankruptcy Court to be examined, Mr. Abednego and the
two gentlemen from Houndsditch were present to swear to their debts, and
made a sad noise, and uttered a vast number of oaths in attestation of
their claim.  But Messrs. Jackson and Paxton produced against them that
very Irish porter who was said to have been the cause of the fire, and, I
am told, hinted that they had matter for hanging the Jewish gents if they
persisted in their demand.  On this they disappeared altogether, and no
more was ever heard of their losses.  I am inclined to believe that our
Director had had money from Abednego--had given him shares as bonus and
security--had been suddenly obliged to redeem these shares with ready
money; and so had precipitated the ruin of himself and the concern.  It
is needless to say here in what a multiplicity of companies Brough was
engaged.  That in which poor Mr. Tidd invested his money did not pay
2_d_. in the pound; and that was the largest dividend paid by any of
them.

As for ours--ah! there was a pretty scene as I was brought from the Fleet
to the Bankruptcy Court, to give my testimony as late head clerk and
accountant of the West Diddlesex Association.

My poor wife, then very near her time, insisted upon accompanying me to
Basinghall Street; and so did my friend Gus Hoskins, that true and honest
fellow.  If you had seen the crowd that was assembled, and the hubbub
that was made as I was brought up!

"Mr. Titmarsh," says the Commissioner as I came to the table, with a
peculiar sarcastic accent on the Tit--"Mr. Titmarsh, you were the
confidant of Mr. Brough, the principal clerk of Mr. Brough, and a
considerable shareholder in the Company?"

"Only a nominal one, sir," said I.

"Of course, only nominal," continued the Commissioner, turning to his
colleague with a sneer; "and a great comfort it must be to you, sir, to
think that you had a share in all the plun--the profits of the
speculation, and now can free yourself from the losses, by saying you are
only a nominal shareholder."

"The infernal villain!" shouted out a voice from the crowd.  It was that
of the furious half-pay captain and late shareholder, Captain Sparr.

"Silence in the court there!" the Commissioner continued: and all this
while Mary was anxiously looking in his face, and then in mine, as pale
as death; while Gus, on the contrary, was as red as vermilion.  "Mr.
Titmarsh, I have had the good fortune to see a list of your debts from
the Insolvent Court, and find that you are indebted to Mr. Stiltz, the
great tailor, in a handsome sum; to Mr. Polonius, the celebrated
jeweller, likewise; to fashionable milliners and dressmakers,
moreover;--and all this upon a salary of 200_l_. per annum.  For so young
a gentleman it must be confessed you have employed your time well."

"Has this anything to do with the question, sir?" says I.  "Am I here to
give an account of my private debts, or to speak as to what I know
regarding the affairs of the Company?  As for my share in it, I have a
mother, sir, and many sisters--"

"The d-d scoundrel!" shouts the Captain.

"Silence that there fellow!" shouts Gus, as bold as brass; at which the
court burst out laughing, and this gave me courage to proceed.

"My mother, sir, four years since, having a legacy of 400_l_. left to
her, advised with her solicitor, Mr. Smithers, how she should dispose of
this sum; and as the Independent West Diddlesex was just then
established, the money was placed in an annuity in that office, where I
procured a clerkship.  You may suppose me a very hardened criminal,
because I have ordered clothes of Mr. Von Stiltz; but you will hardly
fancy that I, a lad of nineteen, knew anything of the concerns of the
Company into whose service I entered as twentieth clerk, my own mother's
money paying, as it were, for my place.  Well, sir, the interest offered
by the Company was so tempting, that a rich relative of mine was induced
to purchase a number of shares."

"Who induced your relative, if I may make so bold as to inquire?"

"I can't help owning, sir," says I, blushing, "that I wrote a letter
myself.  But consider, my relative was sixty years old, and I was twenty-
one.  My relative took several months to consider, and had the advice of
her lawyers before she acceded to my request.  And I made it at the
instigation of Mr. Brough, who dictated the letter which I wrote, and who
I really thought then was as rich as Mr. Rothschild himself."

"Your friend placed her money in your name; and you, if I mistake not,
Mr. Titmarsh, were suddenly placed over the heads of twelve of your
fellow-clerks as a reward for your service in obtaining it?"

"It is very true, sir,"--and, as I confessed it, poor Mary began to wipe
her eyes, and Gus's ears (I could not see his face) looked like two red-
hot muffins--"it's quite true, sir; and, as matters have turned out, I am
heartily sorry for what I did.  But at the time I thought I could serve
my aunt as well as myself; and you must remember, then, how high our
shares were."

"Well, sir, having procured this sum of money, you were straightway taken
into Mr. Brough's confidence.  You were received into his house, and from
third clerk speedily became head clerk; in which post you were found at
the disappearance of your worthy patron!"

"Sir, you have no right to question me, to be sure; but here are a
hundred of our shareholders, and I'm not unwilling to make a clean breast
of it," said I, pressing Mary's hand.  "I certainly was the head clerk.
And why?  Because the other gents left the office.  I certainly was
received into Mr. Brough's house.  And why?  Because, sir, my aunt _had
more money to lay out_.  I see it all clearly now, though I could not
understand it then; and the proof that Mr. Brough wanted my aunt's money,
and not me, is that, when she came to town, our Director carried her by
force out of my house to Fulham, and never so much as thought of asking
me or my wife thither.  Ay, sir, and he would have had her remaining
money, had not her lawyer from the country prevented her disposing of it.
Before the concern finally broke, and as soon as she heard there was
doubt concerning it, she took back her shares--scrip shares they were,
sir, as you know--and has disposed of them as she thought fit.  Here,
sir, and gents," says I, "you have the whole of the history as far as
regards me.  In order to get her only son a means of livelihood, my
mother placed her little money with the Company--it is lost.  My aunt
invested larger sums with it, which were to have been mine one day, and
they are lost too; and here am I, at the end of four years, a disgraced
and ruined man.  Is there anyone present, however much he has suffered by
the failure of the Company, that has had worse fortune through it than
I?"

"Mr. Titmarsh," says Mr. Commissioner, in a much more friendly way, and
at the same time casting a glance at a newspaper reporter that was
sitting hard by, "your story is not likely to get into the newspapers;
for, as you say, it is a private affair, which you had no need to speak
of unless you thought proper, and may be considered as a confidential
conversation between us and the other gentlemen here.  But if it _could_
be made public, it might do some good, and warn people, if they _will_ be
warned, against the folly of such enterprises as that in which you have
been engaged.  It is quite clear from your story, that you have been
deceived as grossly as anyone of the persons present.  But look you, sir,
if you had not been so eager after gain, I think you would not have
allowed yourself to be deceived, and would have kept your relative's
money, and inherited it, according to your story, one day or other.
Directly people expect to make a large interest, their judgment seems to
desert them; and because they wish for profit, they think they are sure
of it, and disregard all warnings and all prudence.  Besides the hundreds
of honest families who have been ruined by merely placing confidence in
this Association of yours, and who deserve the heartiest pity, there are
hundreds more who have embarked in it, like yourself, not for investment,
but for speculation; and these, upon my word, deserve the fate they have
met with.  As long as dividends are paid, no questions are asked; and Mr.
Brough might have taken the money for his shareholders on the high-road,
and they would have pocketed it, and not been too curious.  But what's
the use of talking?" says Mr. Commissioner, in a passion: "here is one
rogue detected, and a thousand dupes made; and if another swindler starts
to-morrow, there will be a thousand more of his victims round this table
a year hence; and so, I suppose, to the end.  And now let's go to
business, gentlemen, and excuse this sermon."

After giving an account of all I knew, which was very little, other gents
who were employed in the concern were examined; and I went back to
prison, with my poor little wife on my arm.  We had to pass through the
crowd in the rooms, and my heart bled as I saw, amongst a score of
others, poor Gates, Brough's porter, who had advanced every shilling to
his master, and was now, with ten children, houseless and penniless in
his old age.  Captain Sparr was in this neighbourhood, but by no means so
friendly disposed; for while Gates touched his hat, as if I had been a
lord, the little Captain came forward threatening with his bamboo-cane
and swearing with great oaths that I was an accomplice of Brough.  "Curse
you for a smooth-faced scoundrel!" says he.  "What business have you to
ruin an English gentleman, as you have me?"  And again he advanced with
his stick.  But this time, officer as he was, Gus took him by the collar,
and shoved him back, and said, "Look at the lady, you brute, and hold
your tongue!"  And when he looked at my wife's situation, Captain Sparr
became redder for shame than he had before been for anger.  "I'm sorry
she's married to such a good-for-nothing," muttered he, and fell back;
and my poor wife and I walked out of the court, and back to our dismal
room in the prison.

It was a hard place for a gentle creature like her to be confined in; and
I longed to have some of my relatives with her when her time should come.
But her grandmother could not leave the old lieutenant; and my mother had
written to say that, as Mrs. Hoggarty was with us, she was quite as well
at home with her children.  "What a blessing it is for you, under your
misfortunes," continued the good soul, "to have the generous purse of
your aunt for succour!"  Generous purse of my aunt, indeed!  Where could
Mrs. Hoggarty be?  It was evident that she had not written to any of her
friends in the country, nor gone thither, as she threatened.

But as my mother had already lost so much money through my unfortunate
luck, and as she had enough to do with her little pittance to keep my
sisters at home; and as, on hearing of my condition, she would infallibly
have sold her last gown to bring me aid, Mary and I agreed that we would
not let her know what our real condition was--bad enough! Heaven knows,
and sad and cheerless.  Old Lieutenant Smith had likewise nothing but his
half-pay and his rheumatism; so we were, in fact, quite friendless.

That period of my life, and that horrible prison, seem to me like
recollections of some fever.  What an awful place!--not for the sadness,
strangely enough, as I thought, but for the gaiety of it; for the long
prison galleries were, I remember, full of life and a sort of grave
bustle.  All day and all night doors were clapping to and fro; and you
heard loud voices, oaths, footsteps, and laughter.  Next door to our room
was one where a man sold gin, under the name of _tape_; and here, from
morning till night, the people kept up a horrible revelry;--and sang--sad
songs some of them: but my dear little girl was, thank God! unable to
understand the most part of their ribaldry.  She never used to go out
till nightfall; and all day she sat working at a little store of caps and
dresses for the expected stranger--and not, she says to this day,
unhappy.  But the confinement sickened her, who had been used to happy
country air, and she grew daily paler and paler.

The Fives Court was opposite our window; and here I used, very
unwillingly at first, but afterwards, I do confess, with much eagerness,
to take a couple of hours' daily sport.  Ah! it was a strange place.
There was an aristocracy there as elsewhere,--amongst other gents, a son
of my Lord Deuce-ace; and many of the men in the prison were as eager to
walk with him, and talked of his family as knowingly, as if they were
Bond Street bucks.  Poor Tidd, especially, was one of these.  Of all his
fortune he had nothing left but a dressing-case and a flowered dressing-
gown; and to these possessions he added a fine pair of moustaches, with
which the poor creature strutted about; and though cursing his ill
fortune, was, I do believe, as happy whenever his friends brought him a
guinea, as he had been during his brief career as a gentleman on town.  I
have seen sauntering dandies in watering-places ogling the women,
watching eagerly for steamboats and stage-coaches as if their lives
depended upon them, and strutting all day in jackets up and down the
public walks.  Well, there are such fellows in prison: quite as dandified
and foolish, only a little more shabby--dandies with dirty beards and
holes at their elbows.

I did not go near what is called the poor side of the prison--I _dared_
not, that was the fact.  But our little stock of money was running low;
and my heart sickened to think what might be my dear wife's fate, and on
what sort of a couch our child might be born.  But Heaven spared me that
pang,--Heaven, and my dear good friend, Gus Hoskins.

The attorneys to whom Mr. Smithers recommended me, told me that I could
get leave to live in the rules of the Fleet, could I procure sureties to
the marshal of the prison for the amount of the detainer lodged against
me; but though I looked Mr. Blatherwick hard in the face, he never
offered to give the bail for me, and I knew no housekeeper in London who
would procure it.  There was, however, one whom I did not know,--and that
was old Mr. Hoskins, the leatherseller of Skinner Street, a kind fat
gentleman, who brought his fat wife to see Mrs. Titmarsh; and though the
lady gave herself rather patronising airs (her husband being free of the
Skinners' Company, and bidding fair to be Alderman, nay, Lord Mayor of
the first city in the world), she seemed heartily to sympathise with us;
and her husband stirred and bustled about until the requisite leave was
obtained, and I was allowed comparative liberty.

As for lodgings, they were soon had.  My old landlady, Mrs. Stokes, sent
her Jemima to say that her first floor was at our service; and when we
had taken possession of it, and I offered at the end of the week to pay
her bill, the good soul, with tears in her eyes, told me that she did not
want for money now, and that she knew I had enough to do with what I had.
I did not refuse her kindness; for, indeed, I had but five guineas left,
and ought not by rights to have thought of such expensive apartments as
hers; but my wife's time was very near, and I could not bear to think
that she should want for any comfort in her lying-in.

The admirable woman, with whom the Misses Hoskins came every day to keep
company--and very nice, kind ladies they are--recovered her health a good
deal, now she was out of the odious prison and was enabled to take
exercise.  How gaily did we pace up and down Bridge Street and Chatham
Place, to be sure! and yet, in truth, I was a beggar, and felt sometimes
ashamed of being so happy.

With regard to the liabilities of the Company my mind was now made quite
easy; for the creditors could only come upon our directors, and these it
was rather difficult to find.  Mr. Brough was across the water; and I
must say, to the credit of that gentleman, that while everybody thought
he had run away with hundreds of thousands of pounds, he was in a garret
at Boulogne, with scarce a shilling in his pocket, and his fortune to
make afresh.  Mrs. Brough, like a good brave woman, remained faithful to
him, and only left Fulham with the gown on her back; and Miss Belinda,
though grumbling and sadly out of temper, was no better off.  For the
other directors,--when they came to inquire at Edinburgh for Mr. Mull, W.
S., it appeared there _was_ a gentleman of that name, who had practised
in Edinburgh with good reputation until 1800, since when he had retired
to the Isle of Skye; and on being applied to, knew no more of the West
Diddlesex Association than Queen Anne did.  General Sir Dionysius
O'Halloran had abruptly quitted Dublin, and returned to the republic of
Guatemala.  Mr. Shirk went into the _Gazette_.  Mr. Macraw, M.P. and
King's Counsel, had not a single guinea in the world but what he received
for attending our board; and the only man seizable was Mr. Manstraw, a
wealthy navy contractor, as we understood, at Chatham.  He turned out to
be a small dealer in marine stores, and his whole stock in trade was not
worth 10_l_.  Mr. Abednego was the other director, and we have already
seen what became of _him_.

"Why, as there is no danger from the West Diddlesex," suggested Mr.
Hoskins, senior, "should you not now endeavour to make an arrangement
with your creditors; and who can make a better bargain with them than
pretty Mrs. Titmarsh here, whose sweet eyes would soften the
hardest-hearted tailor or milliner that ever lived?"

Accordingly my dear girl, one bright day in February, shook me by the
hand, and bidding me be of good cheer, set forth with Gus in a coach, to
pay a visit to those persons.  Little did I think a year before, that the
daughter of the gallant Smith should ever be compelled to be a suppliant
to tailors and haberdashers; but _she_, Heaven bless her! felt none of
the shame which oppressed me--or _said_ she felt none--and went away,
nothing doubting, on her errand.

In the evening she came back, and my heart thumped to know the news.  I
saw it was bad by her face.  For some time she did not speak, but looked
as pale as death, and wept as she kissed me.  "_You_ speak, Mr.
Augustus," at last said she, sobbing; and so Gus told me the
circumstances of that dismal day.

"What do you think, Sam?" says he; "that infernal aunt of yours, at whose
command you had the things, has written to the tradesmen to say that you
are a swindler and impostor; that you give out that _she_ ordered the
goods; that she is ready to drop down dead, and to take her bible-oath
she never did any such thing, and that they must look to you alone for
payment.  Not one of them would hear of letting you out; and as for
Mantalini, the scoundrel was so insolent that I gave him a box on the
ear, and would have half-killed him, only poor Mary--Mrs. Titmarsh I
mean--screamed and fainted: and I brought her away, and here she is, as
ill as can be."

That night, the indefatigable Gus was obliged to run post-haste for
Doctor Salts, and next morning a little boy was born.  I did not know
whether to be sad or happy, as they showed me the little weakly thing;
but Mary was the happiest woman, she declared, in the world, and forgot
all her sorrows in nursing the poor baby; she went bravely through her
time, and vowed that it was the loveliest child in the world; and that
though Lady Tiptoff, whose confinement we read of as having taken place
the same day, might have a silk bed and a fine house in Grosvenor Square,
she never never could have such a beautiful child as our dear little Gus:
for after whom should we have named the boy, if not after our good kind
friend?  We had a little party at the christening, and I assure you were
very merry over our tea.

The mother, thank Heaven! was very well, and it did one's heart good to
see her in that attitude in which I think every woman, be she ever so
plain, looks beautiful--with her baby at her bosom.  The child was
sickly, but she did not see it; we were very poor, but what cared she?
She had no leisure to be sorrowful as I was: I had my last guinea now in
my pocket; and when _that_ was gone--ah! my heart sickened to think of
what was to come, and I prayed for strength and guidance, and in the
midst of my perplexities felt yet thankful that the danger of the
confinement was over; and that for the worst fortune which was to befall
us, my dear wife was at least prepared, and strong in health.

I told Mrs. Stokes that she must let us have a cheaper room--a garret
that should cost but a few shillings; and though the good woman bade me
remain in the apartments we occupied, yet, now that my wife was well, I
felt it would be a crime to deprive my kind landlady of her chief means
of livelihood; and at length she promised to get me a garret as I wanted,
and to make it as comfortable as might be; and little Jemima declared
that she would be glad beyond measure to wait on the mother and the
child.

The room, then, was made ready; and though I took some pains not to speak
of the arrangement too suddenly to Mary, yet there was no need of
disguise or hesitation; for when at last I told her--"Is that all?" said
she, and took my hand with one of her blessed smiles, and vowed that she
and Jemima would keep the room as pretty and neat as possible.  "And I
will cook your dinners," added she; "for you know you said I make the
best roly-poly puddings in the world."  God bless her!  I do think some
women almost love poverty: but I did not tell Mary how poor I was, nor
had she any idea how lawyers', and prison's, and doctors' fees had
diminished the sum of money which she brought me when we came to the
Fleet.

It was not, however, destined that she and her child should inhabit that
little garret.  We were to leave our lodgings on Monday morning; but on
Saturday evening the child was seized with convulsions, and all Sunday
the mother watched and prayed for it: but it pleased God to take the
innocent infant from us, and on Sunday, at midnight, it lay a corpse in
its mother's bosom.  Amen.  We have other children, happy and well, now
round about us, and from the father's heart the memory of this little
thing has almost faded; but I do believe that every day of her life the
mother thinks of the firstborn that was with her for so short a while:
many and many a time has she taken her daughters to the grave, in Saint
Bride's, where he lies buried; and she wears still at her neck a little
little lock of gold hair, which she took from the head of the infant as
he lay smiling in his coffin.  It has happened to me to forget the
child's birthday, but to her never; and often in the midst of common talk
comes something that shows she is thinking of the child still,--some
simple allusion that is to me inexpressibly affecting.

I shall not try to describe her grief, for such things are sacred and
secret; and a man has no business to place them on paper for all the
world to read.  Nor should I have mentioned the child's loss at all, but
that even that loss was the means of a great worldly blessing to us; as
my wife has often with tears and thanks acknowledged.

While my wife was weeping over her child, I am ashamed to say I was
distracted with other feelings besides those of grief for its loss; and I
have often since thought what a master--nay, destroyer--of the affections
want is, and have learned from experience to be thankful for _daily
bread_.  That acknowledgment of weakness which we make in imploring to be
relieved from hunger and from temptation, is surely wisely put in our
daily prayer.  Think of it you who are rich, and take heed how you turn a
beggar away.

The child lay there in its wicker cradle, with its sweet fixed smile in
its face (I think the angels in heaven must have been glad to welcome
that pretty innocent smile); and it was only the next day, after my wife
had gone to lie down, and I sat keeping watch by it, that I remembered
the condition of its parents, and thought, I can't tell with what a pang,
that I had not money left to bury the little thing, and wept bitter tears
of despair.  Now, at last, I thought I must apply to my poor mother, for
this was a sacred necessity; and I took paper, and wrote her a letter at
the baby's side, and told her of our condition.  But, thank Heaven!  I
never sent the letter; for as I went to the desk to get sealing-wax and
seal that dismal letter, my eyes fell upon the diamond pin that I had
quite forgotten, and that was lying in the drawer of the desk.

I looked into the bedroom,--my poor wife was asleep; she had been
watching for three nights and days, and had fallen asleep from sheer
fatigue; and I ran out to a pawnbroker's with the diamond, and received
seven guineas for it, and coming back put the money into the landlady's
hand, and told her to get what was needful.  My wife was still asleep
when I came back; and when she woke, we persuaded her to go downstairs to
the landlady's parlour; and meanwhile the necessary preparations were
made, and the poor child consigned to its coffin.

The next day, after all was over, Mrs. Stokes gave me back three out of
the seven guineas; and then I could not help sobbing out to her my doubts
and wretchedness, telling her that this was the last money I had; and
when that was gone I knew not what was to become of the best wife that
ever a man was blest with.

My wife was downstairs with the woman.  Poor Gus, who was with me, and
quite as much affected as any of the party, took me by the arm, and led
me downstairs; and we quite forgot all about the prison and the rules,
and walked a long long way across Blackfriars Bridge, the kind fellow
striving as much as possible to console me.

When we came back, it was in the evening.  The first person who met me in
the house was my kind mother, who fell into my arms with many tears, and
who rebuked me tenderly for not having told her of my necessities.  She
never should have known of them, she said; but she had not heard from me
since I wrote announcing the birth of the child, and she felt uneasy
about my silence; and meeting Mr. Smithers in the street, asked from him
news concerning me: whereupon that gentleman, with some little show of
alarm, told her that he thought her daughter-in-law was confined in an
uncomfortable place; that Mrs. Hoggarty had left us; finally, that I was
in prison.  This news at once despatched my poor mother on her travels,
and she had only just come from the prison, where she learned my address.

I asked her whether she had seen my wife, and how she found her.  Rather
to my amaze she said that Mary was out with the landlady when she
arrived; and eight--nine o'clock came, and she was absent still.

At ten o'clock returned--not my wife, but Mrs. Stokes, and with her a
gentleman, who shook hands with me on coming into the room, and said,
"Mr. Titmarsh!  I don't know whether you will remember me: my name is
Tiptoff.  I have brought you a note from Mrs. Titmarsh, and a message
from my wife, who sincerely commiserates your loss, and begs you will not
be uneasy at Mrs. Titmarsh's absence.  She has been good enough to
promise to pass the night with Lady Tiptoff; and I am sure you will not
object to her being away from you, while she is giving happiness to a
sick mother and a sick child."  After a few more words, my Lord left us.
My wife's note only said that Mrs. Stokes would tell me all.




CHAPTER XIII


IN WHICH IT IS SHOWN THAT A GOOD WIFE IS THE BEST DIAMOND A MAN CAN WEAR
IN HIS BOSOM

"Mrs. Titmarsh, ma'am," says Mrs. Stokes, "before I gratify your
curiosity, ma'am, permit me to observe that angels is scarce; and it's
rare to have one, much more two, in a family.  Both your son and your
daughter-in-law, ma'am, are of that uncommon sort; they are, now, reely,
ma'am."

My mother said she thanked God for both of us; and Mrs. Stokes
proceeded:--

"When the fu--- when the seminary, ma'am, was concluded this morning,
your poor daughter-in-law was glad to take shelter in my humble parlour,
ma'am; where she wept, and told a thousand stories of the little cherub
that's gone.  Heaven bless us! it was here but a month, and no one could
have thought it could have done such a many things in that time.  But a
mother's eyes are clear, ma'am; and I had just such another angel, my
dear little Antony, that was born before Jemima, and would have been
twenty-three now were he in this wicked world, ma'am.  However, I won't
speak of him, ma'am, but of what took place.

"You must know, ma'am, that Mrs. Titmarsh remained downstairs while Mr.
Samuel was talking with his friend Mr. Hoskins; and the poor thing would
not touch a bit of dinner, though we had it made comfortable; and after
dinner, it was with difficulty I could get her to sup a little drop of
wine-and-water, and dip a toast in it.  It was the first morsel that had
passed her lips for many a long hour, ma'am.

"Well, she would not speak, and I thought it best not to interrupt her;
but she sat and looked at my two youngest that were playing on the rug;
and just as Mr. Titmarsh and his friend Gus went out, the boy brought the
newspaper, ma'am,--it always comes from three to four, and I began
a-reading of it.  But I couldn't read much, for thinking of poor Mr.
Sam's sad face as he went out, and the sad story he told me about his
money being so low; and every now and then I stopped reading, and bade
Mrs. T. not to take on so; and told her some stories about my dear little
Antony.

"'Ah!' says she, sobbing, and looking at the young ones, 'you have other
children, Mrs. Stokes; but that--that was my only one;' and she flung
back in her chair, and cried fit to break her heart: and I knew that the
cry would do her good, and so went back to my paper--the _Morning Post_,
ma'am; I always read it, for I like to know what's a-going on in the West
End.

"The very first thing that my eyes lighted upon was this:--'Wanted,
immediately, a respectable person as wet-nurse.  Apply at No. ---,
Grosvenor Square.'  'Bless us and save us!' says I, 'here's poor Lady
Tiptoff ill;' for I knew her Ladyship's address, and how she was confined
on the very same day with Mrs. T.: and, for the matter of that, her
Ladyship knows my address, having visited here.

"A sudden thought came over me.  'My dear Mrs. Titmarsh,' said I, 'you
know how poor and how good your husband is?'

"'Yes,' says she, rather surprised.

"'Well, my dear,' says I, looking her hard in the face, 'Lady Tiptoff,
who knows him, wants a nurse for her son, Lord Poynings.  Will you be a
brave woman, and look for the place, and mayhap replace the little one
that God has taken from you?'

"She began to tremble and blush; and then I told her what you, Mr. Sam,
had told me the other day about your money matters; and no sooner did she
hear it than she sprung to her bonnet, and said, 'Come, come:' and in
five minutes she had me by the arm, and we walked together to Grosvenor
Square.  The air did her no harm, Mr. Sam, and during the whole of the
walk she never cried but once, and then it was at seeing a nursery-maid
in the Square.

"A great fellow in livery opens the door, and says, 'You're the forty-
fifth as come about this 'ere place; but, fust, let me ask you a
preliminary question.  Are you a Hirishwoman?'

"'No, sir,' says Mrs. T.

"'That suffishnt, mem,' says the gentleman in plush; 'I see you're not by
your axnt.  Step this way, ladies, if you please.  You'll find some more
candidix for the place upstairs; but I sent away forty-four happlicants,
because they _was_ Hirish.'

"We were taken upstairs over very soft carpets, and brought into a room,
and told by an old lady who was there to speak very softly, for my Lady
was only two rooms off.  And when I asked how the baby and her Ladyship
were, the old lady told me both were pretty well: only the doctor said
Lady Tiptoff was too delicate to nurse any longer; and so it was
considered necessary to have a wet-nurse.

"There was another young woman in the room--a tall fine woman as ever you
saw--that looked very angry and contempshious at Mrs. T. and me, and
said, 'I've brought a letter from the duchess whose daughter I nust; and
I think, Mrs. Blenkinsop, mem, my Lady Tiptoff may look far before she
finds such another nuss as me.  Five feet six high, had the small-pox,
married to a corporal in the Lifeguards, perfectly healthy, best of
charactiers, only drink water; and as for the child, ma'am, if her
Ladyship had six, I've a plenty for them all.'

"As the woman was making this speech, a little gentleman in black came in
from the next room, treading as if on velvet.  The woman got up, and made
him a low curtsey, and folding her arms on her great broad chest,
repeated the speech she had made before.  Mrs. T. did not get up from her
chair, but only made a sort of a bow; which, to be sure, I thought was
ill manners, as this gentleman was evidently the apothecary.  He looked
hard at her and said, 'Well, my good woman, and are you come about the
place too?'

"'Yes, sir,' says she, blushing.

"'You seem very delicate.  How old is your child?  How many have you had?
What character have you?'

"Your wife didn't answer a word; so I stepped up, and said, 'Sir,' says
I, 'this lady has just lost her first child, and isn't used to look for
places, being the daughter of a captain in the navy; so you'll excuse her
want of manners in not getting up when you came in.'

"The doctor at this sat down and began talking very kindly to her; he
said he was afraid that her application would be unsuccessful, as Mrs.
Horner came very strongly recommended from the Duchess of Doncaster,
whose relative Lady Tiptoff was; and presently my Lady appeared, looking
very pretty, ma'am, in an elegant lace-cap and a sweet muslin _robe-de-
sham_.

"A nurse came out of her Ladyship's room with her; and while my Lady was
talking to us, walked up and down in the next room with something in her
arms.

"First, my Lady spoke to Mrs. Horner, and then to Mrs. T.; but all the
while she was talking, Mrs. Titmarsh, rather rudely, as I thought, ma'am,
was looking into the next room: looking--looking at the baby there with
all her might.  My Lady asked her her name, and if she had any character;
and as she did not speak, I spoke up for her, and said she was the wife
of one of the best men in the world; that her Ladyship knew the
gentleman, too, and had brought him a haunch of venison.  Then Lady
Tiptoff looked up quite astonished, and I told the whole story: how you
had been head clerk, and that rascal, Brough, had brought you to ruin.
'Poor thing!' said my Lady: Mrs. Titmarsh did not speak, but still kept
looking at the baby; and the great big grenadier of a Mrs. Horner looked
angrily at her.

"'Poor thing!' says my Lady, taking Mrs. T.'s hand very kind, 'she seems
very young.  How old are you, my dear?'

"'Five weeks and two days!' says your wife, sobbing.

"Mrs. Horner burst into a laugh; but there was a tear in my Lady's eyes,
for she knew what the poor thing was a-thinking of.

"'Silence, woman!' says she angrily to the great grenadier woman; and at
this moment the child in the next room began crying.

"As soon as your wife heard the noise, she sprung from her chair and made
a stop forward, and put both her hands to her breast and said, 'The
child--the child--give it me!' and then began to cry again.

"My Lady looked at her for a moment, and then ran into the next room and
brought her the baby; and the baby clung to her as if he knew her: and a
pretty sight it was to see that dear woman with the child at her bosom.

"When my Lady saw it, what do you think she did?  After looking on it for
a bit, she put her arms round your wife's neck and kissed her.

"'My dear,' said she, 'I am sure you are as good as you are pretty, and
you shall keep the child: and I thank God for sending you to me!'

"These were her very words; and Dr. Bland, who was standing by, says,
'It's a second judgment of Solomon!'

"'I suppose, my Lady, you don't want _me_?' says the big woman, with
another curtsey.

"'Not in the least!' answers my Lady, haughtily, and the grenadier left
the room: and then I told all your story at full length, and Mrs.
Blenkinsop kept me to tea, and I saw the beautiful room that Mrs.
Titmarsh is to have next to Lady Tiptoff's; and when my Lord came home,
what does he do but insist upon coming back with me here in a hackney-
coach, as he said he must apologise to you for keeping your wife away."

I could not help, in my own mind, connecting this strange event which, in
the midst of our sorrow, came to console us, and in our poverty to give
us bread,--I could not help connecting it with the _diamond pin_, and
fancying that the disappearance of that ornament had somehow brought a
different and a better sort of luck into my family.  And though some
gents who read this, may call me a poor-spirited fellow for allowing my
wife to go out to service, who was bred a lady and ought to have servants
herself: yet, for my part, I confess I did not feel one minute's scruple
or mortification on the subject.  If you love a person, is it not a
pleasure to feel obliged to him?  And this, in consequence, I felt.  I
was proud and happy at being able to think that my dear wife should be
able to labour and earn bread for me, now misfortune had put it out of my
power to support me and her.  And now, instead of making any reflections
of my own upon prison discipline, I will recommend the reader to consult
that admirable chapter in the Life of Mr. Pickwick in which the same
theme is handled, and which shows how silly it is to deprive honest men
of the means of labour just at the moment when they most want it.  What
could I do?  There were one or two gents in the prison who could work
(literary gents,--one wrote his "Travels in Mesopotamia," and the other
his "Sketches at Almack's," in the place); but all the occupation I could
find was walking down Bridge Street, and then up Bridge Street, and
staring at Alderman Waithman's windows, and then at the black man who
swept the crossing.  I never gave him anything; but I envied him his
trade and his broom, and the money that continually fell into his old
hat.  But I was not allowed even to carry a broom.

Twice or thrice--for Lady Tiptoff did not wish her little boy often to
breathe the air of such a close place as Salisbury Square--my dear Mary
came in the thundering carriage to see me.  They were merry meetings;
and--if the truth must be told--twice, when nobody was by, I jumped into
the carriage and had a drive with her; and when I had seen her home,
jumped into another hackney-coach and drove back.  But this was only
twice; for the system was dangerous, and it might bring me into trouble,
and it cost three shillings from Grosvenor Square to Ludgate Hill.

Here, meanwhile, my good mother kept me company; and what should we read
of one day but the marriage of Mrs. Hoggarty and the Rev. Grimes Wapshot!
My mother, who never loved Mrs. H., now said that she should repent all
her life having allowed me to spend so much of my time with that odious
ungrateful woman; and added that she and I too were justly punished for
worshipping the mammon of unrighteousness and forgetting our natural
feelings for the sake of my aunt's paltry lucre.  "Well, Amen!" said I.
"This is the end of all our fine schemes!  My aunt's money and my aunt's
diamond were the causes of my ruin, and now they are clear gone, thank
Heaven! and I hope the old lady will be happy; and I must say I don't
envy the Rev. Grimes Wapshot."  So we put Mrs. Hoggarty out of our
thoughts, and made ourselves as comfortable as might be.

Rich and great people are slower in making Christians of their children
than we poor ones, and little Lord Poynings was not christened until the
month of June.  A duke was one godfather, and Mr. Edmund Preston, the
State Secretary, another; and that kind Lady Jane Preston, whom I have
before spoken of, was the godmother to her nephew.  She had not long been
made acquainted with my wife's history; and both she and her sister loved
her heartily and were very kind to her.  Indeed, there was not a single
soul in the house, high or low, but was fond of that good sweet creature;
and the very footmen were as ready to serve her as they were their own
mistress.

"I tell you what, sir," says one of them.  "You see, Tit my boy, I'm a
connyshure, and up to snough; and if ever I see a lady in my life, Mrs.
Titmarsh is one.  I can't be fimiliar with her--I've tried--"

"Have you, sir?" said I.

"Don't look so indignant!  I can't, I say, be fimiliar with her as I am
with you.  There's a somethink in her, a jenny-squaw, that haws me, sir!
and even my Lord's own man, that 'as 'ad as much success as any gentleman
in Europe--he says that, cuss him--"

"Mr. Charles," says I, "tell my Lord's own man that, if he wants to keep
his place and his whole skin, he will never address a single word to that
lady but such as a servant should utter in the presence of his mistress;
and take notice that I am a gentleman, though a poor one, and will murder
the first man who does her wrong!"

Mr. Charles only said "Gammin!" to this: but psha! in bragging about my
own spirit, I forgot to say what great good fortune my dear wife's
conduct procured for me.

On the christening-day, Mr. Preston offered her first a five, and then a
twenty-pound note; but she declined either; but she did not decline a
present that the two ladies made her together, and this was no other than
_my release from the Fleet_.  Lord Tiptoff's lawyer paid every one of the
bills against me, and that happy christening-day made me a free man.  Ah!
who shall tell the pleasure of that day, or the merry dinner we had in
Mary's room at Lord Tiptoff's house, when my Lord and my Lady came
upstairs to shake hands with me!

"I have been speaking to Mr. Preston," says my Lord, "the gentleman with
whom you had the memorable quarrel, and he has forgiven it, although he
was in the wrong, and promises to do something for you.  We are going
down, meanwhile, to his house at Richmond; and be sure, Mr. Titmarsh, I
will not fail to keep you in his mind."

"_Mrs_. Titmarsh will do that," says my Lady; "for Edmund is woefully
smitten with her!"  And Mary blushed, and I laughed, and we were all very
happy: and sure enough there came from Richmond a letter to me, stating
that I was appointed fourth clerk in the Tape and Sealing-wax Office,
with a salary of 80_l_. per annum.

Here perhaps my story ought to stop; for I was happy at last, and have
never since, thank Heaven! known want: but Gus insists that I should add
how I gave up the place in the Tape and Sealing-wax Office, and for what
reason.  That excellent Lady Jane Preston is long gone, and so is Mr. P---
off in an apoplexy, and there is no harm now in telling the story.

The fact was, that Mr. Preston had fallen in love with Mary in a much
more serious way than any of us imagined; for I do believe he invited his
brother-in-law to Richmond for no other purpose than to pay court to his
son's nurse.  And one day, as I was coming post-haste to thank him for
the place he had procured for me, being directed by Mr. Charles to the
"scrubbery," as he called it, which led down to the river--there, sure
enough, I found Mr. Preston, on his knees too, on the gravel-walk, and
before him Mary, holding the little lord.

"Dearest creature!" says Mr. Preston, "do but listen to me, and I'll make
your husband consul at Timbuctoo!  He shall never know of it, I tell you:
he _can_ never know of it.  I pledge you my word as a Cabinet Minister!
Oh, don't look at me in that arch way: by heavens, your eyes kill me!"

Mary, when she saw me, burst out laughing, and ran down the lawn; my Lord
making a huge crowing, too, and holding out his little fat hands.  Mr.
Preston, who was a heavy man, was slowly getting up, when, catching a
sight of me looking as fierce as the crater of Mount Etna,--he gave a
start back and lost his footing, and rolled over and over, walloping into
the water at the garden's edge.  It was not deep, and he came bubbling
and snorting out again in as much fright as fury.

"You d-d ungrateful villain!" says he, "what do you stand there laughing
for?"

"I'm waiting your orders for Timbuctoo, sir," says I, and laughed fit to
die; and so did my Lord Tiptoff and his party, who joined us on the lawn:
and Jeames the footman came forward and helped Mr. Preston out of the
water.

"Oh, you old sinner!" says my Lord, as his brother-in-law came up the
slope.  "Will that heart of yours be always so susceptible, you romantic,
apoplectic, immoral man?"

Mr. Preston went away, looking blue with rage, and ill-treated his wife
for a whole month afterwards.

"At any rate," says my Lord, "Titmarsh here has got a place through our
friend's unhappy attachment; and Mrs. Titmarsh has only laughed at him,
so there is no harm there.  It's an ill wind that blows nobody good, you
know."

"Such a wind as that, my Lord, with due respect to you, shall never do
good to me.  I have learned in the past few years what it is to make
friends with the mammon of unrighteousness; and that out of such
friendship no good comes in the end to honest men.  It shall never be
said that Sam Titmarsh got a place because a great man was in love with
his wife; and were the situation ten times as valuable, I should blush
every day I entered the office-doors in thinking of the base means by
which my fortune was made.  You have made me free, my Lord; and, thank
God! I am willing to work.  I can easily get a clerkship with the
assistance of my friends; and with that and my wife's income, we can
manage honestly to face the world."

This rather long speech I made with some animation; for, look you, I was
not over well pleased that his Lordship should think me capable of
speculating in any way on my wife's beauty.

My Lord at first turned red, and looked rather angry; but at last he held
out his hand and said, "You are right, Titmarsh, and I am wrong; and let
me tell you in confidence, that I think you are a very honest fellow.  You
shan't lose by your honesty, I promise you."

Nor did I: for I am at this present moment Lord Tiptoff's steward and
right-hand man: and am I not a happy father? and is not my wife loved and
respected by all the country? and is not Gus Hoskins my brother-in-law,
partner with his excellent father in the leather way, and the delight of
all his nephews and nieces for his tricks and fun?

As for Mr. Brough, that gentleman's history would fill a volume of
itself.  Since he vanished from the London world, he has become
celebrated on the Continent, where he has acted a thousand parts, and met
all sorts of changes of high and low fortune.  One thing we may at least
admire in the man, and that is, his undaunted courage; and I can't help
thinking, as I have said before, that there must be some good in him,
seeing the way in which his family are faithful to him.  With respect to
Roundhand, I had best also speak tenderly.  The case of Roundhand v. Tidd
is still in the memory of the public; nor can I ever understand how Bill
Tidd, so poetic as he was, could ever take on with such a fat, odious,
vulgar woman as Mrs. R., who was old enough to be his mother.

As soon as we were in prosperity, Mr. and Mrs. Grimes Wapshot made
overtures to be reconciled to us; and Mr. Wapshot laid bare to me all the
baseness of Mr. Smithers's conduct in the Brough transaction.  Smithers
had also endeavoured to pay his court to me, once when I went down to
Somersetshire; but I cut his pretensions short, as I have shown.  "He it
was," said Mr. Wapshot, "who induced Mrs. Grimes (Mrs. Hoggarty she was
then) to purchase the West Diddlesex shares: receiving, of course, a
large bonus for himself.  But directly he found that Mrs. Hoggarty had
fallen into the hands of Mr. Brough, and that he should lose the income
he made from the lawsuits with her tenants and from the management of her
landed property, he determined to rescue her from that villain Brough,
and came to town for the purpose.  He also," added Mr. Wapshot, "vented
his malignant slander against me; but Heaven was pleased to frustrate his
base schemes.  In the proceedings consequent on Brough's bankruptcy, Mr.
Smithers could not appear; for his own share in the transactions of the
Company would have been most certainly shown up.  During his absence from
London, I became the husband--the happy husband--of your aunt.  But
though, my dear sir, I have been the means of bringing her to grace, I
cannot disguise from you that Mrs. W. has faults which all my pastoral
care has not enabled me to eradicate.  She is close of her money,
sir--very close; nor can I make that charitable use of her property
which, as a clergyman, I ought to do; for she has tied up every shilling
of it, and only allows me half-a-crown a week for pocket-money.  In
temper, too, she is very violent.  During the first years of our union, I
strove with her; yea, I chastised her; but her perseverance, I must
confess, got the better of me.  I make no more remonstrances, but am as a
lamb in her hands, and she leads me whithersoever she pleases."

Mr. Wapshot concluded his tale by borrowing half-a-crown from me (it was
at the Somerset Coffee-house in the Strand, where he came, in the year
1832, to wait upon me), and I saw him go from thence into the gin-shop
opposite, and come out of the gin-shop half-an-hour afterwards, reeling
across the streets, and perfectly intoxicated.

He died next year: when his widow, who called herself Mrs.
Hoggarty-Grimes-Wapshot, of Castle Hoggarty, said that over the grave of
her saint all earthly resentments were forgotten, and proposed to come
and live with us; paying us, of course, a handsome remuneration.  But
this offer my wife and I respectfully declined; and once more she altered
her will, which once more she had made in our favour; called us
ungrateful wretches and pampered menials, and left all her property to
the Irish Hoggarties.  But seeing my wife one day in a carriage with Lady
Tiptoff, and hearing that we had been at the great ball at Tiptoff
Castle, and that I had grown to be a rich man, she changed her mind
again, sent for me on her death-bed, and left me the farms of Slopperton
and Squashtail, with all her savings for fifteen years.  Peace be to her
soul! for certainly she left me a very pretty property.

Though I am no literary man myself, my cousin Michael (who generally,
when he is short of coin, comes down and passes a few months with us)
says that my Memoirs may be of some use to the public (meaning, I
suspect, to himself); and if so, I am glad to serve him and them, and
hereby take farewell: bidding all gents who peruse this, to be cautious
of their money, if they have it; to be still more cautious of their
friends' money; to remember that great profits imply great risks; and
that the great shrewd capitalists of this country would not be content
with four per cent. for their money, if they could securely get more:
above all, I entreat them never to embark in any speculation, of which
the conduct is not perfectly clear to them, and of which the agents are
not perfectly open and loyal.

========================================
========================================

THE BEDFORD-ROW CONSPIRACY

By William Makepeace Thackeray


Contents.

  I.   Of the loves of Mr. Perkins and Miss Gorgon, and of the two
  great factions in the town of Oldborough.

  II.  Shows how the plot began to thicken in or about Bedford Row.

  III. Behind the scenes.


  Note:

  A story of Charles de Bernard furnished the plot of
  "The Bedford-Row Conspiracy."




THE BEDFORD-ROW CONSPIRACY




CHAPTER I.


OF THE LOVES OF MR. PERKINS AND MISS GORGON, AND OF THE TWO GREAT
FACTIONS IN THE TOWN OF OLDBOROUGH.

"My dear John," cried Lucy, with a very wise look indeed, "it must and
shall be so. As for Doughty Street, with our means, a house is out of
the question. We must keep three servants, and Aunt Biggs says the taxes
are one-and-twenty pounds a year."

"I have seen a sweet place at Chelsea," remarked John: "Paradise Row,
No. 17,--garden--greenhouse--fifty pounds a year--omnibus to town within
a mile."

"What! that I may be left alone all day, and you spend a fortune in
driving backward and forward in those horrid breakneck cabs? My darling,
I should die there--die of fright, I know I should. Did you not say
yourself that the road was not as yet lighted, and that the place
swarmed with public-houses and dreadful tipsy Irish bricklayers? Would
you kill me, John?"

"My da-arling," said John, with tremendous fondness, clutching Miss
Lucy suddenly round the waist, and rapping the hand of that young person
violently against his waistcoat,--"My da-arling, don't say such things,
even in a joke. If I objected to the chambers, it is only because you,
my love, with your birth and connections, ought to have a house of your
own. The chambers are quite large enough and certainly quite good enough
for me." And so, after some more sweet parley on the part of these
young people, it was agreed that they should take up their abode,
when married, in a part of the House number One hundred and something,
Bedford Row.

It will be necessary to explain to the reader that John was no other
than John Perkins, Esquire, of the Middle Temple, barrister-at-law, and
that Miss Lucy was the daughter of the late Captain Gorgon, and Marianne
Biggs, his wife. The Captain being of noble connections, younger son of
a baronet, cousin to Lord X----, and related to the Y---- family, had
angered all his relatives by marrying a very silly pretty young woman,
who kept a ladies'-school at Canterbury. She had six hundred pounds
to her fortune, which the Captain laid out in the purchase of a sweet
travelling-carriage and dressing-case for himself; and going abroad with
his lady, spent several years in the principal prisons of Europe, in one
of which he died. His wife and daughter were meantime supported by the
contributions of Mrs. Jemima Biggs, who still kept the ladies'-school.

At last a dear old relative--such a one as one reads of in
romances--died and left seven thousand pounds apiece to the two sisters,
whereupon the elder gave up schooling and retired to London; and the
younger managed to live with some comfort and decency at Brussels,
upon two hundred and ten pounds per annum. Mrs. Gorgon never touched
a shilling of her capital, for the very good reason that it was placed
entirely out of her reach; so that when she died, her daughter found
herself in possession of a sum of money that is not always to be met
with in this world.

Her aunt the baronet's lady, and her aunt the ex-schoolmistress, both
wrote very pressing invitations to her, and she resided with each for
six months after her arrival in England. Now, for a second time, she had
come to Mrs. Biggs, Caroline Place, Mecklenburgh Square. It was under
the roof of that respectable old lady that John Perkins, Esquire, being
invited to take tea, wooed and won Miss Gorgon.

Having thus described the circumstances of Miss Gorgon's life, let us
pass for a moment from that young lady, and lift up the veil of mystery
which envelopes the deeds and character of Perkins.

Perkins, too, was an orphan; and he and his Lucy, of summer evenings,
when Sol descending lingered fondly yet about the minarets of the
Foundling, and gilded the grassplots of Mecklenburgh Square--Perkins,
I say, and Lucy would often sit together in the summer-house of that
pleasure-ground, and muse upon the strange coincidences of their life.
Lucy was motherless and fatherless; so too was Perkins. If Perkins was
brotherless and sisterless, was not Lucy likewise an only child? Perkins
was twenty-three: his age and Lucy's united, amounted to forty-six; and
it was to be remarked, as a fact still more extraordinary, that while
Lucy's relatives were AUNTS, John's were UNCLES. Mysterious spirit of
love! let us treat thee with respect and whisper not too many of thy
secrets. The fact is, John and Lucy were a pair of fools (as every young
couple OUGHT to be who have hearts that are worth a farthing), and were
ready to find coincidences, sympathies, hidden gushes of feeling, mystic
unions of the soul, and what not, in every single circumstance that
occurred from the rising of the sun to the going down thereof, and in
the intervals. Bedford Row, where Perkins lived, is not very far from
Mecklenburgh Square; and John used to say that he felt a comfort that
his house and Lucy's were served by the same muffin-man.

Further comment is needless. A more honest, simple, clever,
warm-hearted, soft, whimsical, romantical, high-spirited young fellow
than John Perkins did not exist. When his father, Doctor Perkins, died,
this, his only son, was placed under the care of John Perkins, Esquire,
of the house of Perkins, Scully, and Perkins, those celebrated attorneys
in the trading town of Oldborough, which the second partner, William
Pitt Scully, Esquire, represented in Parliament and in London.

All John's fortune was the house in Bedford Row, which, at his father's
death, was let out into chambers, and brought in a clear hundred a
year. Under his uncle's roof at Oldborough, where he lived with thirteen
red-haired male and female cousins, he was only charged fifty pounds
for board, clothes, and pocket-money, and the remainder of his rents
was carefully put by for him until his majority. When he approached
that period--when he came to belong to two spouting-clubs at Oldborough,
among the young merchants and lawyers'-clerks--to blow the flute nicely,
and play a good game at billiards--to have written one or two smart
things in the Oldborough Sentinel--to be fond of smoking (in which act
he was discovered by his fainting aunt at three o'clock one morning)--in
one word, when John Perkins arrived at manhood, he discovered that he
was quite unfit to be an attorney, that he detested all the ways of his
uncle's stern, dull, vulgar, regular, red-headed family, and he vowed
that he would go to London and make his fortune. Thither he went, his
aunt and cousins, who were all "serious," vowing that he was a lost boy;
and when his history opens, John had been two years in the metropolis,
inhabiting his own garrets; and a very nice compact set of apartments,
looking into the back-garden, at this moment falling vacant, the prudent
Lucy Gorgon had visited them, and vowed that she and her John should
there commence housekeeping.

All these explanations are tedious, but necessary; and furthermore, it
must be said, that as John's uncle's partner was the Liberal member for
Oldborough, so Lucy's uncle was its Ministerial representative.

This gentleman, the brother of the deceased Captain Gorgon, lived at the
paternal mansion of Gorgon Castle, and rejoiced in the name and title of
Sir George Grimsby Gorgon.

He, too, like his younger brother, had married a lady beneath his own
rank in life; having espoused the daughter and heiress of Mr. Hicks, the
great brewer at Oldborough, who held numerous mortgages on the Gorgon
property, all of which he yielded up, together with his daughter
Juliana, to the care of the baronet.

What Lady Gorgon was in character, this history will show. In person,
if she may be compared to any vulgar animal, one of her father's heavy,
healthy, broad-flanked, Roman-nosed white dray-horses might, to the
poetic mind, appear to resemble her. At twenty she was a splendid
creature, and though not at her full growth, yet remarkable for strength
and sinew; at forty-five she was as fine a woman as any in His Majesty's
dominions. Five feet seven in height, thirteen stone, her own teeth and
hair, she looked as if she were the mother of a regiment of Grenadier
Guards. She had three daughters of her own size, and at length, ten
years after the birth of the last of the young ladies, a son--one
son--George Augustus Frederick Grimsby Gorgon, the godson of a royal
duke, whose steady officer in waiting Sir George had been for many
years.

It is needless to say, after entering so largely into a description
of Lady Gorgon, that her husband was a little shrivelled wizen-faced
creature, eight inches shorter than her Ladyship. This is the way of
the world, as every single reader of this book must have remarked; for
frolic love delights to join giants and pigmies of different sexes in
the bonds of matrimony. When you saw her Ladyship in flame-coloured
satin and gorgeous toque and feathers, entering the drawing-room, as
footmen along the stairs shouted melodiously, "Sir George and Lady
Gorgon," you beheld in her company a small withered old gentleman, with
powder and large royal household buttons, who tripped at her elbow as a
little weak-legged colt does at the side of a stout mare.

The little General had been present at about a hundred and twenty
pitched battles on Hounslow Heath and Wormwood Scrubs, but had never
drawn his sword against an enemy. As might be expected, therefore, his
talk and tenue were outrageously military. He had the whole Army List by
heart--that is, as far as the field-officers: all below them he scorned.
A bugle at Gorgon Castle always sounded at breakfast, and dinner: a gun
announced sunset. He clung to his pigtail for many years after the army
had forsaken that ornament, and could never be brought to think much of
the Peninsular men for giving it up. When he spoke of the Duke, he used
to call him "MY LORD WELLINGTON--I RECOLLECT HIM AS CAPTAIN WELLESLEY."
He swore fearfully in conversation, was most regular at church, and
regularly read to his family and domestics the morning and evening
prayer; he bullied his daughters, seemed to bully his wife, who led him
whither she chose; gave grand entertainments, and never asked a friend
by chance; had splendid liveries, and starved his people; and was
as dull, stingy, pompous, insolent, cringing, ill-tempered a little
creature as ever was known.

With such qualities you may fancy that he was generally admired in
society and by his country. So he was: and I never knew a man so
endowed whose way through life was not safe--who had fewer pangs of
conscience--more positive enjoyments--more respect shown to him--more
favours granted to him, than such a one as my friend the General.

Her Ladyship was just suited to him, and they did in reality admire
each other hugely. Previously to her marriage with the baronet, many
love-passages had passed between her and William Pitt Scully, Esquire,
the attorney; and there was especially one story, a propos of certain
syllabubs and Sally-Lunn cakes, which seemed to show that matters had
gone very far. Be this as it may, no sooner did the General (Major
Gorgon he was then) cast an eye on her, than Scully's five years' fabric
of love was instantly dashed to the ground. She cut him pitilessly,
cut Sally Scully, his sister, her dearest friend and confidante, and
bestowed her big person upon the little aide-de-camp at the end of a
fortnight's wooing. In the course of time their mutual fathers died;
the Gorgon estates were unencumbered: patron of both the seats in the
borough of Oldborough, and occupant of one, Sir George Grimsby Gorgon,
Baronet, was a personage of no small importance.

He was, it scarcely need to be said, a Tory; and this was the reason
why William Pitt Scully, Esquire, of the firm of Perkins and Scully,
deserted those principles in which he had been bred and christened;
deserted that church which he had frequented, for he could not bear to
see Sir George and my Lady flaunting in their grand pew;--deserted, I
say, the church, adopted the conventicle, and became one of the most
zealous and eloquent supporters that Freedom has known in our time.
Scully, of the house of Scully and Perkins, was a dangerous enemy. In
five years from that marriage, which snatched from the jilted solicitor
his heart's young affections, Sir George Gorgon found that he must
actually spend seven hundred pounds to keep his two seats. At the next
election, a Liberal was set up against his man, and actually ran
him hard; and finally, at the end of eighteen years, the rejected
Scully--the mean attorney--was actually the FIRST Member for Oldborough,
Sir George Grimsby Gorgon, Baronet, being only the second!

The agony of that day cannot be imagined--the dreadful curses of Sir
George, who saw fifteen hundred a year robbed from under his very
nose--the religious resignation of my Lady--the hideous window-smashing
that took place at the "Gorgon Arms," and the discomfiture of the pelted
Mayor and Corporation. The very next Sunday, Scully was reconciled to
the church (or attended it in the morning, and the meeting twice in the
afternoon), and as Doctor Snorter uttered the prayer for the High Court
of Parliament, his eye, the eye of his whole party--turned towards Lady
Gorgon and Sir George in a most unholy triumph. Sir George (who always
stood during prayers, like a military man) fairly sank down among the
hassocks, and Lady Gorgon was heard to sob as audibly as ever did little
beadle-belaboured urchin.

Scully, when at Oldborough, came from that day forth to church. "What,"
said he, "was it to him? were we not all brethren?" Old Perkins,
however, kept religiously to the Squaretoes congregation. In fact, to
tell the truth, this subject had been debated between the partners,
who saw the advantage of courting both the Establishment and the
Dissenters--a manoeuvre which, I need not say, is repeated in almost
every country town in England, where a solicitor's house has this kind
of power and connection.

Three months after this election came the races at Oldborough, and the
race-ball. Gorgon was so infuriated by his defeat, that he gave "the
Gorgon cup and cover," a matter of fifteen pounds. Scully, "although
anxious," as he wrote from town, "anxious beyond measure to preserve
the breed of horses for which our beloved country has ever been famous,
could attend no such sports as these, which but too often degenerated
into vice." It was voted a shabby excuse. Lady Gorgon was radiant in her
barouche and four, and gladly became the patroness of the ball that was
to ensue; and which all the gentry and townspeople, Tory and Whig, were
in the custom of attending. The ball took place on the last day of the
races. On that day, the walls of the market-house, the principal public
buildings, and the "Gorgon Arms Hotel" itself, were plastered with the
following:--

"Letter from our distinguished representative, William P. Scully,
Esquire, etc., etc.

                           "HOUSE OF COMMONS:  June 1, 18--.

"MY DEAR HEELTAP,--You know my opinion about horseracing, and though
I blame neither you nor any brother Englishman who enjoys that manly
sport, you will, I am sure, appreciate the conscientious motives
which induce me not to appear among my friends and constituents on the
festival of the 3rd, 4th, and 5th instant. If _I_, however, cannot
allow my name to appear among your list of stewards, ONE at least of the
representatives of Oldborough has no such scruples. Sir George Gorgon is
among you: and though I differ from that honourable Baronet on more than
ONE VITAL POINT, I am glad to think that he is with you. A gentleman, a
soldier, a man of property in the county, how can he be better employed
than in forwarding the county's amusements, and in forwarding the
happiness of all?

"Had I no such scruples as those to which I have just alluded, I must
still have refrained from coming among you. Your great Oldborough
common-drainage and inclosure bill comes on to-morrow, and I shall be AT
MY POST. I am sure, if Sir George Gorgon were here, he and I should
on this occasion vote side by side, and that party strife would be
forgotten in the object of our common interest--OUR DEAR NATIVE TOWN.

"There is, however, another occasion at hand, in which I shall be
proud to meet him. Your ball is on the night of the 6th. Party
forgotten--brotherly union--innocent mirth--beauty, OUR DEAR TOWN'S
BEAUTY, our daughters in the joy of their expanding loveliness, our
matrons in the exquisite contemplation of their children's bliss--can
you, can I, can Whig or Tory, can any Briton be indifferent to a scene
like this, or refuse to join in this heart-stirring festival? If there
BE such let them pardon me--I, for one, my dear Heeltap, will be among
you on Friday night--ay, and hereby invite all pretty Tory Misses, who
are in want of a partner.

"I am here in the very midst of good things, you know, and we old folks
like A SUPPER after a dance. Please to accept a brace of bucks and a
turtle, which come herewith. My worthy colleague, who was so liberal
last year of his soup to the poor, will not, I trust, refuse to taste
a little of Alderman Birch's--'tis offered on my part with hearty
goodwill. Hey for the 6th, and vive la joie!

                "Ever, my dear Heeltap, your faithful

                                 "W. PITT SCULLY.

"P.S.--Of course this letter is STRICTLY PRIVATE. Say that the venison,
etc. came from a WELL-WISHER TO OLDBOROUGH."

This amazing letter was published, in defiance of Mr. Scully's
injunctions, by the enthusiastic Heeltap, who said, bluntly, in a
preface, "that he saw no reason why Mr. Scully should be ashamed of his
action, and he, for his part, was glad to let all friends at Oldborough
know of it."

The allusion about the Gorgon soup was killing: thirteen paupers in
Oldborough had, it was confidently asserted, died of it. Lady Gorgon,
on the reading of this letter, was struck completely dumb; Sir George
Gorgon was wild. Ten dozen of champagne was he obliged to send down to
the "Gorgon Arms," to be added to the festival. He would have stayed
away if he could, but he dared not.

At nine o'clock, he in general's uniform; his wife in blue satin and
diamonds; his daughters in blue crape and white roses; his niece, Lucy
Gorgon, in white muslin; his son, George Augustus Frederick Grimsby
Gorgon, in a blue velvet jacket, sugar-loaf buttons, and nankeens,
entered the north door of the ballroom, to much cheering, and the sound
of "God save the King!"

At that very same moment, and from the south door, issued William Pitt
Scully, Esquire, M.P., and his staff. Mr. Scully had a brand-new blue
coat and brass buttons, buff waistcoat, white kerseymere tights, pumps
with large rosettes, and pink silk stockings.

"This wool," said he to a friend, "was grown on Oldborough sheep,
this cloth was spun in Oldborough looms, these buttons were cast in
an Oldborough manufactory, these shoes were made by an Oldborough
tradesman, this HEART first beat in Oldborough town, and pray Heaven may
be buried there!"

Could anything resist a man like this? John Perkins, who had come down
as one of Scully's aides-de-camp, in a fit of generous enthusiasm,
leaped on a whist-table, flung up a pocket-handkerchief, and
shrieked--"SCULLY FOR EVER!"

Heeltap, who was generally drunk, fairly burst into tears, and the grave
tradesmen and Whig gentry, who had dined with the Member at his inn, and
accompanied him thence to the "Gorgon Arms," lifted their deep voices
and shouted "Hear!" "Good!" "Bravo!" "Noble!" "Scully for ever!" "God
bless him!" and "Hurrah!"

The scene was tumultuously affecting; and when young Perkins sprang down
from the table and came blushing up to the Member, that gentleman said,
"Thank you, Jack! THANK you, my boy! THANK you," in a way which made
Perkins think that his supreme cup of bliss was quaffed; that he had but
to die: for that life had no other such joy in store for him. Scully
was Perkins's Napoleon--he yielded himself up to the attorney, body and
soul.

Whilst this scene was going on under one chandelier of the ballroom,
beneath the other scarlet little General Gorgon, sumptuous Lady Gorgon,
the daughters and niece Gorgons, were standing surrounded by their Tory
court, who affected to sneer and titter at the Whig demonstrations which
were taking place.

"What a howwid thmell of whithkey!" lisped Cornet Fitch, of the
Dragoons, to Miss Lucy, confidentially. "And the--the are what they call
Whigth, are they? He! he!"

"They are drunk, ----me, --drunk, by ----!" said the General to the
Mayor.

"WHICH is Scully?" said Lady Gorgon, lifting her glass gravely (she was
at that very moment thinking of the syllabubs). "Is it that tipsy man in
the green coat, or that vulgar creature in the blue one?"

"Law, my Lady," said the Mayoress, "have you forgotten him? Why, that's
him in blue and buff."

"And a monthous fine man, too," said Cornet Fitch. "I wish we had him in
our twoop--he'th thix feet thwee, if he'th an inch; ain't he, Genewal?"

No reply.

"And heavens! Mamma," shrieked the three Gorgons in a breath, "see, one
creature is on the whist-table. Oh, the wretch!

"I'm sure he's very good-looking," said Lucy, simply.

Lady Gorgon darted at her an angry look, and was about to say something
very contemptuous, when, at that instant, John Perkins's shout taking
effect, Master George Augustus Frederick Grimsby Gorgon, not knowing
better, incontinently raised a small shout on his side.

"Hear! good! bravo!" exclaimed he; "Scully for ever! Hurra-a-a-ay!" and
fell skipping about like the Whigs opposite.

"Silence, you brute you!" groaned Lady Gorgon; and seizing him by the
shirt-frill and coat-collar, carried him away to his nurse, who, with
many other maids of the Whig and Tory parties, stood giggling and
peeping at the landing-place.

Fancy how all these small incidents augmented the heap of Lady Gorgon's
anger and injuries! She was a dull phlegmatic woman for the most part,
and contented herself generally with merely despising her neighbours;
but oh! what a fine active hatred raged in her bosom for victorious
Scully! At this moment Mr. Perkins had finished shaking hands with his
Napoleon--Napoleon seemed bent upon some tremendous enterprise. He was
looking at Lady Gorgon very hard.

"She's a fine woman," said Scully, thoughtfully; he was still holding
the hand of Perkins. And then, after a pause, "Gad! I think I'll try."

"Try what, sir?"

"She's a DEUCED fine woman!" burst out again the tender solicitor. "I
WILL go. Springer, tell the fiddlers to strike up."

Springer scuttled across the room, and gave the leader of the band a
knowing nod. Suddenly, "God save the King" ceased, and "Sir Roger
de Coverley" began. The rival forces eyed each other; Mr. Scully,
accompanied by his friend, came forward, looking very red, and fumbling
two large kid gloves.

"HE'S GOING TO ASK ME TO DANCE," hissed out Lady Gorgon, with a dreadful
intuition, and she drew back behind her lord.

"D---- it, madam, THEN DANCE with him!" said the General. "Don't you see
that the scoundrel is carrying it all his own way! ---- him! and ----
him! and ---- him!" (All of which dashes the reader may fill up with
oaths of such strength as may be requisite).

"General!" cried Lady Gorgon, but could say no more. Scully was before
her.

"Madam!" exclaimed the Liberal Member for Oldborough, "in a moment
like this--I say--that is--that on the present occasion--your
Ladyship--unaccustomed as I am--pooh, psha--WILL your Ladyship give me
the distinguished honour and pleasure of going down the country-dance
with your Ladyship?"

An immense heave of her Ladyship's ample chest was perceptible. Yards of
blond lace, which might be compared to a foam of the sea, were agitated
at the same moment, and by the same mighty emotion. The river of
diamonds which flowed round her Ladyship's neck, seemed to swell and to
shine more than ever. The tall plumes on her ambrosial head bowed down
beneath the storm. In other words, Lady Gorgon, in a furious rage,
which she was compelled to restrain, trembled, drew up, and bowing
majestically, said,--

"Sir, I shall have much pleasure." With this, she extended her hand.
Scully, trembling, thrust forward one of his huge kid-gloves, and led
her to the head of the country-dance. John Perkins--who I presume
had been drinking pretty freely, so as to have forgotten his ordinary
bashfulness--looked at the three Gorgons in blue, then at the pretty
smiling one in white, and stepping up to her, without the smallest
hesitation, asked her if she would dance with him.

The young lady smilingly agreed. The great example of Scully and Lady
Gorgon was followed by all dancing men and women. Political enmities
were forgotten. Whig voters invited Tory voters' wives to the dance. The
daughters of Reform accepted the hands of the sons of Conservatism. The
reconciliation of the Romans and Sabines was not more touching than this
sweet fusion. Whack--whack! Springer clapped his hands; and the fiddlers
adroitly obeying the cheerful signal, began playing "Sir Roger de
Coverley" louder than ever.

I do not know by what extraordinary charm (nescio qua praeter solitum,
etc.), but young Perkins, who all his life had hated country-dances, was
delighted with this one, and skipped and laughed, poussetting, crossing,
down-the-middling, with his merry little partner, till every one of the
bettermost sort of the thirty-nine couples had dropped panting away, and
till the youngest Miss Gorgon, coming up to his partner, said in a loud
hissing scornful whisper, "Lucy, Mamma thinks you have danced quite
enough with this--this person." And Lucy, blushing, starting back, and
looking at Perkins in a very melancholy way, made him a little curtsey,
and went off to the Gorgonian party with her cousin. Perkins was too
frightened to lead her back to her place--too frightened at first, and
then too angry. "Person!" said he: his soul swelled with a desperate
republicanism: he went back to his patron more of a Radical than ever.

He found that gentleman in the solitary tea-room, pacing up and down
before the observant landlady and handmaidens of the "Gorgon Arms,"
wiping his brows, gnawing his fingers--his ears looming over his stiff
white shirt-collar as red as fire. Once more the great man seized John
Perkins's hand as the latter came up.

"D---- the aristocrats!" roared the ex-follower of Squaretoes.

"And so say I! but what's the matter, sir?"

"What's the matter?--Why, that woman--that infernal, haughty,
straitlaced, cold-blooded brewer's daughter! I loved that woman, sir--I
KISSED that woman, sir, twenty years ago: we were all but engaged, sir:
we've walked for hours and hours, sir--us and the governess--I've got
a lock of her hair, sir, among my papers now; and to-night, would you
believe it?--as soon as she got to the bottom of the set, away she
went--not one word would she speak to me all the way down: and when I
wanted to lead her to her place, and asked her if she would have a glass
of negus, 'Sir,' says she, 'I have done my duty; I bear no malice: but
I consider you a traitor to Sir George Gorgon's family--a traitor and
an upstart! I consider your speaking to me as a piece of insolent
vulgarity, and beg you will leave me to myself!' There's her speech,
sir. Twenty people heard it, and all of her Tory set too. I'll tell you
what, Jack: at the next election I'll put YOU up. Oh that woman! that
woman!--and to think that I love her still!" Here Mr. Scully paused,
and fiercely consoled himself by swallowing three cups of Mrs. Rincer's
green tea.

The fact is, that Lady Gorgon's passion had completely got the better of
her reason. Her Ladyship was naturally cold, and artificially extremely
squeamish; and when this great red-faced enemy of hers looked tenderly
at her through his red little eyes, and squeezed her hand and attempted
to renew old acquaintance, she felt such an intolerable disgust at his
triumph, at his familiarity, and at the remembrance of her own former
liking for him, that she gave utterance to the speech above correctly
reported. The Tories were delighted with her spirit, and Cornet Fitch,
with much glee, told the story to the General; but that officer, who was
at whist with some of his friends, flung down his cards, and coming up
to his lady, said briefly,--

"Madam, you are a fool!"

"I will NOT stay here to be bearded by that disgusting man!--Mr. Fitch,
call my people.--Henrietta, bring Miss Lucy from that linendraper with
whom she is dancing. I will not stay, General, once for all."

Henrietta ran--she hated her cousin: Cornet Fitch was departing. "Stop,
Fitch," said Sir George, seizing him by the arm. "You are a fool, Lady
Gorgon," said he, "and I repeat it--a ---- fool! This fellow Scully
is carrying all before him: he has talked with everybody, laughed with
everybody--and you, with your infernal airs--a brewer's daughter, by
----, must sit like a queen and not speak to a soul! You've lost me one
seat of my borough, with your infernal pride--fifteen hundred a year,
by Jove!--and you think you will bully me out of another. No, madam, you
SHALL stay, and stay supper too;--and the girls shall dance with every
cursed chimney-sweep and butcher in the room: they shall--confound me!"

Her Ladyship saw that it was necessary to submit; and Mr. Springer, the
master of the ceremonies, was called, and requested to point out
some eligible partners for the young ladies. One went off with a
Whig auctioneer; another figured in a quadrille with a very Liberal
apothecary; and the third, Miss Henrietta, remained.

"Hallo you, sir!" roared the little General to John Perkins, who was
passing by. John turned round and faced him.

"You were dancing with my niece just now--show us your skill now, and
dance with one of my daughters. Stand up, Miss Henrietta Gorgon--Mr.
What's-your-name?"

"My name," said John, with marked and majestic emphasis, "is PERKINS."
And he looked towards Lucy, who dared not look again.

"Miss Gorgon--Mr. Perkins. There, now go and dance."

"Mr. Perkins regrets, madam," said John, making a bow to Miss Henrietta,
"that he is not able to dance this evening. I am this moment obliged to
look to the supper; but you will find, no doubt, some other PERSON who
will have much pleasure."

"Go to ----, sir!" screamed the General, starting up, and shaking his
cane.

"Calm yourself, dearest George," said Lady Gorgon, clinging fondly to
him. Fitch twiddled his moustaches. Miss Henrietta Gorgon stared
with open mouth. The silks of the surrounding dowagers rustled--the
countenances of all looked grave.

"I will follow you, sir, wherever you please; and you may hear of me
whenever you like," said Mr. Perkins, bowing and retiring. He heard
little Lucy sobbing in a corner. He was lost at once--lost in love; he
felt as if he could combat fifty generals! he never was so happy in his
life.

The supper came; but as that meal cost five shillings a head, General
Gorgon dismissed the four spinsters of his family homewards in the
carriage, and so saved himself a pound. This added to Jack Perkins's
wrath; he had hoped to have seen Miss Lucy once more. He was a steward,
and, in the General's teeth, would have done his duty. He was thinking
how he would have helped her to the most delicate chicken-wings and
blancmanges, how he WOULD have made her take champagne. Under the noses
of indignant aunt and uncle, what glorious fun it would have been!

Out of place as Mr. Scully's present was, and though Lady Gorgon and her
party sneered at the vulgar notion of venison and turtle for supper,
all the world at Oldborough ate very greedily of those two substantial
dishes; and the Mayor's wife became from that day forth a mortal
enemy of the Gorgons: for, sitting near her Ladyship, who refused the
proffered soup and meat, the Mayoress thought herself obliged to follow
this disagreeable example. She sent away the plate of turtle with a
sigh, saying, however, to the baronet's lady, "I thought, mem, that the
LORD MAYOR OF LONDON always had turtle to his supper?"

"And what if he didn't, Biddy?" said his Honour the Mayor; "a good
thing's a good thing, and here goes!" wherewith he plunged his spoon
into the savoury mess. The Mayoress, as we have said, dared not; but she
hated Lady Gorgon, and remembered it at the next election.

The pride, in fact, and insolence of the Gorgon party rendered every
person in the room hostile to them; so soon as, gorged with meat, they
began to find that courage which Britons invariably derive from their
victuals. The show of the Gorgon plate seemed to offend the people. The
Gorgon champagne was a long time, too, in making its appearance. Arrive,
however, it did. The people were waiting for it; the young ladies, not
accustomed to that drink, declined pledging their admirers until it
was produced; the men, too, despised the bucellas and sherry, and were
looking continually towards the door. At last, Mr. Rincer, the landlord,
Mr. Hock, Sir George's butler, and sundry others entered the room. Bang!
went the corks--fizz the foamy liquor sparkled into all sorts of glasses
that were held out for its reception. Mr. Hock helped Sir George and his
party, who drank with great gusto; the wine which was administered to
the persons immediately around Mr. Scully was likewise pronounced to
be good. But Mr. Perkins, who had taken his seat among the humbler
individuals, and in the very middle of the table, observed that all
these persons, after drinking, made to each other very wry and ominous
faces, and whispered much. He tasted his wine: it was a villanous
compound of sugar, vitriol, soda-water, and green gooseberries. At
this moment a great clatter of forks was made by the president's and
vice-president's party. Silence for a toast--'twas silence all.

"Landlord," said Mr. Perkins, starting up (the rogue, where did his
impudence come from?) "have you any champagne of YOUR OWN?"

"Silence! down!" roared the Tories, the ladies looking aghast. "Silence,
sit down you!" shrieked the well-known voice of the General.

"I beg your pardon, General," said young John Perkins; "but where COULD
you have bought this champagne? My worthy friend I know is going to
propose the ladies; let us at any rate drink such a toast in good wine."
("Hear, hear!") "Drink her Ladyship's health in THIS stuff? I declare to
goodness I would sooner drink it in beer!"

No pen can describe the uproar which arose: the anguish of the
Gorgonites--the shrieks, jeers, cheers, ironic cries of "Swipes!" etc.,
which proceeded from the less genteel but more enthusiastic Scullyites.

"This vulgarity is too much," said Lady Gorgon, rising; and Mrs.
Mayoress and the ladies of the party did so too.

The General, two squires, the clergyman, the Gorgon apothecary and
attorney, with their respective ladies, followed her: they were plainly
beaten from the field. Such of the Tories as dared remained, and in
inglorious compromise shared the jovial Whig feast.

"Gentlemen and ladies," hiccupped Mr. Heeltap, "I'll give you a toast.
'Champagne to our real--hic--friends,' no, 'Real champagne to our
friends,' and--hic--pooh! 'Champagne to our friends, and real pain to
our enemies,'--huzzay!"

The Scully faction on this day bore the victory away, and if the polite
reader has been shocked by certain vulgarities on the part of Mr.
Scully and his friends, he must remember imprimis that Oldborough was
an inconsiderable place--that the inhabitants thereof were chiefly
tradespeople, not of refined habits--that Mr. Scully himself had only
for three months mingled among the aristocracy--that his young friend
Perkins was violently angry--and finally, and to conclude, that the
proud vulgarity of the great Sir George Gorgon and his family was
infinitely more odious and contemptible than the mean vulgarity of the
Scullyites and their leader.

Immediately after this event, Mr. Scully and his young friend Perkins
returned to town; the latter to his garrets in Bedford Row--the former
to his apartments on the first floor of the same house. He lived here to
superintend his legal business: his London agents, Messrs. Higgs, Biggs,
and Blatherwick, occupying the ground floor; the junior partner, Mr.
Gustavus Blatherwick, the second flat of the house. Scully made no
secret of his profession or residence: he was an attorney, and proud of
it; he was the grandson of a labourer, and thanked God for it; he had
made his fortune by his own honest labour, and why should he be ashamed
of it?

And now, having explained at full length who the several heroes and
heroines of this history were, and how they conducted themselves in the
country, let us describe their behaviour in London, and the great events
which occurred there.

You must know that Mr. Perkins bore away the tenderest recollections
of the young lady with whom he had danced at the Oldborough ball, and,
having taken particular care to find out where she dwelt when in the
metropolis, managed soon to become acquainted with Aunt Biggs, and made
himself so amiable to that lady, that she begged he would pass all his
disengaged evenings at her lodgings in Caroline Place. Mrs. Biggs was
perfectly aware that the young gentleman did not come for her bohea
and muffins, so much as for the sweeter conversation of her niece, Miss
Gorgon; but seeing that these two young people were of an age when ideas
of love and marriage will spring up, do what you will; seeing that her
niece had a fortune, and Mr. Perkins had the prospect of a place, and
was moreover a very amiable and well-disposed young fellow, she thought
her niece could not do better than marry him; and Miss Gorgon thought
so too. Now the public will be able to understand the meaning of that
important conversation which is recorded at the very commencement of
this history.

Lady Gorgon and her family were likewise in town; but, when in the
metropolis, they never took notice of their relative, Miss Lucy: the
idea of acknowledging an ex-schoolmistress living in Mecklenburgh Square
being much too preposterous for a person of my Lady Gorgon's breeding
and fashion. She did not, therefore, know of the progress which sly
Perkins was making all this while; for Lucy Gorgon did not think it was
at all necessary to inform her Ladyship how deeply she was smitten
by the wicked young gentleman who had made all the disturbance at the
Oldborough ball.

The intimacy of these young persons had, in fact, become so close, that
on a certain sunshiny Sunday in December, after having accompanied Aunt
Biggs to church, they had pursued their walk as far as that rendezvous
of lovers, the Regent's Park, and were talking of their coming marriage,
with much confidential tenderness, before the bears in the Zoological
Gardens.

Miss Lucy was ever and anon feeding those interesting animals with buns,
to perform which act of charity she had clambered up on the parapet
which surrounds their den. Mr. Perkins was below; and Miss Lucy, having
distributed her buns, was on the point of following,--but whether from
timidity, or whether from a desire to do young Perkins an essential
service, I know not: however, she found herself quite unwilling to jump
down unaided.

"My dearest John," said she, "I never can jump that."

Whereupon John stepped up, put one hand round Lucy's waist; and as one
of hers gently fell upon his shoulder, Mr. Perkins took the other and
said,--

"Now jump."

Hoop! jump she did, and so excessively active and clever was Mr. John
Perkins, that he jumped Miss Lucy plump into the middle of a group
formed of--

Lady Gorgon;

The Misses Gorgon;

Master George Augustus Frederick Grimsby Gorgon;

And a footman, poodle, and French governess: who had all been for two or
three minutes listening to the billings and cooings of these imprudent
young lovers.



CHAPTER II.


SHOWS HOW THE PLOT BEGAN TO THICKEN IN OR ABOUT BEDFORD ROW.

"Miss Lucy!"

"Upon my word!"

"I'm hanged if it aren't Lucy! How do, Lucy?" uttered Lady, the Misses,
and Master Gorgon in a breath.

Lucy came forward, bending down her ambrosial curls, and blushing, as a
modest young woman should: for, in truth, the scrape was very awkward.
And as for John Perkins, he made a start, and then a step forwards, and
then two backwards, and then began laying hands upon his black satin
stock--in short, the sun did not shine at that moment upon a man who
looked so exquisitely foolish.

"Miss Lucy Gorgon, is your aunt--is Mrs. Briggs here?" said Lady Gorgon,
drawing herself up with much state.

"Mrs. Biggs, Aunt?" said Lucy demurely.

"Biggs or Briggs, madam, it is not of the slightest consequence.
I presume that persons in my rank of life are not expected to know
everybody's name in Magdeburg Square?" (Lady Gorgon had a house in Baker
Street, and a dismal house it was.) "NOT here," continued she, rightly
interpreting Lucy's silence, "NOT here?--and may I ask how long is it
that young ladies have been allowed to walk abroad without chaperons,
and to--to take a part in such scenes as that which we have just seen
acted?"

To this question--and indeed it was rather difficult to answer--Miss
Gorgon had no reply. There were the six grey eyes of her cousins
glowering at her; there was George Augustus Frederick examining her with
an air of extreme wonder, Mademoiselle the governess turning her looks
demurely away, and awful Lady Gorgon glancing fiercely at her in front.
Not mentioning the footman and poodle, what could a poor modest timid
girl plead before such an inquisition, especially when she was clearly
guilty? Add to this, that as Lady Gorgon, that majestic woman, always
remarkable for her size and insolence of demeanour, had planted herself
in the middle of the path, and spoke at the extreme pitch of her voice,
many persons walking in the neighbourhood had heard her Ladyship's
speech and stopped, and seemed disposed to await the rejoinder.

"For Heaven's sake, Aunt, don't draw a crowd around us," said Lucy, who,
indeed, was glad of the only escape that lay in her power. "I will
tell you of the--of the circumstances of--of my engagement with this
gentleman--with Mr. Perkins," added she, in a softer tone--so soft that
the 'ERKINS was quite inaudible.

"A Mr. What? An engagement without consulting your guardians!" screamed
her Ladyship. "This must be looked to! Jerningham, call round my
carriage. Mademoiselle, you will have the goodness to walk home with
Master Gorgon, and carry him, if you please, where there is wet; and,
girls, as the day is fine, you will do likewise. Jerningham, you will
attend the young ladies. Miss Gorgon, I will thank you to follow me
immediately." And so saying, and looking at the crowd with ineffable
scorn, and at Mr. Perkins not at all, the lady bustled away forwards,
the files of Gorgon daughters and governess closing round and enveloping
poor Lucy, who found herself carried forward against her will, and in a
minute seated in her aunt's coach, along with that tremendous person.

Her case was bad enough, but what was it to Perkins's? Fancy his blank
surprise and rage at having his love thus suddenly ravished from
him, and his delicious tete-a-tete interrupted. He managed, in an
inconceivably short space of time, to conjure up half-a-million
obstacles to his union. What should he do? he would rush on to Baker
Street, and wait there until his Lucy left Lady Gorgon's house.

He could find no vehicle in the Regent's Park, and was in consequence
obliged to make his journey on foot. Of course, he nearly killed himself
with running, and ran so quick, that he was just in time to see the two
ladies step out of Lady Gorgon's carriage at her own house, and to hear
Jerningham's fellow-footman roar to the Gorgonian coachman, "Half-past
seven!" at which hour we are, to this day, convinced that Lady Gorgon
was going out to dine. Mr. Jerningham's associate having banged to the
door, with an insolent look towards Perkins, who was prying in with the
most suspicious and indecent curiosity, retired, exclaiming, "That chap
has a hi to our great-coats, I reckon!" and left John Perkins to pace
the street and be miserable.

John Perkins then walked resolutely up and down dismal Baker Street,
determined on an eclaircissement. He was for some time occupied in
thinking how it was that the Gorgons were not at church, they who made
such a parade of piety; and John Perkins smiled as he passed the chapel,
and saw that two CHARITY SERMONS were to be preached that day--and
therefore it was that General Gorgon read prayers to his family at home
in the morning.

Perkins, at last, saw that little General, in blue frock-coat and
spotless buff gloves, saunter scowling home; and half an hour before his
arrival had witnessed the entrance of Jerningham, and the three gaunt
Miss Gorgons, poodle, son-and-heir, and French governess, protected by
him, into Sir George's mansion.

"Can she be going to stay all night?" mused poor John, after being on
the watch for three hours: when presently, to his inexpressible delight,
he saw a very dirty hackney-coach clatter up to the Gorgon door, out of
which first issued the ruby plush breeches and stalwart calves of Mr.
Jerningham; these were followed by his body, and then the gentleman,
ringing modestly, was admitted.

Again the door opened: a lady came out, nor was she followed by the
footman, who crossed his legs at the door-post and allowed her to mount
the jingling vehicle as best she might. Mr. Jerningham had witnessed the
scene in the Park Gardens, had listened to the altercation through the
library keyhole, and had been mighty sulky at being ordered to call a
coach for this young woman. He did not therefore deign to assist her to
mount.

But there was ONE who did! Perkins was by the side of his Lucy: he
had seen her start back and cry, "La, John!"--had felt her squeeze his
arm--had mounted with her into the coach, and then shouted with a voice
of thunder to the coachman, "Caroline Place, Mecklenburgh Square."

But Mr. Jerningham would have been much more surprised and puzzled if
he had waited one minute longer, and seen this Mr. Perkins, who had
so gallantly escaladed the hackney-coach, step out of it with the most
mortified, miserable, chap-fallen countenance possible.

The fact is, he had found poor Lucy sobbing fit to break her heart, and
instead of consoling her, as he expected, he only seemed to irritate her
further: for she said, "Mr. Perkins--I beg--I insist, that you leave the
carriage." And when Perkins made some movement (which, not being in
the vehicle at the time, we have never been able to comprehend), she
suddenly sprang from the back-seat and began pulling at a large piece
of cord which communicated with the wrist of the gentleman driving; and,
screaming to him at the top of her voice, bade him immediately stop.

This Mr. Coachman did, with a curious, puzzled, grinning air.

Perkins descended, and on being asked, "Vere ham I to drive the young
'oman, sir?" I am sorry to say muttered something like an oath, and
uttered the above-mentioned words, "Caroline Place, Mecklenburgh
Square," in a tone which I should be inclined to describe as both dogged
and sheepish--very different from that cheery voice which he had used
when he first gave the order.

Poor Lucy, in the course of those fatal three hours which had passed
while Mr. Perkins was pacing up and down Baker Street, had received a
lecture which lasted exactly one hundred and eighty minutes--from her
aunt first, then from her uncle, whom we have seen marching homewards,
and often from both together.

Sir George Gorgon and his lady poured out such a flood of advice and
abuse against the poor girl, that she came away from the interview quite
timid and cowering; and when she saw John Perkins (the sly rogue! how
well he thought he had managed the trick!) she shrank from him as if
he had been a demon of wickedness, ordered him out of the carriage, and
went home by herself, convinced that she had committed some tremendous
sin.

While, then, her coach jingled away to Caroline Place, Perkins,
once more alone, bent his steps in the same direction. A desperate,
heart-stricken man, he passed by the beloved's door, saw lights in the
front drawing-room, felt probably that she was there; but he could not
go in. Moodily he paced down Doughty Street, and turning abruptly
into Bedford Row, rushed into his own chambers, where Mrs. Snooks, the
laundress, had prepared his humble Sabbath meal.

A cheerful fire blazed in his garret, and Mrs. Snooks had prepared for
him the favourite blade-bone he loved (blest four-days' dinner for
a bachelor--roast, cold, hashed, grilled bladebone, the fourth being
better than the first); but although he usually did rejoice in this
meal--ordinarily, indeed, grumbling that there was not enough to satisfy
him--he, on this occasion, after two mouthfuls, flung down his knife and
fork, and buried his two claws in his hair.

"Snooks," said he at last, very moodily, "remove this d---- mutton, give
me my writing things, and some hot brandy-and-water."

This was done without much alarm: for you must know that Perkins used to
dabble in poetry, and ordinarily prepare himself for composition by this
kind of stimulus.

He wrote hastily a few lines.

"Snooks, put on your bonnet," said he, "and carry this--YOU KNOW WHERE!"
he added, in a hollow, heart-breaking tone of voice, that affected poor
Snooks almost to tears. She went, however, with the note, which was to
this purpose:--

"Lucy! Lucy! my soul's love--what, what has happened? I am writing
this"--(a gulp of brandy-and-water)--"in a state bordering on
distraction--madness--insanity" (another). "Why did you send me out of
the coach in that cruel cruel way? Write to me a word, a line--tell
me, tell me, I may come to you--and leave me not in this agonising
condition; your faithful" (glog--glog--glog--the whole glass)--"J.P."

He never signed John Perkins in full--he couldn't, it was so unromantic.

Well, this missive was despatched by Mrs. Snooks, and Perkins, in
a fearful state of excitement, haggard, wild, and with more
brandy-and-water, awaited the return of his messenger.

When at length, after about an absence of forty years, as it seemed to
him, the old lady returned with a large packet, Perkins seized it with
a trembling hand, and was yet more frightened to see the handwriting of
Mrs. or Miss Biggs.

"MY DEAR MR. PERKINS," she began--"Although I am not your soul's adored,
I performed her part for once, since I have read your letter, as I told
her. You need not be very much alarmed, although Lucy is at this moment
in bed and unwell: for the poor girl has had a sad scene at her grand
uncle's house in Baker Street, and came home very much affected. Rest,
however, will restore her, for she is not one of your nervous sort; and
I hope when you come in the morning, you will see her as blooming as she
was when you went out to-day on that unlucky walk.

"See what Sir George Gorgon says of us all! You won't challenge him, I
know, as he is to be your uncle, and so I may show you his letter.

"Good-night, my dear John. Do not go QUITE distracted before morning;
and believe me your loving aunt,
                                           "JEMIMA BIGGS."

                                "41 BAKER STREET:  11th December.

"MAJOR-GENERAL SIR GEORGE GORGON has heard with the utmost disgust and
surprise of the engagement which Miss Lucy Gorgon has thought fit to
form.

"The Major-General cannot conceal his indignation at the share which
Miss Biggs has taken in this disgraceful transaction.

"Sir George Gorgon puts an absolute veto upon all further communication
between his niece and the low-born adventurer who has been admitted into
her society, and begs to say that Lieutenant Fitch, of the Lifeguards,
is the gentleman who he intends shall marry Miss Gorgon.

"It is the Major-General's wish, that on the 28th Miss Gorgon should be
ready to come to his house, in Baker Street, where she will be more safe
from impertinent intrusions than she has been in Mucklebury Square.

       "MRS. BIGGS,
          "Caroline Place,
              "Mecklenburgh Square."

When poor John Perkins read this epistle, blank rage and wonder filled
his soul, at the audacity of the little General, who thus, without
the smallest title in the world, pretended to dispose of the hand
and fortune of his niece. The fact is, that Sir George had such a
transcendent notion of his own dignity and station, that it never for a
moment entered his head that his niece, or anybody else connected with
him, should take a single step in life without previously receiving his
orders; and Mr. Fitch, a baronet's son, having expressed an admiration
of Lucy, Sir George had determined that his suit should be accepted, and
really considered Lucy's preference of another as downright treason.

John Perkins determined on the death of Fitch as the very least
reparation that should satisfy him; and vowed too that some of the
General's blood should be shed for the words which he had dared to
utter.

We have said that William Pitt Scully, Esquire, M.P., occupied the first
floor of Mr. Perkins's house in Bedford Row: and the reader is further
to be informed that an immense friendship had sprung up between these
two gentlemen. The fact is, that poor John was very much flattered
by Scully's notice, and began in a very short time to fancy himself
a political personage; for he had made several of Scully's speeches,
written more than one letter from him to his constituents, and, in
a word, acted as his gratis clerk. At least a guinea a week did Mr.
Perkins save to the pockets of Mr. Scully, and with hearty good will
too, for he adored the great William Pitt, and believed every word that
dropped from the pompous lips of that gentleman.

Well, after having discussed Sir George Gorgon's letter, poor Perkins,
in the utmost fury of mind that his darling should be slandered so,
feeling a desire for fresh air, determined to descend to the garden and
smoke a cigar in that rural quiet spot. The night was very calm. The
moonbeams slept softly upon the herbage of Gray's Inn gardens, and
bathed with silver splendour Theobald's Row. A million of little frisky
twinkling stars attended their queen, who looked with bland round face
upon their gambols, as they peeped in and out from the azure heavens.
Along Gray's Inn wall a lazy row of cabs stood listlessly, for who would
call a cab on such a night? Meanwhile their drivers, at the alehouse
near, smoked the short pipe or quaffed the foaming beer. Perhaps from
Gray's Inn Lane some broken sounds of Irish revelry might rise. Issuing
perhaps from Raymond Buildings gate, six lawyers' clerks might whoop a
tipsy song--or the loud watchman yell the passing hour; but beyond this
all was silence; and young Perkins, as he sat in the summerhouse at the
bottom of the garden, and contemplated the peaceful heaven, felt some
influences of it entering into his soul, and almost forgetting revenge,
thought but of peace and love.

Presently, he was aware there was someone else pacing the garden.
Who could it be?--Not Blatherwick, for he passed the Sabbath with his
grandmamma at Clapham; not Scully surely, for he always went to Bethesda
Chapel, and to a select prayer-meeting afterwards. Alas! it WAS Scully;
for though that gentleman SAID that he went to chapel, we have it for
a fact that he did not always keep his promise, and was at this moment
employed in rehearsing an extempore speech, which he proposed to deliver
at St. Stephen's.

"Had I, sir," spouted he, with folded arms, slowly pacing to and
fro--"Had I, sir, entertained the smallest possible intention of
addressing the House on the present occasion--hum, on the present
occasion--I would have endeavoured to prepare myself in a way that
should have at least shown my sense of the greatness of the subject
before the House's consideration, and the nature of the distinguished
audience I have the honour to address. I am, sir, a plain man--born
of the people--myself one of the people, having won, thank Heaven, an
honourable fortune and position by my own honest labour; and standing
here as I do--"

                    *          *          *

Here Mr. Scully (it may be said that he never made a speech without
bragging about himself: and an excellent plan it is, for people cannot
help believing you at last)--here, I say, Mr. Scully, who had one arm
raised, felt himself suddenly tipped on the shoulder, and heard a voice
saying, "Your money or your life!"

The honourable gentleman twirled round as if he had been shot; the
papers on which a great part of this impromptu was written dropped from
his lifted hand, and some of them were actually borne on the air into
neighbouring gardens. The man was, in fact, in the direst fright.

"It's only I," said Perkins, with rather a forced laugh, when he saw the
effect that his wit had produced.

"Only you! And pray what the dev--what right have you to--to come upon
a man of my rank in that way, and disturb me in the midst of very
important meditations?" asked Mr. Scully, beginning to grow fierce.

"I want your advice," said Perkins, "on a matter of the very greatest
importance to me. You know my idea of marrying?"

"Marry!" said Scully; "I thought you had given up that silly scheme. And
how, pray, do you intend to live?"

"Why, my intended has a couple of hundreds a year, and my clerkship in
the Tape and Sealing-Wax Office will be as much more."

"Clerkship--Tape and Sealing-Wax Office--Government sinecure!--Why, good
heavens! John Perkins, you don't tell ME that you are going to accept
any such thing?"

"It is a very small salary, certainly," said John, who had a decent
notion of his own merits; "but consider, six months vacation, two hours
in the day, and those spent over the newspapers. After all, it's--"

"After all it's a swindle," roared out Mr. Scully--"a swindle upon the
country; an infamous tax upon the people, who starve that you may
fatten in idleness. But take this clerkship in the Tape and Sealing-Wax
Office," continued the patriot, his bosom heaving with noble
indignation, and his eye flashing the purest fire,--"TAKE this
clerkship, John Perkins, and sanction tyranny, by becoming one of its
agents; sanction dishonesty by sharing in its plunder--do this, BUT
never more be friend of mine. Had I a child," said the patriot, clasping
his hands and raising his eyes to heaven, "I would rather see him dead,
sir--dead, dead at my feet, than the servant of a Government which all
honest men despise." And here, giving a searching glance at Perkins, Mr.
Scully began tramping up and down the garden in a perfect fury.

"Good heavens!" exclaimed the timid John Perkins--"don't say SO. My
dear Mr. Scully, I'm not the dishonest character you suppose me to be--I
never looked at the matter in this light. I'll--I'll consider of it.
I'll tell Crampton that I will give up the place; but for Heaven's sake,
don't let me forfeit YOUR friendship, which is dearer to me than any
place in the world."

Mr. Scully pressed his hand, and said nothing; and though their
interview lasted a full half-hour longer, during which they paced up and
down the gravel walk, we shall not breathe a single syllable of their
conversation, as it has nothing to do with our tale.

The next morning, after an interview with Miss Lucy, John Perkins,
Esquire, was seen to issue from Mrs. Biggs's house, looking particularly
pale, melancholy, and thoughtful; and he did not stop until he reached a
certain door in Downing Street, where was the office of a certain great
Minister, and the offices of the clerks in his Lordship's department.

The head of them was Mr. Josiah Crampton, who has now to be introduced
to the public. He was a little old gentleman, some sixty years of age,
maternal uncle to John Perkins; a bachelor, who had been about forty-two
years employed in the department of which he was now the head.

After waiting four hours in an ante-room, where a number of Irishmen,
some newspaper editors, many pompous-looking political personages asking
for the "first lord," a few sauntering clerks, and numbers of swift
active messengers passed to and fro;--after waiting for four hours,
making drawings on the blotting-book, and reading the Morning Post
for that day week, Mr. Perkins was informed that he might go into his
uncle's room, and did so accordingly.

He found a little hard old gentleman seated at a table covered with
every variety of sealing-wax, blotting-paper, envelopes, despatch-boxes,
green tapers, etc. etc. An immense fire was blazing in the grate, an
immense sheet-almanack hung over that, a screen, three or four chairs,
and a faded Turkey carpet, formed the rest of the furniture of this
remarkable room--which I have described thus particularly, because in
the course of a long official life, I have remarked that such is the
invariable decoration of political rooms.

"Well, John," said the little hard old gentleman, pointing to an
arm-chair, "I'm told you've been here since eleven. Why the deuce do you
come so early?"

"I had important business," answered Mr. Perkins, stoutly; and as his
uncle looked up with a comical expression of wonder, John began in a
solemn tone to deliver a little speech which he had composed, and which
proved him to be a very worthy, easy, silly fellow.

"Sir," said Mr. Perkins, "you have known for some time past the nature
of my political opinions, and the intimacy which I have had the honour
to form with one--with some of the leading members of the Liberal
party." (A grin from Mr. Crampton.) "When first, by your kindness, I was
promised the clerkship in the Tape and Sealing-Wax Office, my opinions
were not formed as they are now; and having taken the advice of the
gentlemen with whom I act,"--(an enormous grin)--"the advice, I say,
of the gentlemen with whom I act, and the counsel likewise of my own
conscience, I am compelled, with the deepest grief, to say, my dear
uncle, that I--I--"

"That you--what, sir?" exclaimed little Mr. Crampton, bouncing off his
chair. "You don't mean to say that you are such a fool as to decline the
place?"

"I do decline the place," said Perkins, whose blood rose at the word
"fool." "As a man of honour, I cannot take it."

"Not take it! and how are you to live? On the rent of that house of
yours? For, by gad, sir, if you give up the clerkship, I never will give
you a shilling."

"It cannot be helped," said Mr. Perkins, looking as much like a martyr
as he possibly could, and thinking himself a very fine fellow. "I have
talents, sir, which I hope to cultivate; and am member of a profession
by which a man may hope to rise to the very highest offices of the
State."

"Profession, talents, offices of the State! Are you mad, John Perkins,
that you come to me with such insufferable twaddle as this? Why, do you
think if you HAD been capable of rising at the bar, I would have taken
so much trouble about getting you a place? No, sir; you are too fond of
pleasure, and bed, and tea-parties, and small-talk, and reading novels,
and playing the flute, and writing sonnets. You would no more rise
at the bar than my messenger, sir. It was because I knew your
disposition--that hopeless, careless, irresolute good-humour of
yours--that I had determined to keep you out of danger, by placing you
in a snug shelter, where the storms of the world would not come near
you. You must have principles forsooth! and you must marry Miss Gorgon,
of course: and by the time you have gone ten circuits, and had six
children, you will have eaten up every shilling of your wife's fortune,
and be as briefless as you are now. Who the deuce has put all this
nonsense into your head? I think I know."

Mr. Perkins's ears tingled as these hard words saluted them; and he
scarcely knew whether he ought to knock his uncle down, or fall at his
feet and say, "Uncle, I have been a fool, and I know it." The fact is,
that in his interview with Miss Gorgon and her aunt in the morning,
when he came to tell them of the resolution he had formed to give up
the place, both the ladies and John himself had agreed, with a thousand
rapturous tears and exclamations, that he was one of the noblest young
men that ever lived, had acted as became himself, and might with perfect
propriety give up the place, his talents being so prodigious that no
power on earth could hinder him from being Lord Chancellor. Indeed, John
and Lucy had always thought the clerkship quite beneath him, and were
not a little glad, perhaps, at finding a pretext for decently refusing
it. But as Perkins was a young gentleman whose candour was such that he
was always swayed by the opinions of the last speaker, he did begin to
feel now the truth of his uncle's statements, however disagreeable they
might be.

Mr. Crampton continued:--

"I think I know the cause of your patriotism. Has not William Pitt
Scully, Esquire, had something to do with it?"

Mr. Perkins COULD not turn any redder than he was, but confessed with
deep humiliation that "he HAD consulted Mr. Scully among other friends."

Mr. Crampton smiled--drew a letter from a heap before him, and tearing
off the signature, handed over the document to his nephew. It contained
the following paragraphs:--

"Hawksby has sounded Scully: we can have him any day we want him. He
talks very big at present, and says he would not take anything under
a... This is absurd. He has a Yorkshire nephew coming up to town, and
wants a place for him. There is one vacant in the Tape Office, he says:
have you not a promise of it?"

"I can't--I can't believe it," said John; "this, sir, is some weak
invention of the enemy. Scully is the most honourable man breathing."

"Mr. Scully is a gentleman in a very fair way to make a fortune,"
answered Mr. Crampton. "Look you, John--it is just as well for your sake
that I should give you the news a few weeks before the papers, for I
don't want you to be ruined, if I can help it, as I don't wish to have
you on my hands. We know all the particulars of Scully's history. He was
a Tory attorney at Oldborough; he was jilted by the present Lady Gorgon,
turned Radical, and fought Sir George in his own borough. Sir George
would have had the peerage he is dying for, had he not lost that second
seat (by-the-by, my Lady will be here in five minutes), and Scully
is now quite firm there. Well, my dear lad, we have bought your
incorruptible Scully. Look here,"--and Mr. Crampton produced three
Morning Posts.

"'THE HONOURABLE HENRY HAWKSBY'S DINNER-PARTY.--Lord So-and-So--Duke of
So-and-So--W. Pitt Scully, Esq. M.P.'

"Hawksby is our neutral, our dinner-giver.

"'LADY DIANA DOLDRUM'S ROUT.--W. Pitt Scully, Esq,' again.

"'THE EARL OF MANTRAP'S GRAND DINNER.'--A Duke--four Lords--'Mr. Scully,
and Sir George Gorgon.'"

"Well, but I don't see how you have bought him; look at his votes."

"My dear John," said Mr. Crampton, jingling his watch-seals very
complacently, "I am letting you into fearful secrets. The great common
end of party is to buy your opponents--the great statesman buys them for
nothing."

Here the attendant genius of Mr. Crampton made his appearance, and
whispered something, to which the little gentleman said, "Show her
Ladyship in,"--when the attendant disappeared.

"John," said Mr. Crampton, with a very queer smile, "you can't stay in
this room while Lady Gorgon is with me; but there is a little clerk's
room behind the screen there, where you can wait until I call you."

John retired, and as he closed the door of communication, strange to
say, little Mr. Crampton sprang up and said, "Confound the young ninny,
he has shut the door!"

Mr. Crampton then, remembering that he wanted a map in the next room,
sprang into it, left the door half open in coming out, and was in
time to receive Her Ladyship with smiling face as she, ushered by Mr.
Strongitharm, majestically sailed in.



CHAPTER III.


BEHIND THE SCENES.

In issuing from and leaving open the door of the inner room, Mr.
Crampton had bestowed upon Mr. Perkins a look so peculiarly arch, that
even he, simple as he was, began to imagine that some mystery was about
to be cleared up, or some mighty matter to be discussed. Presently
he heard the well-known voice of Lady Gorgon in conversation with his
uncle. What could their talk be about? Mr. Perkins was dying to know,
and--shall we say it?--advanced to the door on tiptoe and listened with
all his might.

Her Ladyship, that Juno of a woman, if she had not borrowed Venus's
girdle to render herself irresistible, at least had adopted a tender,
coaxing, wheedling, frisky tone, quite different from her ordinary
dignified style of conversation. She called Mr. Crampton a naughty man,
for neglecting his old friends, vowed that Sir George was quite hurt at
his not coming to dine--nor fixing a day when he would come--and added,
with a most engaging ogle, that she had three fine girls at home,
who would perhaps make an evening pass pleasantly, even to such a gay
bachelor as Mr. Crampton.

"Madam," said he, with much gravity, "the daughters of such a mother
must be charming; but I, who have seen your Ladyship, am, alas! proof
against even them."

Both parties here heaved tremendous sighs and affected to be wonderfully
unhappy about something.

"I wish," after a pause, said Lady Gorgon--"I wish, dear Mr. Crampton,
you would not use that odious title 'my Ladyship:' you know it always
makes me melancholy."

"Melancholy, my dear Lady Gorgon; and why?"

"Because it makes me think of another title that ought to have been
mine--ours (I speak for dear Sir George's and my darling boy's sake,
Heaven knows, not mine). What a sad disappointment it has been to my
husband, that after all his services, all the promises he has had, they
have never given him his peerage. As for me, you know--"

"For you, my dear madam, I know quite well that you care for no such
bauble as a coronet, except in so far as it may confer honour upon those
most dear to you--excellent wife and noble mother as you are. Heigho!
what a happy man is Sir George!"

Here there was another pause, and if Mr. Perkins could have seen what
was taking place behind the screen, he would have beheld little Mr.
Crampton looking into Lady Gorgon's face, with as love-sick a Romeo-gaze
as he could possibly counterfeit; while her Ladyship, blushing somewhat
and turning her own grey gogglers up to heaven, received all his words
for gospel, and sat fancying herself to be the best, most meritorious,
and most beautiful creature in the three kingdoms.

"You men are terrible flatterers," continued she; "but you say right:
for myself I value not these empty distinctions. I am growing old, Mr.
Crampton,--yes, indeed, I am, although you smile so incredulously,--and
let me add, that MY thoughts are fixed upon HIGHER things than earthly
crowns. But tell me, you who are all in all with Lord Bagwig, are we
never to have our peerage? His Majesty, I know, is not averse; the
services of dear Sir George to a member of His Majesty's august family,
I know, have been appreciated in the highest quarter. Ever since the
peace we have had a promise. Four hundred pounds has Sir George spent at
the Heralds' Office (I myself am of one of the most ancient families
in the kingdom, Mr. Crampton), and the poor dear man's health is really
ruined by the anxious sickening feeling of hope so long delayed."

Mr. Crampton now assumed an air of much solemnity.

"My dear Lady Gorgon," said he, "will you let me be frank with you, and
will you promise solemnly that what I am going to tell you shall never
be repeated to a single soul?"

Lady Gorgon promised.

"Well, then, since the truth you must know, you yourselves have been in
part the cause of the delay of which you complain. You gave us two votes
five years ago; you now only give us one. If Sir George were to go up
to the Peers, we should lose even that one vote; and would it be common
sense in us to incur such a loss? Mr. Scully, the Liberal, would return
another Member of his own way of thinking; and as for the Lords, we
have, you know, a majority there."

"Oh, that horrid man!" said Lady Gorgon, cursing Mr. Scully in her
heart, and beginning to play a rapid tattoo with her feet, "that
miscreant, that traitor, that--that attorney has been our ruin."

"Horrid man, if you please, but give me leave to tell you that the
horrid man is not the sole cause of your ruin--if ruin you will call it.
I am sorry to say that I do candidly think Ministers believe that Sir
George Gorgon has lost his influence in Oldborough as much through his
own fault as through Mr. Scully's cleverness."

"Our own fault! Good heavens! Have we not done everything--everything
that persons of our station in the county could do, to keep those
misguided men? Have we not remonstrated, threatened, taken away our
custom from the Mayor, established a Conservative apothecary--in
fact, done all that gentlemen could do? But these are such times, Mr.
Crampton: the spirit of revolution is abroad, and the great families of
England are menaced by democratic insolence."

This was Sir George Gorgon's speech always after dinner, and was
delivered by his lady with a great deal of stateliness. Somewhat,
perhaps, to her annoyance, Mr. Crampton only smiled, shook his head, and
said--

"Nonsense, my dear Lady Gorgon--pardon the phrase, but I am a plain old
man, and call things by their names. Now, will you let me whisper in
your ear one word of truth? You have tried all sorts of remonstrances,
and exerted yourself to maintain your influence in every way, except the
right one, and that is--"

"What, in Heaven's name?"

"Conciliation. We know your situation in the borough. Mr. Scully's
whole history, and, pardon me for saying so (but we men in office know
everything), yours--"

Lady Gorgon's ears and cheeks now assumed the hottest hue of crimson.
She thought of her former passages with Scully, and of the days
when--but never mind when: for she suffered her veil to fall, and buried
her head in the folds of her handkerchief. Vain folds! The wily
little Mr. Crampton could see all that passed behind the cambric, and
continued--

"Yes, madam, we know the absurd hopes that were formed by a certain
attorney twenty years since. We know how, up to this moment, he boasts
of certain walks--"

"With the governess--we were always with the governess!" shrieked out
Lady Gorgon, clasping her hands. "She was not the wisest of women."

"With the governess, of course," said Mr. Crampton, firmly. "Do you
suppose that any man dare breathe a syllable against your spotless
reputation? Never, my dear madam; but what I would urge is this--you
have treated your disappointed admirer too cruelly."

"What! the traitor who has robbed us of our rights?"

"He never would have robbed you of your rights if you had been more kind
to him. You should be gentle, madam; you should forgive him--you should
be friends with him."

"With a traitor, never!"

"Think what made him a traitor, Lady Gorgon; look in your glass, and say
if there be not some excuse for him? Think of the feelings of the man
who saw beauty such as yours--I am a plain man and must speak--virtue
such as yours, in the possession of a rival. By heavens, madam, I think
he was RIGHT to hate Sir George Gorgon! Would you have him allow such a
prize to be ravished from him without a pang on his part?"

"He was, I believe, very much attached to me," said Lady Gorgon, quite
delighted; "but you must be aware that a young man of his station in
life could not look up to a person of my rank."

"Surely not: it was monstrous pride and arrogance in Mr. Scully. But
que voulez-vous? Such is the world's way. Scully could not help loving
you--who that knows you can? I am a plain man, and say what I think.
He loves you still. Why make an enemy of him, who would at a word be at
your feet? Dearest Lady Gorgon, listen to me. Sir George Gorgon and Mr.
Scully have already met--their meeting was our contrivance. It is for
our interest, for yours, that they should be friends. If there were two
Ministerial Members for Oldborough, do you think your husband's peerage
would be less secure? I am not at liberty to tell you all I know on this
subject; but do, I entreat you, be reconciled to him."

And after a little more conversation, which was carried on by Mr.
Crampton in the same tender way, this important interview closed, and
Lady Gorgon, folding her shawl round her, threaded certain mysterious
passages and found her way to her carriage in Whitehall.

"I hope you have not been listening, you rogue?" said Mr. Crampton to
his nephew, who blushed most absurdly by way of answer. "You would have
heard great State secrets, if you had dared to do so. That woman is
perpetually here, and if peerages are to be had for the asking, she
ought to have been a duchess by this time. I would not have admitted her
but for a reason that I have. Go you now and ponder upon what you have
heard and seen. Be on good terms with Scully, and, above all, speak not
a word concerning our interview--no, not a word even to your mistress.
By the way, I presume, sir, you will recall your resignation?"

The bewildered Perkins was about to stammer out a speech, when his
uncle, cutting it short, pushed him gently out of the door.

                    *          *          *

At the period when the important events occurred which have been
recorded here, parties ran very high, and a mighty struggle for the
vacant Speakership was about to come on. The Right Honourable Robert
Pincher was the Ministerial candidate, and Sir Charles Macabaw was
patronised by the Opposition. The two Members for Oldborough of course
took different sides, the baronet being of the Pincher faction, while
Mr. William Pitt Scully strongly supported the Macabaw party.

It was Mr. Scully's intention to deliver an impromptu speech upon the
occasion of the election, and he and his faithful Perkins prepared
it between them: for the latter gentleman had wisely kept his uncle's
counsel and his own and Mr. Scully was quite ignorant of the conspiracy
that was brooding. Indeed, so artfully had that young Machiavel of a
Perkins conducted himself, that when asked by his patron whether he had
given up his place in the Tape and Sealing Wax Office, he replied that
"he HAD tendered his resignation," but did not say one word about having
recalled it.

"You were right, my boy, quite right," said Mr. Scully. "A man of
uncompromising principles should make no compromise." And herewith he
sat down and wrote off a couple of letters, one to Mr. Hawksby, telling
him that the place in the Sealing-Wax Office was, as he had reason to
know, vacant; and the other to his nephew, stating that it was to be
his. "Under the rose, my dear Bob," added Mr. Scully, "it will cost you
five hundred pounds; but you cannot invest your money better."

It is needless to state that the affair was to be conducted "with the
strictest secresy and honour," and that the money was to pass through
Mr. Scully's hands.

While, however, the great Pincher and Macabaw question was yet
undecided, an event occurred to Mr. Scully, which had a great influence
upon his after-life. A second grand banquet was given at the Earl of
Mantrap's: Lady Mantrap requested him to conduct Lady Gorgon to dinner;
and the latter, with a charming timidity, and a gracious melancholy look
into his face (after which her veined eyelids veiled her azure eyes),
put her hand into the trembling one of Mr. Scully and said as much as
looks could say, "Forgive and forget."

Down went Scully to dinner. There were dukes on his right hand and earls
on his left; there were but two persons without title in the midst of
that glittering assemblage; the very servants looked like noblemen. The
cook had done wonders; the wines were cool and rich, and Lady Gorgon was
splendid! What attention did everybody pay to her and to him! Why WOULD
she go on gazing into his face with that tender imploring look? In
other words, Scully, after partaking of soup and fish (he, during their
discussion, had been thinking over all the former love-and-hate passages
between himself and Lady Gorgon), turned very red, and began talking to
her.

"Were you not at the opera on Tuesday?" began he, assuming at once the
airs of a man of fashion. "I thought I caught a glimpse of you in the
Duchess of Diddlebury's box."

"Opera, Mr. Scully?" (pronouncing the word "Scully" with the utmost
softness). "Ah, no! we seldom go, and yet too often. For serious persons
the enchantments of that place are too dangerous. I am so nervous--so
delicate; the smallest trifle so agitates, depresses, or irritates me,
that I dare not yield myself up to the excitement of music. I am too
passionately attached to it; and, shall I tell you? it has such a
strange influence upon me, that the smallest false note almost drives me
to distraction, and for that very reason I hardly ever go to a concert
or a ball."

"Egad," thought Scully, "I recollect when she would dance down a matter
of five-and-forty couple, and jingle away at the 'Battle of Prague' all
day."

She continued: "Don't you recollect, I do, with--oh, what regret!--that
day at Oldborough race-ball, when I behaved with such sad rudeness to
you? You will scarcely believe me, and yet I assure you 'tis the fact,
the music had made me almost mad. Do let me ask your pardon for my
conduct. I was not myself. Oh, Mr. Scully! I am no worldly woman; I
know my duties, and I feel my wrongs. Nights and days have I lain awake
weeping and thinking of that unhappy day--that I should ever speak so to
an old friend; for we WERE old friends, were we not?"

Scully did not speak; but his eyes were bursting out of his head, and
his face was the exact colour of a deputy-lieutenant's uniform.

"That I should ever forget myself and you so! How I have been longing
for this opportunity to ask you to forgive me! I asked Lady Mantrap,
when I heard you were to be here, to invite me to her party. Come, I
know you will forgive me--your eyes say you will. You used to look so in
old days, and forgive me my caprices THEN. Do give me a little wine--we
will drink to the memory of old days."

Her eyes filled with tears; and poor Scully's hand caused such a
rattling and trembling of the glass and the decanter that the Duke
of Doldrum--who had been, during the course of this whispered
sentimentality, describing a famous run with the Queen's hounds at the
top of his voice--stopped at the jingling of the glass, and his tale
was lost for ever. Scully hastily drank his wine, and Lady Gorgon turned
round to her next neighbour, a little gentleman in black, between whom
and herself certain conscious looks passed.

"I am glad poor Sir George is not here," said he, smiling.

Lady Gorgon said, "Pooh, for shame!" The little gentleman was no other
than Josiah Crampton, Esquire, that eminent financier, and he was now
going through the curious calculation before mentioned, by which you BUY
A MAN FOR NOTHING. He intended to pay the very same price for Sir George
Gorgon, too; but there was no need to tell the baronet so; only of this
the reader must be made aware.

While Mr. Crampton was conducting this intrigue, which was to bring a
new recruit to the Ministerial ranks, his mighty spirit condescended to
ponder upon subjects of infinitely less importance, and to arrange plans
for the welfare of his nephew and the young woman to whom he had made
a present of his heart. These young persons, as we said before, had
arranged to live in Mr. Perkins's own house in Bedford Row. It was of a
peculiar construction, and might more properly be called a house and
a half: for a snug little tenement of four chambers protruded from the
back of the house into the garden. These rooms communicated with the
drawing-rooms occupied by Mr. Scully; and Perkins, who acted as his
friend and secretary, used frequently to sit in the one nearest the
Member's study, in order that he might be close at hand to confer
with that great man. The rooms had a private entrance too, were newly
decorated, and in them the young couple proposed to live; the kitchen
and garrets being theirs likewise. What more could they need? We
are obliged to be particular in describing these apartments, for
extraordinary events occurred therein.

To say the truth, until the present period Mr. Crampton had taken no
great interest in his nephew's marriage, or, indeed, in the young man
himself. The old gentleman was of a saturnine turn, and inclined
to undervalue the qualities of Mr. Perkins, which were idleness,
simplicity, enthusiasm, and easy good-nature.

"Such fellows never do anything in the world," he would say, and for
such he had accordingly the most profound contempt. But when, after
John Perkins's repeated entreaties, he had been induced to make the
acquaintance of Miss Gorgon, he became instantly charmed with her, and
warmly espoused her cause against her overbearing relations.

At his suggestion she wrote back to decline Sir George Gorgon's
peremptory invitation, and hinted at the same time that she had attained
an age and a position which enabled her to be the mistress of her own
actions. To this letter there came an answer from Lady Gorgon which we
shall not copy, but which simply stated that Miss Lucy Gorgon's conduct
was unchristian, ungrateful, unladylike, and immodest; that the Gorgon
family disowned her for the future, and left her at liberty to form
whatever base connections she pleased.

"A pretty world this," said Mr. Crampton, in a great rage, when the
letter was shown to him. "This same fellow, Scully, dissuades my nephew
from taking a place, because Scully wants it for himself. This prude of
a Lady Gorgon cries out shame, and disowns an innocent amiable girl: she
a heartless jilt herself once, and a heartless flirt now. The Pharisees,
the Pharisees! And to call mine a base family, too!"

Now, Lady Gorgon did not in the least know Mr. Crampton's connection
with Mr. Perkins, or she would have been much more guarded in her
language; but whether she knew it or not, the old gentleman felt a huge
indignation, and determined to have his revenge.

"That's right, Uncle! SHALL I call Gorgon out?" said the impetuous young
Perkins, who was all for blood.

"John, you are a fool," said his uncle. "You shall have a better
revenge: you shall be married from Sir George Gorgon's house, and you
shall see Mr. William Pitt Scully sold for nothing." This to the veteran
diplomatist seemed to be the highest triumph which man could possibly
enjoy.

It was very soon to take place: and, as has been the case ever since the
world began, woman, lovely woman was to be the cause of Scully's fall.
The tender scene at Lord Mantrap's was followed by many others equally
sentimental. Sir George Gorgon called upon his colleague the very next
day, and brought with him a card from Lady Gorgon inviting Mr. Scully
to dinner. The attorney eagerly accepted the invitation, was received
in Baker Street by the whole amiable family with much respectful
cordiality, and was pressed to repeat his visits as country neighbours
should. More than once did he call, and somehow always at the hour when
Sir George was away at his club, or riding in the Park, or elsewhere
engaged. Sir George Gorgon was very old, very feeble, very much
shattered in constitution. Lady Gorgon used to impart her fears to Mr.
Scully every time he called there, and the sympathising attorney used to
console her as best he might. Sir George's country agent neglected the
property--his lady consulted Mr. Scully concerning it. He knew to a
fraction how large her jointure was; how she was to have Gorgon Castle
for her life; and how, in the event of the young baronet's death (he,
too, was a sickly poor boy), the chief part of the estates, bought by
her money, would be at her absolute disposal.

"What a pity these odious politics prevent me from having you for our
agent," would Lady Gorgon say; and indeed Scully thought it was a pity
too. Ambitious Scully! what wild notions filled his brain. He used to
take leave of Lady Gorgon and ruminate upon these things; and when he
was gone, Sir George and her Ladyship used to laugh.

"If we can but commit him--if we can but make him vote for Pincher,"
said the General, "my peerage is secure. Hawksby and Crampton as good as
told me so."

The point had been urged upon Mr. Scully repeatedly and adroitly. "Is
not Pincher a more experienced man than Macabaw?" would Sir George say
to his guest over their wine. Scully allowed it. "Can't you vote for
him on personal grounds, and say so in the House?" Scully wished he
could--how he wished he could! Every time the General coughed, Scully
saw his friend's desperate situation more and more, and thought how
pleasant it would be to be lord of Gorgon Castle. "Knowing my property,"
cried Sir George, "as you do, and with your talents and integrity, what
a comfort it would be could I leave you as guardian to my boy! But these
cursed politics prevent it, my dear fellow. Why WILL you be a Radical?"
And Scully cursed politics too. "Hang the low-bred rogue," added Sir
George, when William Pitt Scully left the house: "he will do everything
but promise."

"My dear General," said Lady Gorgon, sidling up to him and patting him
on his old yellow cheek--"My dear Georgy, tell me one thing,--are you
jealous?"

"Jealous, my dear! and jealous of THAT fellow--pshaw!"

"Well, then, give me leave, and you shall have the promise to-morrow."

                    *          *          *

To-morrow arrived. It was a remarkably fine day, and in the forenoon
Mr. Perkins gave his accustomed knock at Scully's study, which was only
separated from his own sitting-room by a double door. John had wisely
followed his uncle's advice, and was on the best terms with the
honourable Member.

"Here are a few sentences," said he, "which I think may suit
your purpose. Great public services--undeniable merit--years of
integrity--cause of reform, and Macabaw for ever!" He put down the
paper. It was, in fact, a speech in favour of Mr. Macabaw.

"Hush," said Scully, rather surlily; for he was thinking how
disagreeable it was to support Macabaw; and besides, there were clerks
in the room, whom the thoughtless Perkins had not at first perceived. As
soon as that gentleman saw them, "You are busy, I see," continued he in
a lower tone. "I came to say that I must be off duty to-day, for I am
engaged to take a walk with some ladies of my acquaintance."

So saying, the light-hearted young man placed his hat unceremoniously on
his head, and went off through his own door, humming a song. He was in
such high spirits that he did not even think of closing the doors of
communication, and Scully looked after him with a sneer.

"Ladies, forsooth," thought he; "I know who they are. This precious girl
that he is fooling with, for one, I suppose." He was right: Perkins was
off on the wings of love, to see Miss Lucy; and she and Aunt Biggs
and Uncle Crampton had promised this very day to come and look at the
apartments which Mrs. John Perkins was to occupy with her happy husband.

"Poor devil," so continued Mr. Scully's meditations, "it is almost too
bad to do him out of his place; but my Bob wants it, and John's girl
has, I hear, seven thousand pounds. His uncle will get him another place
before all that money is spent." And herewith Mr. Scully began conning
the speech which Perkins had made for him.

He had not read it more than six times,--in truth, he was getting it by
heart,--when his head clerk came to him from the front room, bearing
a card: a footman had brought it, who said his lady was waiting below.
Lady Gorgon's name was on the card! To seize his hat and rush downstairs
was, with Mr. Scully, the work of an infinitesimal portion of time.

It was indeed Lady Gorgon in her Gorgonian chariot.

"Mr. Scully," said she, popping her head out of window and smiling in a
most engaging way, "I want to speak to you, on something very particular
INDEED"--and she held him out her hand. Scully pressed it most tenderly:
he hoped all heads in Bedford Row were at the windows to see him. "I
can't ask you into the carriage, for you see the governess is with me,
and I want to talk secrets to you."

"Shall I go and make a little promenade?" said mademoiselle, innocently.
And her mistress hated her for that speech.

"No. Mr. Scully, I am sure, will let me come in for five minutes?"

Mr. Scully was only too happy. My Lady descended and walked upstairs,
leaning on the happy solicitor's arm. But how should he manage? The
front room was consecrated to clerks; there were clerks too, as ill-luck
would have it, in his private room. "Perkins is out for the day,"
thought Scully; "I will take her into his room." And into Perkins's
room he took her--ay, and he shut the double doors after him too, and
trembled as he thought of his own happiness.

"What a charming little study," said Lady Gorgon, seating herself. And
indeed it was very pretty: for Perkins had furnished it beautifully, and
laid out a neat tray with cakes, a cold fowl, and sherry, to entertain
his party withal. "And do you bachelors always live so well?" continued
she, pointing to the little cold collation.

Mr. Scully looked rather blank when he saw it, and a dreadful suspicion
crossed his soul; but there was no need to trouble Lady Gorgon with
explanations: therefore, at once, and with much presence of mind, he
asked her to partake of his bachelor's fare (she would refuse Mr. Scully
nothing that day). A pretty sight would it have been for young Perkins
to see strangers so unceremoniously devouring his feast. She drank--Mr.
Scully drank--and so emboldened was he by the draught that he actually
seated himself by the side of Lady Gorgon, on John Perkins's new sofa.

Her Ladyship had of course something to say to him. She was a pious
woman, and had suddenly conceived a violent wish for building a chapel
of ease at Oldborough, to which she entreated him to subscribe. She
enlarged upon the benefits that the town would derive from it, spoke
of Sunday-schools, sweet spiritual instruction, and the duty of all
well-minded persons to give aid to the scheme.

"I will subscribe a hundred pounds," said Scully, at the end of her
Ladyship's harangue: "would I not do anything for you?"

"Thank you, thank you, dear Mr. Scully," said the enthusiastic woman.
(How the "dear" went burning through his soul!) "Ah!" added she, "if
you WOULD but do anything for me--if you, who are so eminently, so truly
distinguished, in a religious point of view, would but see the truth
in politics too; and if I could see your name among those of the true
patriot party in this empire, how blest--oh! how blest should I be! Poor
Sir George often says he should go to his grave happy, could he but
see you the guardian of his boy; and I, your old friend (for we WERE
friends, William), how have I wept to think of you as one of those who
are bringing our monarchy to ruin. Do, do promise me this too!" And she
took his hand and pressed it between hers.

The heart of William Pitt Scully, during this speech, was thumping
up and down with a frightful velocity and strength. His old love, the
agency of the Gorgon property--the dear widow--five thousand a year
clear--a thousand delicious hopes rushed madly through his brain, and
almost took away his reason. And there she sat--she, the loved one,
pressing his hand and looking softly into his eyes.

Down, down he plumped on his knees.

"Juliana!" shrieked he, "don't take away your hand! My love--my only
love!--speak but those blessed words again! Call me William once more,
and do with me what you will."

Juliana cast down her eyes and said, in the very smallest type,
"William!"

                    *          *          *
--when the door opened, and in walked Mr. Crampton, leading Mrs. Biggs,
who could hardly contain herself for laughing, and Mr. John Perkins, who
was squeezing the arm of Miss Lucy. They had heard every word of the two
last speeches.

For at the very moment when Lady Gorgon had stopped at Mr. Scully's
door, the four above-named individuals had issued from Great James
Street into Bedford Row.

Lucy cried out that it was her aunt's carriage, and they all saw Mr.
Scully come out, bare-headed, in the sunshine, and my Lady descend, and
the pair go into the house. They meanwhile entered by Mr. Perkins's own
private door, and had been occupied in examining the delightful rooms
on the ground-floor, which were to be his dining-room and library--from
which they ascended a stair to visit the other two rooms, which were to
form Mrs. John Perkins's drawing-room and bedroom. Now whether it was
that they trod softly, or that the stairs were covered with a grand new
carpet and drugget, as was the case, or that the party within were too
much occupied in themselves to heed any outward disturbances, I know
not; but Lucy, who was advancing with John (he was saying something
about one of the apartments, the rogue!)--Lucy started and whispered,
"There is somebody in the rooms!" and at that instant began the speech
already reported, "THANK YOU, THANK YOU, DEAR MR. SCULLY," etc. etc.,
which was delivered by Lady Gorgon in a full clear voice; for, to do her
Ladyship justice, SHE had not one single grain of love for Mr. Scully,
and during the delivery of her little oration, was as cool as the
coolest cucumber.

Then began the impassioned rejoinder, to which the four listened on
the landing-place; and then the little "William," as narrated above: at
which juncture Mr. Crampton thought proper to rattle at the door, and,
after a brief pause, to enter with his party.

"William" had had time to bounce off his knees, and was on a chair at
the other end of the room.

"What, Lady Gorgon!" said Mr. Crampton, with excellent surprise, "how
delighted I am to see you! Always, I see employed in works of charity"
(the chapel-of-ease paper was on her knees), "and on such an occasion,
too,--it is really the most wonderful coincidence! My dear madam, here
is a silly fellow, a nephew of mine, who is going to marry a silly girl,
a niece of your own."

"Sir, I--" began Lady Gorgon, rising.

"They heard every word," whispered Mr. Crampton eagerly. "Come forward,
Mr. Perkins, and show yourself." Mr. Perkins made a genteel bow. "Miss
Lucy, please to shake hands with your aunt; and this, my dear madam, is
Mrs. Biggs, of Mecklenburgh Square, who, if she were not too old, might
marry a gentleman in the Treasury, who is your very humble servant." And
with this gallant speech, old Mr. Crampton began helping everybody to
sherry and cake.

As for William Pitt Scully, he had disappeared, evaporated, in the
most absurd sneaking way imaginable. Lady Gorgon made good her retreat
presently, with much dignity, her countenance undismayed, and her face
turned resolutely to the foe.

                    *          *          *

About five days afterwards, that memorable contest took place in the
House of Commons, in which the partisans of Mr. Macabaw were so very
nearly getting him the Speakership. On the day that the report of the
debate appeared in the Times, there appeared also an announcement in the
Gazette as follows:--

"The King has been pleased to appoint John Perkins, Esquire, to be
Deputy-Subcomptroller of His Majesty's Tape Office and Custos of the
Sealing-Wax Department."

Mr. Crampton showed this to his nephew with great glee, and was
chuckling to think how Mr. William Pitt Scully would be annoyed, who
had expected the place, when Perkins burst out laughing and said, "By
heavens, here is my own speech! Scully has spoken every word of it; he
has only put in Mr. Pincher's name in the place of Mr. Macabaw's."

"He is ours now," responded his uncle, "and I told you WE WOULD HAVE HIM
FOR NOTHING. I told you, too, that you should be married from Sir George
Gorgon's, and here is proof of it."

It was a letter from Lady Gorgon, in which she said that, "had she known
Mr. Perkins to be a nephew of her friend Mr. Crampton, she never for
a moment would have opposed his marriage with her niece, and she
had written that morning to her dear Lucy, begging that the marriage
breakfast should take place in Baker Street."

"It shall be in Mecklenburgh Square," said John Perkins stoutly; and in
Mecklenburgh Square it was.

William Pitt Scully, Esquire, was, as Mr. Crampton said, hugely annoyed
at the loss of the place for his nephew. He had still, however, his
hopes to look forward to, but these were unluckily dashed by the coming
in of the Whigs. As for Sir George Gorgon, when he came to ask about his
peerage, Hawksby told him that they could not afford to lose him in the
Commons, for a Liberal Member would infallibly fill his place.

And now that the Tories are out and the Whigs are in, strange to say a
Liberal does fill his place. This Liberal is no other than Sir George
Gorgon himself, who is still longing to be a lord, and his lady is still
devout and intriguing. So that the Members for Oldborough have
changed sides, and taunt each other with apostasy, and hate each other
cordially. Mr. Crampton still chuckles over the manner in which he
tricked them both, and talks of those five minutes during which he
stood on the landing-place, and hatched and executed his "Bedford-Row
Conspiracy."

========================================
========================================

MEN'S WIVES

By William Makepeace Thackeray



Contents.

The Ravenswing.

I. Which is entirely introductory--contains an account of Miss Crump,
her suitors, and her family circle.

II. In which Mr. Walker makes three attempts to ascertain the dwelling
of Morgiana.

III. What came of Mr. Walker's discovery of the "Bootjack."

IV. In which the heroine has a number more lovers, and cuts a very
dashing figure in the world.

V. In which Mr. Walker falls into difficulties, and Mrs. Walker makes
many foolish attempts to rescue him.

VI. In which Mr. Walker still remains in difficulties, but shows great
resignation under his misfortunes.

VII. In which Morgiana advances towards fame and honour, and in which
several great literary characters make their appearance.

VIII. In which Mr. Walker shows great prudence and forbearance.


Mr. and Mrs. Frank Berry.

I. The fight at Slaughter House.

II. The combat at Versailles.


Dennis Haggarty's wife.




MEN'S WIVES, BY G. FITZ-BOODLE




THE RAVENSWING



CHAPTER I. WHICH IS ENTIRELY INTRODUCTORY--CONTAINS AN ACCOUNT OF MISS
CRUMP, HER SUITORS, AND HER FAMILY CIRCLE.

In a certain quiet and sequestered nook of the retired village of
London--perhaps in the neighbourhood of Berkeley Square, or at any
rate somewhere near Burlington Gardens--there was once a house of
entertainment called the "Bootjack Hotel." Mr. Crump, the landlord, had,
in the outset of life, performed the duties of Boots in some inn even
more frequented than his own, and, far from being ashamed of his origin,
as many persons are in the days of their prosperity, had thus solemnly
recorded it over the hospitable gate of his hotel.

Crump married Miss Budge, so well known to the admirers of the festive
dance on the other side of the water as Miss Delancy; and they had
one daughter, named Morgiana, after that celebrated part in the "Forty
Thieves" which Miss Budge performed with unbounded applause both at
the "Surrey" and "The Wells." Mrs. Crump sat in a little bar, profusely
ornamented with pictures of the dancers of all ages, from Hillisberg,
Rose, Parisot, who plied the light fantastic toe in 1805, down to the
Sylphides of our day. There was in the collection a charming portrait of
herself, done by De Wilde; she was in the dress of Morgiana, and in the
act of pouring, to very slow music, a quantity of boiling oil into one
of the forty jars. In this sanctuary she sat, with black eyes, black
hair, a purple face and a turban, and morning, noon, or night, as you
went into the parlour of the hotel, there was Mrs. Crump taking tea
(with a little something in it), looking at the fashions, or reading
Cumberland's "British Theatre." The Sunday Times was her paper, for she
voted the Dispatch, that journal which is taken in by most ladies of her
profession, to be vulgar and Radical, and loved the theatrical gossip in
which the other mentioned journal abounds.

The fact is, that the "Royal Bootjack," though a humble, was a very
genteel house; and a very little persuasion would induce Mr. Crump, as
he looked at his own door in the sun, to tell you that he had himself
once drawn off with that very bootjack the top-boots of His Royal
Highness the Prince of Wales and the first gentleman in Europe. While,
then, the houses of entertainment in the neighbourhood were loud in
their pretended Liberal politics, the "Bootjack" stuck to the good old
Conservative line, and was only frequented by such persons as were of
that way of thinking. There were two parlours, much accustomed, one for
the gentlemen of the shoulder-knot, who came from the houses of their
employers hard by; another for some "gents who used the 'ouse," as Mrs.
Crump would say (Heaven bless her!) in her simple Cockniac dialect, and
who formed a little club there.

I forgot to say that while Mrs. C. was sipping her eternal tea or
washing up her endless blue china, you might often hear Miss Morgiana
employed at the little red-silk cottage piano, singing, "Come where the
haspens quiver," or "Bonny lad, march over hill and furrow," or "My art
and lute," or any other popular piece of the day. And the dear girl sang
with very considerable skill, too, for she had a fine loud voice, which,
if not always in tune, made up for that defect by its great energy and
activity; and Morgiana was not content with singing the mere tune, but
gave every one of the roulades, flourishes, and ornaments as she heard
them at the theatres by Mrs. Humby, Mrs. Waylett, or Madame Vestris.
The girl had a fine black eye like her mamma, a grand enthusiasm for
the stage, as every actor's child will have, and, if the truth must be
known, had appeared many and many a time at the theatre in Catherine
Street, in minor parts first, and then in Little Pickle, in Desdemona,
in Rosina, and in Miss Foote's part where she used to dance: I have not
the name to my hand, but think it is Davidson. Four times in the week,
at least, her mother and she used to sail off at night to some place of
public amusement, for Mrs. Crump had a mysterious acquaintance with
all sorts of theatrical personages; and the gates of her old haunt "The
Wells," of the "Cobourg" (by the kind permission of Mrs. Davidge), nay,
of the "Lane" and the "Market" themselves, flew open before her
"Open sesame," as the robbers' door did to her colleague, Ali Baba
(Hornbuckle), in the operatic piece in which she was so famous.

Beer was Mr. Crump's beverage, diversified by a little gin, in the
evenings; and little need be said of this gentleman, except that he
discharged his duties honourably, and filled the president's chair at
the club as completely as it could possibly be filled; for he could not
even sit in it in his greatcoat, so accurately was the seat adapted to
him. His wife and daughter, perhaps, thought somewhat slightingly of
him, for he had no literary tastes, and had never been at a theatre
since he took his bride from one. He was valet to Lord Slapper at the
time, and certain it is that his lordship set him up in the "Bootjack,"
and that stories HAD been told. But what are such to you or me? Let
bygones be bygones; Mrs. Crump was quite as honest as her neighbours,
and Miss had five hundred pounds to be paid down on the day of her
wedding.

Those who know the habits of the British tradesman are aware that he has
gregarious propensities like any lord in the land; that he loves a joke,
that he is not averse to a glass; that after the day's toil he is happy
to consort with men of his degree; and that as society is not so far
advanced among us as to allow him to enjoy the comforts of splendid
club-houses, which are open to many persons with not a tenth part of his
pecuniary means, he meets his friends in the cosy tavern parlour, where
a neat sanded floor, a large Windsor chair, and a glass of hot something
and water, make him as happy as any of the clubmen in their magnificent
saloons.

At the "Bootjack" was, as we have said, a very genteel and select
society, called the "Kidney Club," from the fact that on Saturday
evenings a little graceful supper of broiled kidneys was usually
discussed by the members of the club. Saturday was their grand night;
not but that they met on all other nights in the week when inclined for
festivity: and indeed some of them could not come on Saturdays in the
summer having elegant villas in the suburbs, where they passed the
six-and-thirty hours of recreation that are happily to be found at the
end of every week.

There was Mr. Balls, the great grocer of South Audley Street, a warm
man, who, they say, had his twenty thousand pounds; Jack Snaffle, of the
mews hard by, a capital fellow for a song; Clinker, the ironmonger:
all married gentlemen, and in the best line of business; Tressle, the
undertaker, etc. No liveries were admitted into the room, as may be
imagined, but one or two select butlers and major-domos joined the
circle; for the persons composing it knew very well how important it
was to be on good terms with these gentlemen and many a time my lord's
account would never have been paid, and my lady's large order never have
been given, but for the conversation which took place at the "Bootjack,"
and the friendly intercourse subsisting between all the members of the
society.

The tiptop men of the society were two bachelors, and two as fashionable
tradesmen as any in the town: Mr. Woolsey, from Stultz's, of the famous
house of Linsey, Woolsey and Co. of Conduit Street, Tailors; and Mr.
Eglantine, the celebrated perruquier and perfumer of Bond Street, whose
soaps, razors, and patent ventilating scalps are know throughout Europe.
Linsey, the senior partner of the tailors' firm had his handsome mansion
in Regent's Park, drove his buggy, and did little more than lend his
name to the house. Woolsey lived in it, was the working man of the firm,
and it was said that his cut was as magnificent as that of any man in
the profession. Woolsey and Eglantine were rivals in many ways--rivals
in fashion, rivals in wit, and, above all, rivals for the hand of
an amiable young lady whom we have already mentioned, the dark-eyed
songstress Morgiana Crump. They were both desperately in love with her,
that was the truth; and each, in the absence of the other, abused his
rival heartily. Of the hairdresser Woolsey said, that as for Eglantine
being his real name, it was all his (Mr. Woolsey's) eye; that he was in
the hands of the Jews, and his stock and grand shop eaten up by usury.
And with regard to Woolsey, Eglantine remarked, that his pretence
of being descended from the Cardinal was all nonsense; that he was a
partner, certainly, in the firm, but had only a sixteenth share; and
that the firm could never get their moneys in, and had an immense number
of bad debts in their books. As is usual, there was a great deal of
truth and a great deal of malice in these tales; however, the gentlemen
were, take them all in all, in a very fashionable way of business, and
had their claims to Miss Morgiana's hand backed by the parents. Mr.
Crump was a partisan of the tailor; while Mrs. C. was a strong advocate
for the claims of the enticing perfumer.

Now, it was a curious fact, that these two gentlemen were each in
need of the other's services--Woolsey being afflicted with premature
baldness, or some other necessity for a wig still more fatal--Eglantine
being a very fat man, who required much art to make his figure at all
decent. He wore a brown frock-coat and frogs, and attempted by all sorts
of contrivances to hide his obesity; but Woolsey's remark, that, dress
as he would, he would always look like a snob, and that there was
only one man in England who could make a gentleman of him, went to the
perfumer's soul; and if there was one thing on earth he longed for (not
including the hand of Miss Crump) it was to have a coat from Linsey's,
in which costume he was sure that Morgiana would not resist him.

If Eglantine was uneasy about the coat, on the other hand he attacked
Woolsey atrociously on the score of his wig; for though the latter went
to the best makers, he never could get a peruke to sit naturally upon
him and the unhappy epithet of Mr. Wiggins, applied to him on one
occasion by the barber, stuck to him ever after in the club, and
made him writhe when it was uttered. Each man would have quitted the
"Kidneys" in disgust long since, but for the other--for each had an
attraction in the place, and dared not leave the field in possession of
his rival.

To do Miss Morgiana justice, it must be said, that she did not encourage
one more than another; but as far as accepting eau-de-Cologne and
hair-combs from the perfumer--some opera tickets, a treat to Greenwich,
and a piece of real Genoa velvet for a bonnet (it had originally been
intended for a waistcoat), from the admiring tailor, she had been
equally kind to each, and in return had made each a present of a lock
of her beautiful glossy hair. It was all she had to give, poor girl!
and what could she do but gratify her admirers by this cheap and artless
testimony of her regard? A pretty scene and quarrel took place between
the rivals on the day when they discovered that each was in possession
of one of Morgiana's ringlets.

Such, then, were the owners and inmates of the little "Bootjack,"
from whom and which, as this chapter is exceedingly discursive and
descriptive, we must separate the reader for a while, and carry him--it
is only into Bond Street, so no gentleman need be afraid--carry him into
Bond Street, where some other personages are awaiting his consideration.

Not far from Mr. Eglantine's shop in Bond Street, stand, as is very well
known, the Windsor Chambers. The West Diddlesex Association (Western
Branch), the British and Foreign Soap Company, the celebrated attorneys
Kite and Levison, have their respective offices here; and as the names
of the other inhabitants of the chambers are not only painted on the
walls, but also registered in Mr. Boyle's "Court Guide," it is quite
unnecessary that they should be repeated here. Among them, on the
entresol (between the splendid saloons of the Soap Company on the first
floor, with their statue of Britannia presenting a packet of the soap to
Europe, Asia, Africa, and America, and the West Diddlesex Western Branch
on the basement)--lives a gentleman by the name of Mr. Howard Walker.
The brass plate on the door of that gentleman's chambers had the word
"Agency" inscribed beneath his name; and we are therefore at liberty
to imagine that he followed that mysterious occupation. In person Mr.
Walker was very genteel; he had large whiskers, dark eyes (with a slight
cast in them), a cane, and a velvet waistcoat. He was a member of a
club; had an admission to the opera, and knew every face behind the
scenes; and was in the habit of using a number of French phrases in his
conversation, having picked up a smattering of that language during a
residence "on the Continent;" in fact, he had found it very convenient
at various times of his life to dwell in the city of Boulogne, where
he acquired a knowledge of smoking, ecarte, and billiards, which was
afterwards of great service to him. He knew all the best tables in
town, and the marker at Hunt's could only give him ten. He had some
fashionable acquaintances too, and you might see him walking arm-in-arm
with such gentlemen as my Lord Vauxhall, the Marquess of Billingsgate,
or Captain Buff; and at the same time nodding to young Moses, the
dandy bailiff; or Loder, the gambling-house keeper; or Aminadab, the
cigar-seller in the Quadrant. Sometimes he wore a pair of moustaches,
and was called Captain Walker; grounding his claim to that title upon
the fact of having once held a commission in the service of Her Majesty
the Queen of Portugal. It scarcely need be said that he had been through
the Insolvent Court many times. But to those who did not know his
history intimately there was some difficulty in identifying him with the
individual who had so taken the benefit of the law, inasmuch as in
his schedule his name appeared as Hooker Walker, wine-merchant,
commission-agent, music-seller, or what not. The fact is, that though he
preferred to call himself Howard, Hooker was his Christian name, and it
had been bestowed on him by his worthy old father, who was a clergyman,
and had intended his son for that profession. But as the old gentleman
died in York gaol, where he was a prisoner for debt, he was never able
to put his pious intentions with regard to his son into execution; and
the young fellow (as he was wont with many oaths to assert) was thrown
on his own resources, and became a man of the world at a very early age.

What Mr. Howard Walker's age was at the time of the commencement of this
history, and, indeed, for an indefinite period before or afterwards, it
is impossible to determine. If he were eight-and-twenty, as he asserted
himself, Time had dealt hardly with him: his hair was thin, there were
many crows'-feet about his eyes, and other signs in his countenance
of the progress of decay. If, on the contrary, he were forty, as Sam
Snaffle declared, who himself had misfortunes in early life, and vowed
he knew Mr. Walker in Whitecross Street Prison in 1820, he was a very
young-looking person considering his age. His figure was active and
slim, his leg neat, and he had not in his whiskers a single white hair.

It must, however, be owned that he used Mr. Eglantine's Regenerative
Unction (which will make your whiskers as black as your boot), and, in
fact, he was a pretty constant visitor at that gentleman's emporium;
dealing with him largely for soaps and articles of perfumery, which he
had at an exceedingly low rate. Indeed, he was never known to pay Mr.
Eglantine one single shilling for those objects of luxury, and, having
them on such moderate terms, was enabled to indulge in them pretty
copiously. Thus Mr. Walker was almost as great a nosegay as Mr.
Eglantine himself: his handkerchief was scented with verbena, his hair
with jessamine, and his coat had usually a fine perfume of cigars, which
rendered his presence in a small room almost instantaneously remarkable.
I have described Mr. Walker thus accurately, because, in truth, it
is more with characters than with astounding events that this little
history deals, and Mr. Walker is one of the principal of our dramatis
personae.

And so, having introduced Mr. W., we will walk over with him to Mr.
Eglantine's emporium, where that gentleman is in waiting, too, to have
his likeness taken.

There is about an acre of plate glass under the Royal arms on Mr.
Eglantine's shop-window; and at night, when the gas is lighted, and the
washballs are illuminated, and the lambent flame plays fitfully over
numberless bottles of vari-coloured perfumes--now flashes on a case
of razors, and now lightens up a crystal vase, containing a hundred
thousand of his patent tooth-brushes--the effect of the sight may be
imagined. You don't suppose that he is a creature who has those odious,
simpering wax figures in his window, that are called by the vulgar
dummies? He is above such a wretched artifice; and it is my belief
that he would as soon have his own head chopped off, and placed as a
trunkless decoration to his shop-window, as allow a dummy to figure
there. On one pane you read in elegant gold letters "Eglantinia"--'tis
his essence for the handkerchief; on the other is written "Regenerative
Unction"--'tis his invaluable pomatum for the hair.

There is no doubt about it: Eglantine's knowledge of his profession
amounts to genius. He sells a cake of soap for seven shillings, for
which another man would not get a shilling, and his tooth-brushes go off
like wildfire at half-a-guinea apiece. If he has to administer rouge or
pearl-powder to ladies, he does it with a mystery and fascination which
there is no resisting, and the ladies believe there are no cosmetics
like his. He gives his wares unheard-of names, and obtains for them sums
equally prodigious. He CAN dress hair--that is a fact--as few men in
this age can; and has been known to take twenty pounds in a single
night from as many of the first ladies of England when ringlets were in
fashion. The introduction of bands, he says, made a difference of two
thousand pounds a year in his income; and if there is one thing in the
world he hates and despises, it is a Madonna. "I'm not," says he, "a
tradesman--I'm a HARTIST" (Mr. Eglantine was born in London)--"I'm a
hartist; and show me a fine 'ead of air, and I'll dress it for nothink."
He vows that it was his way of dressing Mademoiselle Sontag's hair, that
caused the count her husband to fall in love with her; and he has a lock
of it in a brooch, and says it was the finest head he ever saw, except
one, and that was Morgiana Crump's.

With his genius and his position in the profession, how comes it, then,
that Mr. Eglantine was not a man of fortune, as many a less clever has
been? If the truth must be told, he loved pleasure, and was in the hands
of the Jews. He had been in business twenty years: he had borrowed a
thousand pounds to purchase his stock and shop; and he calculated that
he had paid upwards of twenty thousand pounds for the use of the one
thousand, which was still as much due as on the first day when he
entered business. He could show that he had received a thousand dozen
of champagne from the disinterested money-dealers with whom he usually
negotiated his paper. He had pictures all over his "studios," which had
been purchased in the same bargains. If he sold his goods at an enormous
price, he paid for them at a rate almost equally exorbitant. There
was not an article in his shop but came to him through his Israelite
providers; and in the very front shop itself sat a gentleman who was the
nominee of one of them, and who was called Mr. Mossrose. He was there to
superintend the cash account, and to see that certain instalments were
paid to his principals, according to certain agreements entered into
between Mr. Eglantine and them.

Having that sort of opinion of Mr. Mossrose which Damocles may have had
of the sword which hung over his head, of course Mr. Eglantine hated his
foreman profoundly. "HE an artist," would the former gentleman exclaim;
"why, he's only a disguised bailiff! Mossrose indeed! The chap's name's
Amos, and he sold oranges before he came here." Mr. Mossrose, on his
side, utterly despised Mr. Eglantine, and looked forward to the day when
he would become the proprietor of the shop, and take Eglantine for a
foreman; and then it would HIS turn to sneer and bully, and ride the
high horse.

Thus it will be seen that there was a skeleton in the great perfumer's
house, as the saying is: a worm in his heart's core, and though to all
appearance prosperous, he was really in an awkward position.

What Mr. Eglantine's relations were with Mr. Walker may be imagined from
the following dialogue which took place between the two gentlemen at
five o'clock one summer's afternoon, when Mr. Walker, issuing from his
chambers, came across to the perfumer's shop:--

"Is Eglantine at home, Mr. Mossrose?" said Walker to the foreman, who
sat in the front shop.

"Don't know--go and look" (meaning go and be hanged); for Mossrose also
hated Mr. Walker.

"If you're uncivil I'll break your bones, Mr. AMOS," says Mr. Walker,
sternly.

"I should like to see you try, Mr. HOOKER Walker," replies the undaunted
shopman; on which the Captain, looking several tremendous canings at
him, walked into the back room or "studio."

"How are you, Tiny my buck?" says the Captain. "Much doing?"

"Not a soul in town. I 'aven't touched the hirons all day," replied Mr.
Eglantine, in rather a desponding way.

"Well, just get them ready now, and give my whiskers a turn. I'm going
to dine with Billingsgate and some out-and-out fellows at the 'Regent,'
and so, my lad, just do your best."

"I can't," says Mr. Eglantine. "I expect ladies, Captain, every minute."

"Very good; I don't want to trouble such a great man, I'm sure.
Good-bye, and let me hear from you THIS DAY WEEK, Mr. Eglantine."
"This day week" meant that at seven days from that time a certain bill
accepted by Mr. Eglantine would be due, and presented for payment.

"Don't be in such a hurry, Captain--do sit down. I'll curl you in one
minute. And, I say, won't the party renew?"

"Impossible--it's the third renewal."

"But I'll make the thing handsome to you;--indeed I will."

"How much?"

"Will ten pounds do the business?"

"What! offer my principal ten pounds? Are you mad, Eglantine?--A little
more of the iron to the left whisker."

"No, I meant for commission."

"Well, I'll see if that will do. The party I deal with, Eglantine, has
power, I know, and can defer the matter no doubt. As for me, you know,
I'VE nothing to do in the affair, and only act as a friend between you
and him. I give you my honour and soul, I do."

"I know you do, my dear sir." The last two speeches were lies. The
perfumer knew perfectly well that Mr. Walker would pocket the ten
pounds; but he was too easy to care for paying it, and too timid to
quarrel with such a powerful friend. And he had on three different
occasions already paid ten pounds' fine for the renewal of the bill in
question, all of which bonuses he knew went to his friend Mr. Walker.

Here, too, the reader will perceive what was, in part, the meaning of
the word "Agency" on Mr. Walker's door. He was a go-between between
money-lenders and borrowers in this world, and certain small sums always
remained with him in the course of the transaction. He was an agent for
wine, too; an agent for places to be had through the influence of
great men; he was an agent for half-a-dozen theatrical people, male and
female, and had the interests of the latter especially, it was said,
at heart. Such were a few of the means by which this worthy gentleman
contrived to support himself, and if, as he was fond of high living,
gambling, and pleasures of all kinds, his revenue was not large enough
for his expenditure--why, he got into debt, and settled his bills that
way. He was as much at home in the Fleet as in Pall Mall, and quite as
happy in the one place as in the other. "That's the way I take things,"
would this philosopher say. "If I've money, I spend; if I've credit,
I borrow; if I'm dunned, I whitewash; and so you can't beat me down."
Happy elasticity of temperament! I do believe that, in spite of his
misfortunes and precarious position, there was no man in England whose
conscience was more calm, and whose slumbers were more tranquil, than
those of Captain Howard Walker.

As he was sitting under the hands of Mr. Eglantine, he reverted to "the
ladies," whom the latter gentleman professed to expect; said he was a
sly dog, a lucky ditto, and asked him if the ladies were handsome.

Eglantine thought there could be no harm in telling a bouncer to a
gentleman with whom he was engaged in money transactions; and so, to
give the Captain an idea of his solvency and the brilliancy of his
future prospects, "Captain," said he, "I've got a hundred and eighty
pounds out with you, which you were obliging enough to negotiate for me.
Have I, or have I not, two bills out to that amount?"

"Well, my good fellow, you certainly have; and what then?"

"What then? Why, I bet you five pounds to one, that in three months
those bills are paid."

"Done! five pounds to one. I take it."

This sudden closing with him made the perfumer rather uneasy; but he was
not to pay for three months, and so he said, "Done!" too, and went on:
"What would you say if your bills were paid?"

"Not mine; Pike's."

"Well, if Pike's were paid; and the Minories' man paid, and every single
liability I have cleared off; and that Mossrose flung out of winder, and
me and my emporium as free as hair?"

"You don't say so? Is Queen Anne dead? and has she left you a fortune?
or what's the luck in the wind now?"

"It's better than Queen Anne, or anybody dying. What should you say to
seeing in that very place where Mossrose now sits (hang him!)--seeing
the FINEST HEAD OF 'AIR NOW IN EUROPE? A woman, I tell you--a
slap-up lovely woman, who, I'm proud to say, will soon be called Mrs.
Heglantine, and will bring me five thousand pounds to her fortune."

"Well, Tiny, this IS good luck indeed. I say, you'll be able to do a
bill or two for ME then, hay? You won't forget an old friend?"

"That I won't. I shall have a place at my board for you, Capting; and
many's the time I shall 'ope to see you under that ma'ogany."

"What will the French milliner say? She'll hang herself for despair,
Eglantine."

"Hush! not a word about 'ER. I've sown all my wild oats, I tell you.
Eglantine is no longer the gay young bachelor, but the sober married
man. I want a heart to share the feelings of mine. I want repose. I'm
not so young as I was: I feel it."

"Pooh! pooh! you are--you are--"

"Well, but I sigh for an 'appy fireside; and I'll have it."

"And give up that club which you belong to, hay?"

"'The Kidneys?' Oh! of course, no married man should belong to such
places: at least, I'LL not; and I'll have my kidneys broiled at home.
But be quiet, Captain, if you please; the ladies appointed to--"

"And is it THE lady you expect? eh, you rogue!"

"Well, get along. It's her and her Ma."

But Mr. Walker determined he wouldn't get along, and would see these
lovely ladies before he stirred.

The operation on Mr. Walker's whiskers being concluded, he was arranging
his toilet before the glass in an agreeable attitude: his neck out,
his enormous pin settled in his stock to his satisfaction, his eyes
complacently directed towards the reflection of his left and favourite
whisker. Eglantine was laid on a settee, in an easy, though melancholy
posture; he was twiddling the tongs with which he had just operated on
Walker with one hand, and his right-hand ringlet with the other, and he
was thinking--thinking of Morgiana; and then of the bill which was to
become due on the 16th; and then of a light-blue velvet waistcoat with
gold sprigs, in which he looked very killing, and so was trudging round
in his little circle of loves, fears, and vanities. "Hang it!" Mr.
Walker was thinking, "I AM a handsome man. A pair of whiskers like mine
are not met with every day. If anybody can see that my tuft is dyed, may
I be--" When the door was flung open, and a large lady with a curl
on her forehead, yellow shawl, a green-velvet bonnet with feathers,
half-boots, and a drab gown with tulips and other large exotics painted
on it--when, in a word, Mrs. Crump and her daughter bounced into the
room.

"Here we are, Mr. E," cries Mrs. Crump, in a gay folatre confidential
air. "But law! there's a gent in the room!"

"Don't mind me, ladies," said the gent alluded to, in his fascinating
way. "I'm a friend of Eglantine's; ain't I, Egg? a chip of the old
block, hay?"

"THAT you are," said the perfumer, starting up.

"An 'air-dresser?" asked Mrs. Crump. "Well, I thought he was; there's
something, Mr. E., in gentlemen of your profession so exceeding, so
uncommon distangy."

"Madam, you do me proud," replied the gentleman so complimented, with
great presence of mind. "Will you allow me to try my skill upon you, or
upon Miss, your lovely daughter? I'm not so clever as Eglantine, but no
bad hand, I assure you."

"Nonsense, Captain," interrupted the perfumer, who was uncomfortable
somehow at the rencontre between the Captain and the object of his
affection. "HE'S not in the profession, Mrs. C. This is my friend
Captain Walker, and proud I am to call him my friend." And then aside to
Mrs. C., "One of the first swells on town, ma'am--a regular tiptopper."

Humouring the mistake which Mrs. Crump had just made, Mr. Walker thrust
the curling-irons into the fire in a minute, and looked round at the
ladies with such a fascinating grace, that both, now made acquainted
with his quality, blushed and giggled, and were quite pleased. Mamma
looked at 'Gina, and 'Gina looked at mamma; and then mamma gave 'Gina a
little blow in the region of her little waist, and then both burst out
laughing, as ladies will laugh, and as, let us trust, they may laugh
for ever and ever. Why need there be a reason for laughing? Let us laugh
when we are laughy, as we sleep when we are sleepy. And so Mrs. Crump
and her demoiselle laughed to their hearts' content; and both fixed
their large shining black eyes repeatedly on Mr. Walker.

"I won't leave the room," said he, coming forward with the heated iron
in his hand, and smoothing it on the brown paper with all the dexterity
of a professor (for the fact is, Mr. W. every morning curled his own
immense whiskers with the greatest skill and care)--"I won't leave the
room, Eglantine my boy. My lady here took me for a hairdresser, and so,
you know, I've a right to stay."

"He can't stay," said Mrs. Crump, all of a sudden, blushing as red as a
peony.

"I shall have on my peignoir, Mamma," said Miss, looking at the
gentleman, and then dropping down her eyes and blushing too.

"But he can't stay, 'Gina, I tell you: do you think that I would, before
a gentleman, take off my--"

"Mamma means her FRONT!" said Miss, jumping up, and beginning to laugh
with all her might; at which the honest landlady of the "Bootjack," who
loved a joke, although at her own expense, laughed too, and said that no
one, except Mr. Crump and Mr. Eglantine, had ever seen her without the
ornament in question.

"DO go now, you provoking thing, you!" continued Miss C. to Mr. Walker;
"I wish to hear the hoverture, and it's six o'clock now, and we shall
never be done against then:" but the way in which Morgiana said "DO go,"
clearly indicated "don't" to the perspicacious mind of Mr. Walker.

"Perhaps you 'ad better go," continued Mr. Eglantine, joining in this
sentiment, and being, in truth, somewhat uneasy at the admiration which
his "swell friend" excited.

"I'll see you hanged first, Eggy my boy! Go I won't, until these ladies
have had their hair dressed: didn't you yourself tell me that Miss
Crump's was the most beautiful hair in Europe? And do you think that
I'll go away without seeing it? No, here I stay."

"You naughty wicked odious provoking man!" said Miss Crump. But, at the
same time, she took off her bonnet, and placed it on one of the side
candlesticks of Mr. Eglantine's glass (it was a black-velvet bonnet,
trimmed with sham lace, and with a wreath of nasturtiums, convolvuluses,
and wallflowers within), and then said, "Give me the peignoir, Mr.
Archibald, if you please;" and Eglantine, who would do anything for her
when she called him Archibald, immediately produced that garment, and
wrapped round the delicate shoulders of the lady, who, removing a sham
gold chain which she wore on her forehead, two brass hair-combs set with
glass rubies, and the comb which kept her back hair together--removing
them, I say, and turning her great eyes towards the stranger, and giving
her head a shake, down let tumble such a flood of shining waving heavy
glossy jetty hair, as would have done Mr. Rowland's heart good to see.
It tumbled down Miss Morgiana's back, and it tumbled over her shoulders,
it tumbled over the chair on which she sat, and from the midst of it her
jolly bright-eyed rosy face beamed out with a triumphant smile, which
said, "A'n't I now the most angelic being you ever saw?"

"By Heaven! it's the most beautiful thing I ever saw!" cried Mr. Walker,
with undisguised admiration.

"ISN'T it?" said Mrs. Crump, who made her daughter's triumph her own.
"Heigho! when I acted at 'The Wells' in 1820, before that dear girl was
born, _I_ had such a head of hair as that, to a shade, sir, to a shade.
They called me Ravenswing on account of it. I lost my head of hair when
that dear child was born, and I often say to her, 'Morgiana, you came
into the world to rob your mother of her 'air.' Were you ever at 'The
Wells,' sir, in 1820? Perhaps you recollect Miss Delancy? I am that Miss
Delancy. Perhaps you recollect,--

     "'Tink-a-tink, tink-a-tink,
         By the light of the star,
       On the blue river's brink,
         I heard a guitar.

     "'I heard a guitar,
         On the blue waters clear,
       And knew by its mu-u-sic,
         That Selim was near!'

You remember that in the 'Bagdad Bells'? Fatima, Delancy; Selim,
Benlomond (his real name was Bunnion: and he failed, poor fellow, in
the public line afterwards). It was done to the tambourine, and dancing
between each verse,--

     "'Tink-a-tink, tink-a-tink,
         How the soft music swells,
       And I hear the soft clink
         Of the minaret bells!

     "'Tink-a--'"

"Oh!" here cried Miss Crump, as if in exceeding pain (and whether Mr.
Eglantine had twitched, pulled, or hurt any one individual hair of that
lovely head I don't know)--"Oh, you are killing me, Mr. Eglantine!"

And with this mamma, who was in her attitude, holding up the end of her
boa as a visionary tambourine, and Mr. Walker, who was looking at her,
and in his amusement at the mother's performances had almost forgotten
the charms of the daughter--both turned round at once, and looked at
her with many expressions of sympathy, while Eglantine, in a voice of
reproach, said, "KILLED you, Morgiana! I kill YOU?"

"I'm better now," said the young lady, with a smile--"I'm better, Mr.
Archibald, now." And if the truth must be told, no greater coquette than
Miss Morgiana existed in all Mayfair--no, not among the most fashionable
mistresses of the fashionable valets who frequented the "Bootjack." She
believed herself to be the most fascinating creature that the world ever
produced; she never saw a stranger but she tried these fascinations upon
him; and her charms of manner and person were of that showy sort which
is most popular in this world, where people are wont to admire most that
which gives them the least trouble to see; and so you will find a tulip
of a woman to be in fashion when a little humble violet or daisy of
creation is passed over without remark. Morgiana was a tulip among
women, and the tulip fanciers all came flocking round her.

Well, the said "Oh" and "I'm better now, Mr. Archibald," thereby
succeeded in drawing everybody's attention to her lovely self. By the
latter words Mr. Eglantine was specially inflamed; he glanced at Mr.
Walker, and said, "Capting! didn't I tell you she was a CREECHER? See
her hair, sir: it's as black and as glossy as satting. It weighs fifteen
pound, that hair, sir; and I wouldn't let my apprentice--that blundering
Mossrose, for instance (hang him!)--I wouldn't let anyone but myself
dress that hair for five hundred guineas! Ah, Miss Morgiana, remember
that you MAY ALWAYS have Eglantine to dress your hair!--remember that,
that's all." And with this the worthy gentleman began rubbing delicately
a little of the Eglantinia into those ambrosial locks, which he loved
with all the love of a man and an artist.

And as for Morgiana showing her hair, I hope none of my readers will
entertain a bad opinion of the poor girl for doing so. Her locks were
her pride; she acted at the private theatre "hair parts," where she
could appear on purpose to show them in a dishevelled state; and that
her modesty was real, and not affected may be proved by the fact that
when Mr. Walker, stepping up in the midst of Eglantine's last speech,
took hold of a lock of her hair very gently with his hand, she cried
"Oh!" and started with all her might. And Mr. Eglantine observed
very gravely, "Capting! Miss Crump's hair is to be seen and not to be
touched, if you please."

"No more it is, Mr. Eglantine!" said her mamma. "And now, as it's come
to my turn, I beg the gentleman will be so obliging as to go."

"MUST I?" cried Mr. Walker; and as it was half-past six, and he was
engaged to dinner at the "Regent Club," and as he did not wish to make
Eglantine jealous, who evidently was annoyed by his staying, he took his
hat just as Miss Crump's coiffure was completed, and saluting her and
her mamma, left the room.

"A tip-top swell, I can assure you," said Eglantine, nodding after him:
"a regular bang-up chap, and no MISTAKE. Intimate with the Marquess of
Billingsgate, and Lord Vauxhall, and that set."

"He's very genteel," said Mrs. Crump.

"Law! I'm sure I think nothing of him," said Morgiana.

And Captain Walker walked towards his club, meditating on the beauties
of Morgiana. "What hair," said he, "what eyes the girl has! they're as
big as billiard-balls; and five thousand pounds. Eglantine's in luck!
five thousand pounds--she can't have it, it's impossible!"

No sooner was Mrs. Crump's front arranged, during the time of which
operation Morgiana sat in perfect contentment looking at the last French
fashions in the Courrier des Dames, and thinking how her pink satin
slip would dye, and make just such a mantilla as that represented in the
engraving--no sooner was Mrs. Crump's front arranged, than both ladies,
taking leave of Mr. Eglantine, tripped back to the "Bootjack Hotel" in
the neighbourhood, where a very neat green fly was already in waiting,
the gentleman on the box of which (from a livery-stable in the
neighbourhood) gave a knowing touch to his hat, and a salute with his
whip, to the two ladies, as they entered the tavern.

"Mr. W.'s inside," said the man--a driver from Mr. Snaffle's
establishment; "he's been in and out this score of times, and looking
down the street for you." And in the house, in fact, was Mr. Woolsey,
the tailor, who had hired the fly, and was engaged to conduct the ladies
that evening to the play.

It was really rather too bad to think that Miss Morgiana, after going to
one lover to have her hair dressed, should go with another to the play;
but such is the way with lovely woman! Let her have a dozen admirers,
and the dear coquette will exercise her power upon them all: and as a
lady, when she has a large wardrobe, and a taste for variety in dress,
will appear every day in a different costume, so will the young and
giddy beauty wear her lovers, encouraging now the black whiskers, now
smiling on the brown, now thinking that the gay smiling rattle of an
admirer becomes her very well, and now adopting the sad sentimental
melancholy one, according as her changeful fancy prompts her. Let us not
be too angry with these uncertainties and caprices of beauty; and depend
on it that, for the most part, those females who cry out loudest against
the flightiness of their sisters, and rebuke their undue encouragement
of this man or that, would do as much themselves if they had the chance,
and are constant, as I am to my coat just now, because I have no other.

"Did you see Doubleyou, 'Gina dear?" said her mamma, addressing that
young lady. "He's in the bar with your Pa, and has his military coat
with the king's buttons, and looks like an officer."

This was Mr. Woolsey's style, his great aim being to look like an army
gent, for many of whom he in his capacity of tailor made those splendid
red and blue coats which characterise our military. As for the royal
button, had not he made a set of coats for his late Majesty, George
IV.? and he would add, when he narrated this circumstance, "Sir, Prince
Blucher and Prince Swartzenberg's measure's in the house now; and what's
more, I've cut for Wellington." I believe he would have gone to St.
Helena to make a coat for Napoleon, so great was his ardour. He wore a
blue-black wig, and his whiskers were of the same hue. He was brief and
stern in conversations; and he always went to masquerades and balls in a
field-marshal's uniform.

"He looks really quite the thing to-night," continued Mrs. Crump.

"Yes," said 'Gina; "but he's such an odious wig, and the dye of his
whiskers always comes off on his white gloves."

"Everybody has not their own hair, love," continued Mrs. Crump with a
sigh; "but Eglantine's is beautiful."

"Every hairdresser's is," answered Morgiana, rather contemptuously;
"but what I can't bear is that their fingers is always so very fat and
pudgy."

In fact, something had gone wrong with the fair Morgiana. Was it that
she had but little liking for the one pretender or the other? Was it
that young Glauber, who acted Romeo in the private theatricals, was far
younger and more agreeable than either? Or was it, that seeing a
REAL GENTLEMAN, such as Mr. Walker, with whom she had had her first
interview, she felt more and more the want of refinement in her other
declared admirers? Certain, however, it is, that she was very reserved
all the evening, in spite of the attentions of Mr. Woolsey; that she
repeatedly looked round at the box-door, as if she expected someone to
enter; and that she partook of only a very few oysters, indeed, out of
the barrel which the gallant tailor had sent down to the "Bootjack," and
off which the party supped.

"What is it?" said Mr. Woolsey to his ally, Crump, as they sat together
after the retirement of the ladies. "She was dumb all night. She never
once laughed at the farce, nor cried at the tragedy, and you know she
laughs and cries uncommon. She only took half her negus, and not above a
quarter of her beer."

"No more she did!" replied Mr. Crump, very calmly. "I think it must
be the barber as has been captivating her: he dressed her hair for the
play."

"Hang him, I'll shoot him!" said Mr. Woolsey. "A fat foolish effeminate
beast like that marry Miss Morgiana? Never! I WILL shoot him. I'll
provoke him next Saturday--I'll tread on his toe--I'll pull his nose."

"No quarrelling at the 'Kidneys!'" answered Crump sternly; "there shall
be no quarrelling in that room as long as I'm in the chair!"


"Well, at any rate you'll stand my friend?"

"You know I will," answered the other. "You are honourable, and I like
you better than Eglantine. I trust you more than Eglantine, sir. You're
more of a man than Eglantine, though you ARE a tailor; and I wish with
all my heart you may get Morgiana. Mrs. C. goes the other way, I know:
but I tell you what, women will go their own ways, sir, and Morgy's
like her mother in this point, and depend upon it, Morgy will decide for
herself."

Mr. Woolsey presently went home, still persisting in his plan for the
assassination of Eglantine. Mr. Crump went to bed very quietly, and
snored through the night in his usual tone. Mr. Eglantine passed some
feverish moments of jealousy, for he had come down to the club in the
evening, and had heard that Morgiana was gone to the play with his
rival. And Miss Morgiana dreamed, of a man who was--must we say
it?--exceedingly like Captain Howard Walker. "Mrs. Captain So-and-so!"
thought she. "Oh, I do love a gentleman dearly!"

And about this time, too, Mr. Walker himself came rolling home from
the "Regent," hiccupping. "Such hair!--such eyebrows!--such eyes! like
b-b-billiard-balls, by Jove!"



CHAPTER II. IN WHICH MR. WALKER MAKES THREE ATTEMPTS TO ASCERTAIN THE
DWELLING OF MORGIANA.

The day after the dinner at the "Regent Club," Mr. Walker stepped over
to the shop of his friend the perfumer, where, as usual, the young man,
Mr. Mossrose, was established in the front premises.

For some reason or other, the Captain was particularly good-humoured;
and, quite forgetful of the words which had passed between him and Mr.
Eglantine's lieutenant the day before, began addressing the latter with
extreme cordiality.

"A good morning to you, Mr. Mossrose," said Captain Walker. "Why, sir,
you look as fresh as your namesake--you do, indeed, now, Mossrose."

"You look ash yellow ash a guinea," responded Mr. Mossrose, sulkily. He
thought the Captain was hoaxing him.

"My good sir," replies the other, nothing cast down, "I drank rather too
freely last night."

"The more beast you!" said Mr. Mossrose.

"Thank you, Mossrose; the same to you," answered the Captain.

"If you call me a beast, I'll punch your head off!" answered the young
man, who had much skill in the art which many of his brethren practise.

"I didn't, my fine fellow," replied Walker. "On the contrary, you--"

"Do you mean to give me the lie?" broke out the indignant Mossrose, who
hated the agent fiercely, and did not in the least care to conceal his
hate.

In fact, it was his fixed purpose to pick a quarrel with Walker, and to
drive him, if possible, from Mr. Eglantine's shop. "Do you mean to give
me the lie, I say, Mr. Hooker Walker?"

"For Heaven's sake, Amos, hold your tongue!" exclaimed the Captain, to
whom the name of Hooker was as poison; but at this moment a customer
stepping in, Mr. Amos exchanged his ferocious aspect for a bland grin,
and Mr. Walker walked into the studio.

When in Mr. Eglantine's presence, Walker, too, was all smiles in a
minute, sank down on a settee, held out his hand to the perfumer, and
began confidentially discoursing with him.

"SUCH a dinner, Tiny my boy," said he; "such prime fellows to eat
it, too! Billingsgate, Vauxhall, Cinqbars, Buff of the Blues, and
half-a-dozen more of the best fellows in town. And what do you think the
dinner cost a head? I'll wager you'll never guess."

"Was it two guineas a head?--In course I mean without wine," said the
genteel perfumer.

"Guess again!"

"Well, was it ten guineas a head? I'll guess any sum you please,"
replied Mr. Eglantine: "for I know that when you NOBS are together, you
don't spare your money. I myself, at the "Star and Garter" at Richmond,
once paid--"

"Eighteenpence?"

"Heighteenpence, sir!--I paid five-and-thirty shillings per 'ead. I'd
have you to know that I can act as a gentleman as well as any other
gentleman, sir," answered the perfumer with much dignity.

"Well, eighteenpence was what WE paid, and not a rap more, upon my
honour."

"Nonsense, you're joking. The Marquess of Billinsgate dine for
eighteenpence! Why, hang it, if I was a marquess, I'd pay a five-pound
note for my lunch."

"You little know the person, Master Eglantine," replied the Captain,
with a smile of contemptuous superiority; "you little know the real
man of fashion, my good fellow. Simplicity, sir--simplicity's the
characteristic of the real gentleman, and so I'll tell you what we had
for dinner."

"Turtle and venison, of course:--no nob dines without THEM."

"Psha! we're sick of 'em! We had pea soup and boiled tripe! What do you
think of THAT? We had sprats and herrings, a bullock's heart, a baked
shoulder of mutton and potatoes, pig's-fry and Irish stew. _I_ ordered
the dinner, sir, and got more credit for inventing it than they ever
gave to Ude or Soyer. The Marquess was in ecstasies, the Earl devoured
half a bushel of sprats, and if the Viscount is not laid up with a
surfeit of bullock's heart, my name's not Howard Walker. Billy, as I
call him, was in the chair, and gave my health; and what do you think
the rascal proposed?"

"What DID his Lordship propose?"

"That every man present should subscribe twopence, and pay for my share
of the dinner. By Jove! it is true, and the money was handed to me in
a pewter-pot, of which they also begged to make me a present. We
afterwards went to Tom Spring's, from Tom's to the 'Finish,' from the
'Finish' to the watch-house--that is, THEY did--and sent for me, just as
I was getting into bed, to bail them all out."

"They're happy dogs, those young noblemen," said Mr Eglantine; "nothing
but pleasure from morning till night; no affectation neither--no HOTURE;
but manly downright straightforward good fellows."

"Should you like to meet them, Tiny my boy?" said the Captain.

"If I did sir, I hope I should show myself to be gentleman," answered
Mr. Eglantine.

"Well, you SHALL meet them, and Lady Billingsgate shall order her
perfumes at your shop. We are going to dine, next week, all our set,
at Mealy-faced Bob's, and you shall be my guest," cried the Captain,
slapping the delighted artist on the back. "And now, my boy, tell me how
YOU spent the evening."

"At my club, sir," answered Mr. Eglantine, blushing rather.

"What! not at the play with the lovely black-eyed Miss--What is her
name, Eglantine?

"Never mind her name, Captain," replied Eglantine, partly from prudence
and partly from shame. He had not the heart to own it was Crump, and he
did not care that the Captain should know more of his destined bride.

"You wish to keep the five thousand to yourself--eh, you rogue?"
responded the Captain, with a good-humoured air, although exceedingly
mortified; for, to say the truth, he had put himself to the trouble
of telling the above long story of the dinner, and of promising to
introduce Eglantine to the lords, solely that he might elicit from that
gentleman's good-humour some further particulars regarding the young
lady with the billiard-ball eyes. It was for the very same reason, too,
that he had made the attempt at reconciliation with Mr. Mossrose which
had just so signally failed. Nor would the reader, did he know Mr. W.
better, at all require to have the above explanation; but as yet we are
only at the first chapter of his history, and who is to know what the
hero's motives can be unless we take the trouble to explain?

Well, the little dignified answer of the worthy dealer in bergamot,
"NEVER MIND HER NAME, CAPTAIN!" threw the gallant Captain quite aback;
and though he sat for a quarter of an hour longer, and was exceedingly
kind; and though he threw out some skilful hints, yet the perfumer was
quite unconquerable; or, rather, he was too frightened to tell: the
poor fat timid easy good-natured gentleman was always the prey of
rogues,--panting and floundering in one rascal's snare or another's. He
had the dissimulation, too, which timid men have; and felt the presence
of a victimiser as a hare does of a greyhound. Now he would be quite
still, now he would double, and now he would run, and then came the end.
He knew, by his sure instinct of fear, that the Captain had, in asking
these questions, a scheme against him, and so he was cautious, and
trembled, and doubted. And oh! how he thanked his stars when Lady
Grogmore's chariot drove up, with the Misses Grogmore, who wanted their
hair dressed, and were going to a breakfast at three o'clock!

"I'll look in again, Tiny," said the Captain, on hearing the summons.

"DO, Captain," said the other: "THANK YOU;" and went into the lady's
studio with a heavy heart.

"Get out of the way, you infernal villain!" roared the Captain, with
many oaths, to Lady Grogmore's large footman, with ruby-coloured tights,
who was standing inhaling the ten thousand perfumes of the shop; and the
latter, moving away in great terror, the gallant agent passed out, quite
heedless of the grin of Mr. Mossrose.

Walker was in a fury at his want of success, and walked down Bond Street
in a fury. "I WILL know where the girl lives!" swore he. "I'll spend a
five-pound note, by Jove! rather than not know where she lives!"

"THAT YOU WOULD--I KNOW YOU WOULD!" said a little grave low voice, all
of a sudden, by his side. "Pooh! what's money to you?"

Walker looked down: it was Tom Dale.

Who in London did not know little Tom Dale? He had cheeks like an apple,
and his hair curled every morning, and a little blue stock, and always
two new magazines under his arm, and an umbrella and a little brown
frock-coat, and big square-toed shoes with which he went PAPPING down
the street. He was everywhere at once. Everybody met him every day, and
he knew everything that everybody ever did; though nobody ever knew what
HE did. He was, they say, a hundred years old, and had never dined at
his own charge once in those hundred years. He looked like a figure out
of a waxwork, with glassy clear meaningless eyes: he always spoke with
a grin; he knew what you had for dinner the day before he met you, and
what everybody had had for dinner for a century back almost. He was
the receptacle of all the scandal of all the world, from Bond Street
to Bread Street; he knew all the authors, all the actors, all the
"notorieties" of the town, and the private histories of each. That is,
he never knew anything really, but supplied deficiencies of truth and
memory with ready-coined, never-failing lies. He was the most benevolent
man in the universe, and never saw you without telling you everything
most cruel of your neighbour, and when he left you he went to do the
same kind turn by yourself.

"Pooh! what's money to you, my dear boy?" said little Tom Dale, who had
just come out of Ebers's, where he had been filching an opera-ticket.
"You make it in bushels in the City, you know you do---in thousands.
I saw you go into Eglantine's. Fine business that; finest in London.
Five-shilling cakes of soap, my dear boy. I can't wash with such.
Thousands a year that man has made--hasn't he?"

"Upon my word, Tom, I don't know," says the Captain.

"YOU not know? Don't tell me. You know everything--you agents. You KNOW
he makes five thousand a year--ay, and might make ten, but you know why
he don't."

"Indeed I don't."

"Nonsense. Don't humbug a poor old fellow like me. Jews--Amos--fifty per
cent., ay? Why can't he get his money from a good Christian?"

"I HAVE heard something of that sort," said Walker, laughing. "Why, by
Jove, Tom, you know everything!"

"YOU know everything, my dear boy. You know what a rascally trick that
opera creature served him, poor fellow. Cashmere shawls--Storr and
Mortimer's--'Star and Garter.' Much better dine quiet off pea-soup and
sprats--ay? His betters have, as you know very well."

"Pea-soup and sprats! What! have you heard of that already?"

"Who bailed Lord Billingsgate, hey, you rogue?" and here Tom gave a
knowing and almost demoniacal grin. "Who wouldn't go to the 'Finish'?
Who had the piece of plate presented to him filled with sovereigns? And
you deserved it, my dear boy--you deserved it. They said it was only
halfpence, but I know better!" and here Tom went off in a cough.

"I say, Tom," cried Walker, inspired with a sudden thought, "you, who
know everything, and are a theatrical man, did you ever know a Miss
Delancy, an actress?"

"At 'Sadler's Wells' in '16? Of course I did. Real name was Budge. Lord
Slapper admired her very much, my dear boy. She married a man by the
name of Crump, his Lordship's black footman, and brought him five
thousand pounds; and they keep the 'Bootjack' public-house in Bunker's
Buildings, and they've got fourteen children. Is one of them handsome,
eh, you sly rogue--and is it that which you will give five pounds to
know? God bless you, my dear dear boy. Jones, my dear friend, how are
you?"

And now, seizing on Jones, Tom Dale left Mr. Walker alone, and proceeded
to pour into Mr. Jones's ear an account of the individual whom he had
just quitted; how he was the best fellow in the world, and Jones KNEW
it; how he was in a fine way of making his fortune; how he had been in
the Fleet many times, and how he was at this moment employed in looking
out for a young lady of whom a certain great marquess (whom Jones knew
very well, too) had expressed an admiration.

But for these observations, which he did not hear, Captain Walker, it
may be pronounced, did not care. His eyes brightened up, he marched
quickly and gaily away; and turning into his own chambers opposite
Eglantine's, shop, saluted that establishment with a grin of triumph.
"You wouldn't tell me her name, wouldn't you?" said Mr. Walker. "Well,
the luck's with me now, and here goes."

Two days after, as Mr. Eglantine, with white gloves and a case of
eau-de-Cologne as a present in his pocket, arrived at the "Bootjack
Hotel," Little Bunker's Buildings, Berkeley Square (for it must
out--that was the place in which Mr. Crump's inn was situated),
he paused for a moment at the threshold of the little house of
entertainment, and listened, with beating heart, to the sound of
delicious music that a well-known voice was uttering within.

The moon was playing in silvery brightness down the gutter of the humble
street. A "helper," rubbing down one of Lady Smigsmag's carriage-horses,
even paused in his whistle to listen to the strain. Mr. Tressle's man,
who had been professionally occupied, ceased his tap-tap upon the coffin
which he was getting in readiness. The greengrocer (there is always a
greengrocer in those narrow streets, and he goes out in white Berlin
gloves as a supernumerary footman) was standing charmed at his little
green gate; the cobbler (there is always a cobbler too) was drunk, as
usual, of evenings, but, with unusual subordination, never sang except
when the refrain of the ditty arrived, when he hiccupped it forth with
tipsy loyalty; and Eglantine leaned against the chequers painted on
the door-side under the name of Crump, and looked at the red illumined
curtain of the bar, and the vast well-known shadow of Mrs. Crump's
turban within. Now and again the shadow of that worthy matron's hand
would be seen to grasp the shadow of a bottle; then the shadow of a
cup would rise towards the turban, and still the strain proceeded.
Eglantine, I say, took out his yellow bandanna, and brushed the beady
drops from his brow, and laid the contents of his white kids on his
heart, and sighed with ecstatic sympathy. The song began,--

         "Come to the greenwood tree, [1]
          Come where the dark woods be,
          Dearest, O come with me!
     Let us rove--O my love--O my love!
                             O my-y love!

(Drunken Cobbler without)
                             O my-y love!"

"Beast!" says Eglantine.

         "Come--'tis the moonlight hour,
          Dew is on leaf and flower,
          Come to the linden bower,
     Let us rove--O my love--O my love!
   Let us ro-o-ove, lurlurliety; yes, we'll rove, lurlurliety,
   Through the gro-o-ove, lurlurliety--lurlurli-e-i-e-i-e-i!

(Cobbler, as usual)--
                             Let us ro-o-ove," etc.

"YOU here?" says another individual, coming clinking up the street, in
a military-cut dress-coat, the buttons whereof shone very bright in the
moonlight. "YOU here, Eglantine?--You're always here."

"Hush, Woolsey," said Mr. Eglantine to his rival the tailor (for he
was the individual in question); and Woolsey, accordingly, put his
back against the opposite door-post and chequers, so that (with poor
Eglantine's bulk) nothing much thicker than a sheet of paper could pass
out or in. And thus these two amorous caryatides kept guard as the song
continued:--

          "Dark is the wood, and wide,
           Dangers, they say, betide;
           But, at my Albert's side,
     Nought, I fear, O my love--O my love!

          "Welcome the greenwood tree,
           Welcome the forest tree,
           Dearest, with thee, with thee,
     Nought I fear, O my love--O ma-a-y love!"

Eglantine's fine eyes were filled with tears as Morgiana passionately
uttered the above beautiful words. Little Woolsey's eyes glistened, as
he clenched his fist with an oath, and said, "Show me any singing that
can beat THAT. Cobbler, shut your mouth, or I'll break your head!"

But the cobbler, regardless of the threat, continued to perform the
"Lurlurliety" with great accuracy; and when that was ended, both on his
part and Morgiana's, a rapturous knocking of glasses was heard in the
little bar, then a great clapping of hands, and finally somebody shouted
"Brava!"

"Brava!"

At that word Eglantine turned deadly pale, then gave a start, then a
rush forward, which pinned, or rather cushioned, the tailor against the
wall; then twisting himself abruptly round, he sprang to the door of the
bar, and bounced into that apartment.

"HOW ARE YOU, MY NOSEGAY?" exclaimed the same voice which had shouted
"Brava!" It was that of Captain Walker.

At ten o'clock the next morning, a gentleman, with the King's button
on his military coat, walked abruptly into Mr. Eglantine's shop, and,
turning on Mr. Mossrose, said, "Tell your master I want to see him."

"He's in his studio," said Mr. Mossrose.

"Well, then, fellow, go and fetch him!"

And Mossrose, thinking it must be the Lord Chamberlain, or Doctor
Praetorius at least, walked into the studio, where the perfumer was
seated in a very glossy old silk dressing-gown, his fair hair hanging
over his white face, his double chin over his flaccid whity-brown
shirt-collar, his pea-green slippers on the hob, and on the fire the pot
of chocolate which was simmering for his breakfast. A lazier fellow
than poor Eglantine it would be hard to find; whereas, on the contrary,
Woolsey was always up and brushed, spick-and-span, at seven o'clock; and
had gone through his books, and given out the work for the journeymen,
and eaten a hearty breakfast of rashers of bacon, before Eglantine had
put the usual pound of grease to his hair (his fingers were always as
damp and shiny as if he had them in a pomatum-pot), and arranged his
figure for the day.

"Here's a gent wants you in the shop," says Mr. Mossrose, leaving the
door of communication wide open.

"Say I'm in bed, Mr. Mossrose; I'm out of sperrets, and really can see
nobody."

"It's someone from Vindsor, I think; he's got the royal button," says
Mossrose.

"It's me--Woolsey," shouted the little man from the shop.

Mr. Eglantine at this jumped up, made a rush to the door leading to his
private apartment, and disappeared in a twinkling. But it must not be
imagined that he fled in order to avoid Mr. Woolsey. He only went away
for one minute just to put on his belt, for he was ashamed to be seen
without it by his rival.

This being assumed, and his toilet somewhat arranged, Mr. Woolsey was
admitted into his private room. And Mossrose would have heard every
word of the conversation between those two gentlemen, had not Woolsey,
opening the door, suddenly pounced on the assistant, taken him by
the collar, and told him to disappear altogether into the shop: which
Mossrose did; vowing he would have his revenge.

The subject on which Woolsey had come to treat was an important one.
"Mr. Eglantine," says he, "there's no use disguising from one another
that we are both of us in love with Miss Morgiana, and that our chances
up to this time have been pretty equal. But that Captain whom you
introduced, like an ass as you were--"

"An ass, Mr. Woolsey! I'd have you to know, sir, that I'm no more a hass
than you are, sir; and as for introducing the Captain, I did no such
thing."

"Well, well, he's got a-poaching into our preserves somehow. He's
evidently sweet upon the young woman, and is a more fashionable chap
than either of us two. We must get him out of the house, sir--we must
circumwent him; and THEN, Mr. Eglantine, will be time enough for you and
me to try which is the best man."

"HE the best man?" thought Eglantine; "the little bald unsightly
tailor-creature! A man with no more soul than his smoothing-hiron!" The
perfumer, as may be imagined, did not utter this sentiment aloud, but
expressed himself quite willing to enter into any HAMICABLE arrangement
by which the new candidate for Miss Crump's favour must be thrown over.
It was accordingly agreed between the two gentlemen that they should
coalesce against the common enemy; that they should, by reciting many
perfectly well-founded stories in the Captain's disfavour, influence the
minds of Miss Crump's parents, and of herself, if possible, against this
wolf in sheep's clothing; and that, when they were once fairly rid of
him, each should be at liberty, as before, to prefer his own claim.

"I have thought of a subject," said the little tailor, turning very red,
and hemming and hawing a great deal. "I've thought, I say, of a pint,
which may be resorted to with advantage at the present juncture, and in
which each of us may be useful to the other. An exchange, Mr. Eglantine:
do you take?"

"Do you mean an accommodation-bill?" said Eglantine, whose mind ran a
good deal on that species of exchange.

"Pooh, nonsense, sir! The name of OUR firm is, I flatter myself, a
little more up in the market than some other people's names."

"Do you mean to insult the name of Archibald Eglantine, sir? I'd have
you to know that at three months--"

"Nonsense!" says Mr. Woolsey, mastering his emotion. "There's no use
a-quarrelling, Mr. E.: we're not in love with each other, I know that.
You wish me hanged, or as good, I know that!"

"Indeed I don't, sir!"

"You do, sir; I tell you, you do! and what's more, I wish the same
to you--transported, at any rate! But as two sailors, when a boat's
a-sinking, though they hate each other ever so much, will help and bale
the boat out; so, sir, let US act: let us be the two sailors."

"Bail, sir?" said Eglantine, as usual mistaking the drift of the
argument. "I'll bail no man! If you're in difficulties, I think you had
better go to your senior partner, Mr Woolsey." And Eglantine's cowardly
little soul was filled with a savage satisfaction to think that his
enemy was in distress, and actually obliged to come to HIM for succour.

"You're enough to make Job swear, you great fat stupid lazy old barber!"
roared Mr. Woolsey, in a fury.

Eglantine jumped up and made for the bell-rope. The gallant little
tailor laughed.

"There's no need to call in Betsy," said he. "I'm not a-going to eat
you, Eglantine; you're a bigger man than me: if you were just to fall on
me, you'd smother me! Just sit still on the sofa and listen to reason."

"Well, sir, pro-ceed," said the barber with a gasp.

"Now, listen! What's the darling wish of your heart? I know it, sir!
you've told it to Mr. Tressle, sir, and other gents at the club. The
darling wish of your heart, sir, is to have a slap-up coat turned out of
the ateliers of Messrs. Linsey, Woolsey and Company. You said you'd give
twenty guineas for one of our coats, you know you did! Lord Bolsterton's
a fatter man than you, and look what a figure we turn HIM out. Can any
firm in England dress Lord Bolsterton but us, so as to make his Lordship
look decent? I defy 'em, sir! We could have given Daniel Lambert a
figure!"

"If I want a coat, sir," said Mr. Eglantine, "and I don't deny it,
there's some people want a HEAD OF HAIR!"

"That's the very point I was coming to," said the tailor, resuming the
violent blush which was mentioned as having suffused his countenance
at the beginning of the conversation. "Let us have terms of mutual
accommodation. Make me a wig, Mr. Eglantine, and though I never yet cut
a yard of cloth except for a gentleman, I'll pledge you my word I'll
make you a coat."

"WILL you, honour bright?" says Eglantine.

"Honour bright," says the tailor. "Look!" and in an instant he drew
from his pocket one of those slips of parchment which gentlemen of his
profession carry, and putting Eglantine into the proper position, began
to take the preliminary observations. He felt Eglantine's heart
thump with happiness as his measure passed over that soft part of the
perfumer's person.

Then pulling down the window-blind, and looking that the door was
locked, and blushing still more deeply than ever, the tailor seated
himself in an arm-chair towards which Mr. Eglantine beckoned him, and,
taking off his black wig, exposed his head to the great perruquier's
gaze. Mr. Eglantine looked at it, measured it, manipulated it, sat
for three minutes with his head in his hand and his elbow on his knee,
gazing at the tailor's cranium with all his might, walked round it twice
or thrice, and then said, "It's enough, Mr. Woolsey. Consider the job
as done. And now, sir," said he, with a greatly relieved air--"and now,
Woolsey, let us 'ave a glass of curacoa to celebrate this hauspicious
meeting."

The tailor, however, stiffly replied that he never drank in a morning,
and left the room without offering to shake Mr. Eglantine by the hand:
for he despised that gentleman very heartily, and himself, too, for
coming to any compromise with him, and for so far demeaning himself as
to make a coat for a barber.

Looking from his chambers on the other side of the street, that
inevitable Mr. Walker saw the tailor issuing from the perfumer's shop,
and was at no loss to guess that something extraordinary must be in
progress when two such bitter enemies met together.



CHAPTER III. WHAT CAME OF MR WALKER'S DISCOVERY OF THE "BOOTJACK."

It is very easy to state how the Captain came to take up that proud
position at the "Bootjack" which we have seen him occupy on the evening
when the sound of the fatal "Brava!" so astonished Mr. Eglantine.

The mere entry into the establishment was, of course, not difficult. Any
person by simply uttering the words "A pint of beer," was free of the
"Bootjack;" and it was some such watchword that Howard Walker employed
when he made his first appearance. He requested to be shown into a
parlour, where he might repose himself for a while, and was ushered into
that very sanctum where the "Kidney Club" met. Then he stated that the
beer was the best he had ever tasted, except in Bavaria, and in some
parts of Spain, he added; and professing to be extremely "peckish,"
requested to know if there were any cold meat in the house whereof he
could make a dinner.

"I don't usually dine at this hour, landlord," said he, flinging down
a half-sovereign for payment of the beer; "but your parlour looks so
comfortable, and the Windsor chairs are so snug, that I'm sure I could
not dine better at the first club in London."

"ONE of the first clubs in London is held in this very room," said Mr.
Crump, very well pleased; "and attended by some of the best gents in
town, too. We call it the 'Kidney Club'."

"Why, bless my soul! it is the very club my friend Eglantine has so
often talked to me about, and attended by some of the tip-top tradesmen
of the metropolis!"

"There's better men here than Mr. Eglantine," replied Mr. Crump, "though
he's a good man--I don't say he's not a good man--but there's better.
Mr. Clinker, sir; Mr. Woolsey, of the house of Linsey, Woolsey and Co--"

"The great army-clothiers!" cried Walker; "the first house in town!"
and so continued, with exceeding urbanity, holding conversation with Mr.
Crump, until the honest landlord retired delighted, and told Mrs. Crump
in the bar that there was a tip-top swell in the "Kidney" parlour, who
was a-going to have his dinner there.

Fortune favoured the brave Captain in every way. It was just Mr. Crump's
own dinner-hour; and on Mrs. Crump stepping into the parlour to ask the
guest whether he would like a slice of the joint to which the family
were about to sit down, fancy that lady's start of astonishment at
recognising Mr. Eglantine's facetious friend of the day before. The
Captain at once demanded permission to partake of the joint at the
family table; the lady could not with any great reason deny this
request; the Captain was inducted into the bar; and Miss Crump, who
always came down late for dinner, was even more astonished than her
mamma, on beholding the occupier of the fourth place at the table. Had
she expected to see the fascinating stranger so soon again? I think she
had. Her big eyes said as much, as, furtively looking up at Mr. Walker's
face, they caught his looks; and then bouncing down again towards her
plate, pretended to be very busy in looking at the boiled beef and
carrots there displayed. She blushed far redder than those carrots, but
her shining ringlets hid her confusion together with her lovely face.

Sweet Morgiana! the billiard-ball eyes had a tremendous effect on the
Captain. They fell plump, as it were, into the pocket of his heart; and
he gallantly proposed to treat the company to a bottle of champagne,
which was accepted without much difficulty.

Mr. Crump, under pretence of going to the cellar (where he said he had
some cases of the finest champagne in Europe), called Dick, the boy,
to him, and despatched him with all speed to a wine merchant's, where a
couple of bottles of the liquor were procured.

"Bring up two bottles, Mr. C.," Captain Walker gallantly said when Crump
made his move, as it were, to the cellar and it may be imagined after
the two bottles were drunk (of which Mrs. Crump took at least nine
glasses to her share), how happy, merry, and confidential the whole
party had become. Crump told his story of the "Bootjack," and whose boot
it had drawn; the former Miss Delancy expatiated on her past theatrical
life, and the pictures hanging round the room. Miss was equally
communicative; and, in short, the Captain had all the secrets of the
little family in his possession ere sunset. He knew that Miss cared
little for either of her suitors, about whom mamma and papa had a little
quarrel. He heard Mrs. Crump talk of Morgiana's property, and fell more
in love with her than ever. Then came tea, the luscious crumpet, the
quiet game at cribbage, and the song--the song which poor Eglantine
heard, and which caused Woolsey's rage and his despair.

At the close of the evening the tailor was in a greater rage, and the
perfumer in greater despair than ever. He had made his little present
of eau-de-Cologne. "Oh fie!" says the Captain, with a horse-laugh, "it
SMELLS OF THE SHOP!" He taunted the tailor about his wig, and the honest
fellow had only an oath to give by way of repartee. He told his stories
about his club and his lordly friends. What chance had either against
the all-accomplished Howard Walker?

Old Crump, with a good innate sense of right and wrong, hated the man;
Mrs. Crump did not feel quite at her ease regarding him; but Morgiana
thought him the most delightful person the world ever produced.

Eglantine's usual morning costume was a blue satin neck-cloth
embroidered with butterflies and ornamented with a brandy-ball brooch, a
light shawl waistcoat, and a rhubarb-coloured coat of the sort which, I
believe, are called Taglionis, and which have no waist-buttons, and made
a pretence, as it were, to have no waists, but are in reality adopted by
the fat in order to give them a waist. Nothing easier for an obese man
than to have a waist; he has but to pinch his middle part a little, and
the very fat on either side pushed violently forward MAKES a waist,
as it were, and our worthy perfumer's figure was that of a bolster cut
almost in two with a string.

Walker presently saw him at his shop-door grinning in this costume,
twiddling his ringlets with his dumpy greasy fingers, glittering with
oil and rings, and looking so exceedingly contented and happy that the
estate-agent felt assured some very satisfactory conspiracy had been
planned between the tailor and him. How was Mr. Walker to learn what the
scheme was? Alas! the poor fellow's vanity and delight were such, that
he could not keep silent as to the cause of his satisfaction; and rather
than not mention it at all, in the fulness of his heart he would have
told his secret to Mr. Mossrose himself.

"When I get my coat," thought the Bond Street Alnaschar, "I'll hire
of Snaffle that easy-going cream-coloured 'oss that he bought from
Astley's, and I'll canter through the Park, and WON'T I pass through
Little Bunker's Buildings, that's all? I'll wear my grey trousers with
the velvet stripe down the side, and get my spurs lacquered up, and a
French polish to my boot; and if I don't DO for the Captain, and the
tailor too, my name's not Archibald. And I know what I'll do: I'll hire
the small clarence, and invite the Crumps to dinner at the 'Gar and
Starter'" (this was his facetious way of calling the "Star and Garter"),
"and I'll ride by them all the way to Richmond. It's rather a long ride,
but with Snaffle's soft saddle I can do it pretty easy, I dare say." And
so the honest fellow built castles upon castles in the air; and the last
most beautiful vision of all was Miss Crump "in white satting, with a
horange flower in her 'air," putting him in possession of "her lovely
'and before the haltar of St. George's, 'Anover Square." As for Woolsey,
Eglantine determined that he should have the best wig his art could
produce; for he had not the least fear of his rival.

These points then being arranged to the poor fellow's satisfaction, what
does he do but send out for half a quire of pink note-paper, and in a
filagree envelope despatch a note of invitation to the ladies at the
"Bootjack":--


"BOWER OF BLOOM, BOND STREET:

"Thursday.

"MR. ARCHIBALD EGLANTINE presents his compliments to Mrs. and Miss
Crump, and requests the HONOUR AND PLEASURE of their company at the
'Star and Garter' at Richmond to an early dinner on Sunday next.

"IF AGREEABLE, Mr. Eglantine's carriage will be at your door at three
o'clock, and I propose to accompany them on horseback, if agreeable
likewise."


This note was sealed with yellow wax, and sent to its destination; and
of course Mr. Eglantine went himself for the answer in the evening: and
of course he told the ladies to look out for a certain new coat he was
going to sport on Sunday; and of course Mr. Walker happens to call the
next day with spare tickets for Mrs. Crump and her daughter, when the
whole secret was laid bare to him--how the ladies were going to Richmond
on Sunday in Mr. Snaffle's clarence, and how Mr. Eglantine was to ride
by their side.

Mr. Walker did not keep horses of his own; his magnificent friends at
the "Regent" had plenty in their stables, and some of these were at
livery at the establishment of the Captain's old "college" companion,
Mr. Snaffle. It was easy, therefore, for the Captain to renew his
acquaintance with that individual. So, hanging on the arm of my Lord
Vauxhall, Captain Walker next day made his appearance at Snaffle's
livery-stables, and looked at the various horses there for sale or
at bait, and soon managed, by putting some facetious questions to Mr.
Snaffle regarding the "Kidney Club," etc. to place himself on a friendly
footing with that gentleman, and to learn from him what horse Mr.
Eglantine was to ride on Sunday.

The monster Walker had fully determined in his mind that Eglantine
should FALL off that horse in the course of his Sunday's ride.

"That sing'lar hanimal," said Mr. Snaffle, pointing to the old horse,
"is the celebrated Hemperor that was the wonder of Hastley's some years
back, and was parted with by Mr. Ducrow honly because his feelin's
wouldn't allow him to keep him no longer after the death of the first
Mrs. D., who invariably rode him. I bought him, thinking that p'raps
ladies and Cockney bucks might like to ride him (for his haction is
wonderful, and he canters like a harm-chair); but he's not safe on any
day except Sundays."

"And why's that?" asked Captain Walker. "Why is he safer on Sundays than
other days?"

"BECAUSE THERE'S NO MUSIC in the streets on Sundays. The first gent that
rode him found himself dancing a quadrille in Hupper Brook Street to
an 'urdy-gurdy that was playing 'Cherry Ripe,' such is the natur of the
hanimal. And if you reklect the play of the 'Battle of Hoysterlitz,' in
which Mrs. D. hacted 'the female hussar,' you may remember how she
and the horse died in the third act to the toon of 'God preserve the
Emperor,' from which this horse took his name. Only play that toon to
him, and he rears hisself up, beats the hair in time with his forelegs,
and then sinks gently to the ground as though he were carried off by a
cannon-ball. He served a lady hopposite Hapsley 'Ouse so one day, and
since then I've never let him out to a friend except on Sunday, when, in
course, there's no danger. Heglantine IS a friend of mine, and of course
I wouldn't put the poor fellow on a hanimal I couldn't trust."

After a little more conversation, my lord and his friend quitted Mr.
Snaffle's, and as they walked away towards the "Regent," his Lordship
might be heard shrieking with laughter, crying, "Capital, by jingo!
exthlent! Dwive down in the dwag! Take Lungly. Worth a thousand pound,
by Jove!" and similar ejaculations, indicative of exceeding delight.

On Saturday morning, at ten o'clock to a moment, Mr. Woolsey called at
Mr. Eglantine's with a yellow handkerchief under his arm. It contained
the best and handsomest body-coat that ever gentleman put on. It fitted
Eglantine to a nicety--it did not pinch him in the least, and yet it was
of so exquisite a cut that the perfumer found, as he gazed delighted
in the glass, that he looked like a manly portly high-bred gentleman--a
lieutenant-colonel in the army, at the very least.

"You're a full man, Eglantine," said the tailor, delighted, too, with
his own work; "but that can't be helped. You look more like Hercules
than Falstaff now, sir, and if a coat can make a gentleman, a gentleman
you are. Let me recommend you to sink the blue cravat, and take the
stripes off your trousers. Dress quiet, sir; draw it mild. Plain
waistcoat, dark trousers, black neckcloth, black hat, and if there's a
better-dressed man in Europe to-morrow, I'm a Dutchman."

"Thank you, Woolsey--thank you, my dear sir," said the charmed perfumer.
"And now I'll just trouble you to try on this here."

The wig had been made with equal skill; it was not in the florid style
which Mr. Eglantine loved in his own person, but, as the perfumer said,
a simple straightforward head of hair. "It seems as if it had grown
there all your life, Mr. Woolsey; nobody would tell that it was not
your nat'ral colour" (Mr. Woolsey blushed)--"it makes you look ten year
younger; and as for that scarecrow yonder, you'll never, I think, want
to wear that again."

Woolsey looked in the glass, and was delighted too. The two rivals shook
hands and straightway became friends, and in the overflowing of his
heart the perfumer mentioned to the tailor the party which he had
arranged for the next day, and offered him a seat in the carriage and
at the dinner at the "Star and Garter." "Would you like to ride?" said
Eglantine, with rather a consequential air. "Snaffle will mount you, and
we can go one on each side of the ladies, if you like."

But Woolsey humbly said he was not a riding man, and gladly consented to
take a place in the clarence carriage, provided he was allowed to bear
half the expenses of the entertainment. This proposal was agreed to by
Mr. Eglantine, and the two gentlemen parted to meet once more at the
"Kidneys" that night, when everybody was edified by the friendly tone
adopted between them.

Mr. Snaffle, at the club meeting, made the very same proposal to Mr.
Woolsey that the perfumer had made; and stated that as Eglantine was
going to ride Hemperor, Woolsey, at least, ought to mount too. But he
was met by the same modest refusal on the tailor's part, who stated that
he had never mounted a horse yet, and preferred greatly the use of a
coach.

Eglantine's character as a "swell" rose greatly with the club that
evening.

Two o'clock on Sunday came: the two beaux arrived punctually at the door
to receive the two smiling ladies.

"Bless us, Mr. Eglantine!" said Miss Crump, quite struck by him, "I
never saw you look so handsome in your life." He could have flung his
arms around her neck at the compliment. "And law, Ma! what has happened
to Mr. Woolsey? doesn't he look ten years younger than yesterday?" Mamma
assented, and Woolsey bowed gallantly, and the two gentlemen exchanged a
nod of hearty friendship.

The day was delightful. Eglantine pranced along magnificently on his
cantering armchair, with his hat on one ear, his left hand on his side,
and his head flung over his shoulder, and throwing under-glances at
Morgiana whenever the "Emperor" was in advance of the clarence. The
"Emperor" pricked up his ears a little uneasily passing the Ebenezer
chapel in Richmond, where the congregation were singing a hymn, but
beyond this no accident occurred; nor was Mr. Eglantine in the least
stiff or fatigued by the time the party reached Richmond, where he
arrived time enough to give his steed into the charge of an ostler, and
to present his elbow to the ladies as they alighted from the clarence
carriage.

What this jovial party ate for dinner at the "Star and Garter" need
not here be set down. If they did not drink champagne I am very much
mistaken. They were as merry as any four people in Christendom; and
between the bewildering attentions of the perfumer, and the manly
courtesy of the tailor, Morgiana very likely forgot the gallant Captain,
or, at least, was very happy in his absence.

At eight o'clock they began to drive homewards. "WON'T you come into the
carriage?" said Morgiana to Eglantine, with one of her tenderest looks;
"Dick can ride the horse." But Archibald was too great a lover of
equestrian exercise. "I'm afraid to trust anybody on this horse," said
he with a knowing look; and so he pranced away by the side of the little
carriage. The moon was brilliant, and, with the aid of the gas-lamps,
illuminated the whole face of the country in a way inexpressibly lovely.

Presently, in the distance, the sweet and plaintive notes of a bugle
were heard, and the performer, with great delicacy, executed a religious
air. "Music, too! heavenly!" said Morgiana, throwing up her eyes to the
stars. The music came nearer and nearer, and the delight of the company
was only more intense. The fly was going at about four miles an hour,
and the "Emperor" began cantering to time at the same rapid pace.

"This must be some gallantry of yours, Mr. Woolsey," said the romantic
Morgiana, turning upon that gentleman. "Mr. Eglantine treated us to the
dinner, and you have provided us with the music."

Now Woolsey had been a little, a very little, dissatisfied during the
course of the evening's entertainment, by fancying that Eglantine, a
much more voluble person than himself, had obtained rather an undue
share of the ladies' favour; and as he himself paid half of the
expenses, he felt very much vexed to think that the perfumer should take
all the credit of the business to himself. So when Miss Crump asked if
he had provided the music, he foolishly made an evasive reply to her
query, and rather wished her to imagine that he HAD performed that
piece of gallantry. "If it pleases YOU, Miss Morgiana," said this artful
Schneider, "what more need any man ask? wouldn't I have all Drury Lane
orchestra to please you?"

The bugle had by this time arrived quite close to the clarence carriage,
and if Morgiana had looked round she might have seen whence the music
came. Behind her came slowly a drag, or private stage-coach, with
four horses. Two grooms with cockades and folded arms were behind;
and driving on the box, a little gentleman, with a blue bird's-eye
neckcloth, and a white coat. A bugleman was by his side, who performed
the melodies which so delighted Miss Crump. He played very gently and
sweetly, and "God save the King" trembled so softly out of the brazen
orifice of his bugle, that the Crumps, the tailor, and Eglantine
himself, who was riding close by the carriage, were quite charmed and
subdued.

"Thank you, DEAR Mr. Woolsey," said the grateful Morgiana; which made
Eglantine stare, and Woolsey was just saying, "Really, upon my word,
I've nothing to do with it," when the man on the drag-box said to the
bugleman, "Now!"

The bugleman began the tune of--

     "Heaven preserve our Emperor Fra-an-cis,
      Rum tum-ti-tum-ti-titty-ti."

At the sound, the "Emperor" reared himself (with a roar from Mr.
Eglantine)--reared and beat the air with his fore-paws. Eglantine flung
his arms round the beast's neck; still he kept beating time with
his fore-paws. Mrs. Crump screamed: Mr. Woolsey, Dick, the clarence
coachman, Lord Vauxhall (for it was he), and his Lordship's two grooms,
burst into a shout of laughter; Morgiana cries "Mercy! mercy!" Eglantine
yells "Stop!"--"Wo!"--"Oh!" and a thousand ejaculations of hideous
terror; until, at last, down drops the "Emperor" stone dead in the
middle of the road, as if carried off by a cannon-ball.

Fancy the situation, ye callous souls who laugh at the misery of
humanity, fancy the situation of poor Eglantine under the "Emperor"! He
had fallen very easy, the animal lay perfectly quiet, and the perfumer
was to all intents and purposes as dead as the animal. He had not
fainted, but he was immovable with terror; he lay in a puddle, and
thought it was his own blood gushing from him; and he would have lain
there until Monday morning, if my Lord's grooms, descending, had not
dragged him by the coat-collar from under the beast, who still lay
quiet.

"Play 'Charming Judy Callaghan,' will ye?" says Mr. Snaffle's man,
the fly-driver; on which the bugler performed that lively air, and up
started the horse, and the grooms, who were rubbing Mr. Eglantine down
against a lamp-post, invited him to remount.

But his heart was too broken for that. The ladies gladly made room for
him in the clarence. Dick mounted "Emperor" and rode homewards. The
drag, too, drove away, playing "Oh dear, what can the matter be?" and
with a scowl of furious hate, Mr. Eglantine sat and regarded his rival.
His pantaloons were split, and his coat torn up the back.

"Are you hurt much, dear Mr. Archibald?" said Morgiana, with unaffected
compassion.

"N-not much," said the poor fellow, ready to burst into tears.

"Oh, Mr. Woolsey," added the good-natured girl, "how could you play such
a trick?"

"Upon my word," Woolsey began, intending to plead innocence; but the
ludicrousness of the situation was once more too much for him, and he
burst out into a roar of laughter.

"You! you cowardly beast!" howled out Eglantine, now driven to
fury--"YOU laugh at me, you miserable cretur! Take THAT, sir!" and he
fell upon him with all his might, and well-nigh throttled the tailor,
and pummelling his eyes, his nose, his ears, with inconceivable
rapidity, wrenched, finally, his wig off his head, and flung it into the
road.

Morgiana saw that Woolsey had red hair. [2]



CHAPTER IV. IN WHICH THE HEROINE HAS A NUMBER MORE LOVERS, AND CUTS A
VERY DASHING FIGURE IN THE WORLD.

Two years have elapsed since the festival at Richmond, which, begun so
peaceably, ended in such general uproar. Morgiana never could be brought
to pardon Woolsey's red hair, nor to help laughing at Eglantine's
disasters, nor could the two gentlemen be reconciled to one another.
Woolsey, indeed, sent a challenge to the perfumer to meet him with
pistols, which the latter declined, saying, justly, that tradesmen had
no business with such weapons; on this the tailor proposed to meet
him with coats off, and have it out like men, in the presence of their
friends of the "Kidney Club". The perfumer said he would be party to no
such vulgar transaction; on which, Woolsey, exasperated, made an oath
that he would tweak the perfumer's nose so surely as he ever entered the
club-room; and thus ONE member of the "Kidneys" was compelled to vacate
his armchair.

Woolsey himself attended every meeting regularly, but he did not evince
that gaiety and good-humour which render men's company agreeable in
clubs. On arriving, he would order the boy to "tell him when that
scoundrel Eglantine came;" and, hanging up his hat on a peg, would scowl
round the room, and tuck up his sleeves very high, and stretch, and
shake his fingers and wrists, as if getting them ready for that pull
of the nose which he intended to bestow upon his rival. So prepared, he
would sit down and smoke his pipe quite silently, glaring at all, and
jumping up, and hitching up his coat-sleeves, when anyone entered the
room.

The "Kidneys" did not like this behaviour. Clinker ceased to come.
Bustard, the poulterer, ceased to come. As for Snaffle, he also
disappeared, for Woolsey wished to make him answerable for the
misbehaviour of Eglantine, and proposed to him the duel which the latter
had declined. So Snaffle went. Presently they all went, except the
tailor and Tressle, who lived down the street, and these two would
sit and pug their tobacco, one on each side of Crump, the landlord, as
silent as Indian chiefs in a wigwam. There grew to be more and more room
for poor old Crump in his chair and in his clothes; the "Kidneys" were
gone, and why should he remain? One Saturday he did not come down to
preside at the club (as he still fondly called it), and the Saturday
following Tressle had made a coffin for him; and Woolsey, with the
undertaker by his side, followed to the grave the father of the
"Kidneys."

Mrs. Crump was now alone in the world. "How alone?" says some innocent
and respected reader. Ah! my dear sir, do you know so little of human
nature as not to be aware that, one week after the Richmond affair,
Morgiana married Captain Walker? That did she privately, of course; and,
after the ceremony, came tripping back to her parents, as young people
do in plays, and said, "Forgive me, dear Pa and Ma, I'm married, and
here is my husband the Captain!" Papa and mamma did forgive her, as why
shouldn't they? and papa paid over her fortune to her, which she carried
home delighted to the Captain. This happened several months before the
demise of old Crump; and Mrs. Captain Walker was on the Continent with
her Howard when that melancholy event took place; hence Mrs. Crump's
loneliness and unprotected condition. Morgiana had not latterly seen
much of the old people; how could she, moving in her exalted sphere,
receive at her genteel new residence in the Edgware Road the old
publican and his wife?

Being, then, alone in the world, Mrs. Crump could not abear, she said,
to live in the house where she had been so respected and happy: so she
sold the goodwill of the "Bootjack," and, with the money arising from
this sale and her own private fortune, being able to muster some sixty
pounds per annum, retired to the neighbourhood of her dear old "Sadler's
Wells," where she boarded with one of Mrs. Serle's forty pupils. Her
heart was broken, she said; but, nevertheless, about nine months after
Mr. Crump's death, the wallflowers, nasturtiums, polyanthuses, and
convolvuluses began to blossom under her bonnet as usual; in a year she
was dressed quite as fine as ever, and now never missed "The Wells," or
some other place of entertainment, one single night, but was as regular
as the box-keeper. Nay, she was a buxom widow still, and an old flame of
hers, Fisk, so celebrated as pantaloon in Grimaldi's time, but now doing
the "heavy fathers" at "The Wells," proposed to her to exchange her name
for his.

But this proposal the worthy widow declined altogether. To say truth,
she was exceedingly proud of her daughter, Mrs. Captain Walker. They
did not see each other much at first; but every now and then Mrs. Crump
would pay a visit to the folks in Connaught Square; and on the days when
"the Captain's" lady called in the City Road, there was not a single
official at "The Wells," from the first tragedian down to the call-boy,
who was not made aware of the fact.

It has been said that Morgiana carried home her fortune in her own
reticule, and, smiling, placed the money in her husband's lap; and hence
the reader may imagine, who knows Mr. Walker to be an extremely selfish
fellow, that a great scene of anger must have taken place, and many
coarse oaths and epithets of abuse must have come from him, when he
found that five hundred pounds was all that his wife had, although he
had expected five thousand with her. But, to say the truth, Walker was
at this time almost in love with his handsome rosy good-humoured simple
wife. They had made a fortnight's tour, during which they had been
exceedingly happy; and there was something so frank and touching in the
way in which the kind creature flung her all into his lap, saluting
him with a hearty embrace at the same time, and wishing that it were a
thousand billion billion times more, so that her darling Howard might
enjoy it, that the man would have been a ruffian indeed could he have
found it in his heart to be angry with her; and so he kissed her in
return, and patted her on the shining ringlets, and then counted over
the notes with rather a disconsolate air, and ended by locking them up
in his portfolio. In fact, SHE had never deceived him; Eglantine
had, and he in return had out-tricked Eglantine and so warm were his
affections for Morgiana at this time that, upon my word and honour, I
don't think he repented of his bargain. Besides, five hundred pounds in
crisp bank-notes was a sum of money such as the Captain was not in the
habit of handling every day; a dashing sanguine fellow, he fancied there
was no end to it, and already thought of a dozen ways by which it should
increase and multiply into a plum. Woe is me! Has not many a simple soul
examined five new hundred-pound notes in this way, and calculated their
powers of duration and multiplication?

This subject, however, is too painful to be dwelt on. Let us hear what
Walker did with his money. Why, he furnished the house in the Edgware
Road before mentioned, he ordered a handsome service of plate, he
sported a phaeton and two ponies, he kept a couple of smart maids and
a groom foot-boy--in fact, he mounted just such a neat unpretending
gentleman-like establishment as becomes a respectable young couple on
their outset in life. "I've sown my wild oats," he would say to his
acquaintances; "a few years since, perhaps, I would have longed to cut
a dash, but now prudence is the word; and I've settled every farthing of
Mrs. Walker's fifteen thousand on herself." And the best proof that the
world had confidence in him is the fact, that for the articles of plate,
equipage, and furniture, which have been mentioned as being in his
possession, he did not pay one single shilling; and so prudent was he,
that but for turnpikes, postage-stamps, and king's taxes, he hardly had
occasion to change a five-pound note of his wife's fortune.

To tell the truth, Mr. Walker had determined to make his fortune. And
what is easier in London? Is not the share-market open to all? Do
not Spanish and Columbian bonds rise and fall? For what are companies
invented, but to place thousands in the pockets of shareholders and
directors? Into these commercial pursuits the gallant Captain now
plunged with great energy, and made some brilliant hits at first
starting, and bought and sold so opportunely, that his name began to
rise in the City as a capitalist, and might be seen in the printed list
of directors of many excellent and philanthropic schemes, of which there
is never any lack in London. Business to the amount of thousands was
done at his agency; shares of vast value were bought and sold under his
management. How poor Mr. Eglantine used to hate him and envy him, as
from the door of his emporium (the firm was Eglantine and Mossrose now)
he saw the Captain daily arrive in his pony-phaeton, and heard of the
start he had taken in life.

The only regret Mrs. Walker had was that she did not enjoy enough of her
husband's society. His business called him away all day; his business,
too, obliged him to leave her of evenings very frequently alone; whilst
he (always in pursuit of business) was dining with his great friends at
the club, and drinking claret and champagne to the same end.

She was a perfectly good-natured and simple soul, never made him a
single reproach; but when he could pass an evening at home with her
she was delighted, and when he could drive with her in the Park she was
happy for a week after. On these occasions, and in the fulness of her
heart, she would drive to her mother and tell her story. "Howard drove
with me in the Park yesterday, Mamma;" and "Howard has promised to
take me to the Opera," and so forth. And that evening the manager, Mr.
Gawler, the first tragedian, Mrs. Serle and her forty pupils, all the
box-keepers, bonnet-women--nay, the ginger-beer girls themselves at "The
Wells," knew that Captain and Mrs. Walker were at Kensington Gardens,
or were to have the Marchioness of Billingsgate's box at the Opera. One
night--O joy of joys!--Mrs. Captain Walker appeared in a private box
at "The Wells." That's she with the black ringlets and Cashmere shawl,
smelling-bottle, and black-velvet gown, and bird of paradise in her hat.
Goodness gracious! how they all acted at her, Gawler and all, and how
happy Mrs. Crump was! She kissed her daughter between all the acts, she
nodded to all her friends on the stage, in the slips, or in the
real water; she introduced her daughter, Mrs. Captain Walker, to the
box-opener; and Melvil Delamere (the first comic), Canterfield (the
tyrant), and Jonesini (the celebrated Fontarabian Statuesque), were all
on the steps, and shouted for Mrs. Captain Walker's carriage, and waved
their hats, and bowed as the little pony-phaeton drove away. Walker, in
his moustaches, had come in at the end of the play, and was not a little
gratified by the compliments paid to himself and lady.

Among the other articles of luxury with which the Captain furnished
his house we must not omit to mention an extremely grand piano, which
occupied four-fifths of Mrs. Walker's little back drawing-room, and at
which she was in the habit of practising continually. All day and all
night during Walker's absences (and these occurred all night and all
day), you might hear--the whole street might hear--the voice of the lady
at No. 23, gurgling, and shaking, and quavering, as ladies do when they
practise. The street did not approve of the continuance of the noise;
but neighbours are difficult to please, and what would Morgiana have had
to do if she had ceased to sing? It would be hard to lock a blackbird in
a cage and prevent him from singing too. And so Walker's blackbird, in
the snug little cage in the Edgware Road, sang and was not unhappy.

After the pair had been married for about a year, the omnibus that
passes both by Mrs. Crump's house near "The Wells," and by Mrs. Walker's
street off the Edgware Road, brought up the former-named lady almost
every day to her daughter. She came when the Captain had gone to his
business; she stayed to a two-o'clock dinner with Morgiana; she drove
with her in the pony-carriage round the Park; but she never stopped
later than six. Had she not to go to the play at seven? And, besides,
the Captain might come home with some of his great friends, and he
always swore and grumbled much if he found his mother-in-law on the
premises. As for Morgiana, she was one of those women who encourage
despotism in husbands. What the husband says must be right, because he
says it; what he orders must be obeyed tremblingly. Mrs. Walker gave up
her entire reason to her lord. Why was it? Before marriage she had been
an independent little person; she had far more brains than her Howard.
I think it must have been his moustaches that frightened her, and caused
in her this humility.

Selfish husbands have this advantage in maintaining with easy-minded
wives a rigid and inflexible behaviour, viz. that if they DO by any
chance grant a little favour, the ladies receive it with such transports
of gratitude as they would never think of showing to a lord and master
who was accustomed to give them everything they asked for; and hence,
when Captain Walker signified his assent to his wife's prayer that she
should take a singing-master, she thought his generosity almost divine,
and fell upon her mamma's neck, when that lady came the next day, and
said what a dear adorable angel her Howard was, and what ought she not
to do for a man who had taken her from her humble situation, and raised
her to be what she was! What she was, poor soul! She was the wife of a
swindling parvenu gentleman. She received visits from six ladies of her
husband's acquaintances--two attorneys' ladies, his bill-broker's lady,
and one or two more, of whose characters we had best, if you please,
say nothing; and she thought it an honour to be so distinguished: as
if Walker had been a Lord Exeter to marry a humble maiden, or a noble
prince to fall in love with a humble Cinderella, or a majestic Jove
to come down from heaven and woo a Semele. Look through the world,
respectable reader, and among your honourable acquaintances, and say if
this sort of faith in women is not very frequent? They WILL believe in
their husbands, whatever the latter do. Let John be dull, ugly, vulgar,
and a humbug, his Mary Ann never finds it out; let him tell his stories
ever so many times, there is she always ready with her kind smile; let
him be stingy, she says he is prudent; let him quarrel with his best
friend, she says he is always in the right; let him be prodigal, she
says he is generous, and that his health requires enjoyment; let him
be idle, he must have relaxation; and she will pinch herself and
her household that he may have a guinea for his club. Yes; and every
morning, as she wakes and looks at the face, snoring on the pillow by
her side--every morning, I say, she blesses that dull ugly countenance,
and the dull ugly soul reposing there, and thinks both are something
divine. I want to know how it is that women do not find out their
husbands to be humbugs? Nature has so provided it, and thanks to her.
When last year they were acting the "Midsummer Night's Dream," and all
the boxes began to roar with great coarse heehaws at Titania hugging
Bottom's long long ears--to me, considering these things, it seemed that
there were a hundred other male brutes squatted round about, and treated
just as reasonably as Bottom was. Their Titanias lulled them to sleep
in their laps, summoned a hundred smiling delicate household fairies to
tickle their gross intellects and minister to their vulgar pleasures;
and (as the above remarks are only supposed to apply to honest women
loving their own lawful spouses) a mercy it is that no wicked Puck is
in the way to open their eyes, and point out their folly. Cui bono? let
them live on in their deceit: I know two lovely ladies who will read
this, and will say it is just very likely, and not see in the least,
that it has been written regarding THEM.

Another point of sentiment, and one curious to speculate on. Have
you not remarked the immense works of art that women get through? The
worsted-work sofas, the counterpanes patched or knitted (but these are
among the old-fashioned in the country), the bushels of pincushions,
the albums they laboriously fill, the tremendous pieces of music they
practise, the thousand other fiddle-faddles which occupy the attention
of the dear souls--nay, have we not seen them seated of evenings in a
squad or company, Louisa employed at the worsted-work before mentioned,
Eliza at the pincushions, Amelia at card-racks or filagree matches, and,
in the midst, Theodosia with one of the candles, reading out a novel
aloud? Ah! my dear sir, mortal creatures must be very hard put to it for
amusement, be sure of that, when they are forced to gather together in
a company and hear novels read aloud! They only do it because they can't
help it, depend upon it: it is a sad life, a poor pastime. Mr. Dickens,
in his American book, tells of the prisoners at the silent prison,
how they had ornamented their rooms, some of them with a frightful
prettiness and elaboration. Women's fancy-work is of this
sort often--only prison work, done because there was no other
exercising-ground for their poor little thoughts and fingers; and hence
these wonderful pincushions are executed, these counterpanes woven,
these sonatas learned. By everything sentimental, when I see two kind
innocent fresh-cheeked young women go to a piano, and sit down opposite
to it upon two chairs piled with more or less music-books (according to
their convenience), and, so seated, go through a set of double-barrelled
variations upon this or that tune by Herz or Kalkbrenner--I say, far
from receiving any satisfaction at the noise made by the performance,
my too susceptible heart is given up entirely to bleeding for the
performers. What hours, and weeks, nay, preparatory years of study, has
that infernal jig cost them! What sums has papa paid, what scoldings has
mamma administered ("Lady Bullblock does not play herself;" Sir Thomas
says, "but she has naturally the finest ear for music ever known!");
what evidences of slavery, in a word, are there! It is the condition
of the young lady's existence. She breakfasts at eight, she does
"Mangnall's Questions" with the governess till ten, she practises till
one, she walks in the square with bars round her till two, then she
practises again, then she sews or hems, or reads French, or Hume's
"History," then she comes down to play to papa, because he likes music
whilst he is asleep after dinner, and then it is bed-time, and the
morrow is another day with what are called the same "duties" to be gone
through. A friend of mine went to call at a nobleman's house the other
day, and one of the young ladies of the house came into the room with a
tray on her head; this tray was to give Lady Maria a graceful carriage.
Mon Dieu! and who knows but at that moment Lady Bell was at work with
a pair of her dumb namesakes, and Lady Sophy lying flat on a
stretching-board? I could write whole articles on this theme but peace!
we are keeping Mrs. Walker waiting all the while.

Well, then, if the above disquisitions have anything to do with the
story, as no doubt they have, I wish it to be understood that, during
her husband's absence, and her own solitary confinement, Mrs. Howard
Walker bestowed a prodigious quantity of her time and energy on the
cultivation of her musical talent; and having, as before stated, a very
fine loud voice, speedily attained no ordinary skill in the use of it.
She first had for teacher little Podmore, the fat chorus-master at "The
Wells," and who had taught her mother the "Tink-a-tink" song which has
been such a favourite since it first appeared. He grounded her well, and
bade her eschew the singing of all those "Eagle Tavern" ballads in which
her heart formerly delighted; and when he had brought her to a certain
point of skill, the honest little chorus-master said she should have a
still better instructor, and wrote a note to Captain Walker (enclosing
his own little account), speaking in terms of the most flattering
encomium of his lady's progress, and recommending that she should take
lessons of the celebrated Baroski. Captain Walker dismissed Podmore
then, and engaged Signor Baroski, at a vast expense; as he did not fail
to tell his wife. In fact, he owed Baroski no less than two hundred and
twenty guineas when he was--But we are advancing matters.

Little Baroski is the author of the opera of "Eliogabalo," of the
oratorio of "Purgatorio," which made such an immense sensation, of songs
and ballet-musics innumerable. He is a German by birth, and shows such
an outrageous partiality for pork and sausages, and attends at church so
constantly, that I am sure there cannot be any foundation in the story
that he is a member of the ancient religion. He is a fat little man,
with a hooked nose and jetty whiskers, and coal-black shining eyes, and
plenty of rings and jewels on his fingers and about his person, and a
very considerable portion of his shirtsleeves turned over his coat to
take the air. His great hands (which can sprawl over half a piano, and
produce those effects on the instrument for which he is celebrated) are
encased in lemon-coloured kids, new, or cleaned daily. Parenthetically,
let us ask why so many men, with coarse red wrists and big hands,
persist in the white kid glove and wristband system? Baroski's gloves
alone must cost him a little fortune; only he says with a leer, when
asked the question, "Get along vid you; don't you know dere is a
gloveress that lets me have dem very sheap?" He rides in the Park; has
splendid lodgings in Dover Street; and is a member of the "Regent Club,"
where he is a great source of amusement to the members, to whom he tells
astonishing stories of his successes with the ladies, and for whom he
has always play and opera tickets in store. His eye glistens and his
little heart beats when a lord speaks to him; and he has been known to
spend large sums of money in giving treats to young sprigs of fashion at
Richmond and elsewhere. "In my bolyticks," he says, "I am consarevatiff
to de bag-bone." In fine, he is a puppy, and withal a man of
considerable genius in his profession.

This gentleman, then, undertook to complete the musical education
of Mrs. Walker. He expressed himself at once "enshanted vid her
gababilities," found that the extent of her voice was "brodigious," and
guaranteed that she should become a first-rate singer. The pupil was
apt, the master was exceedingly skilful; and, accordingly, Mrs. Walker's
progress was very remarkable: although, for her part, honest Mrs. Crump,
who used to attend her daughter's lessons, would grumble not a little at
the new system, and the endless exercises which she, Morgiana, was made
to go through. It was very different in HER time, she said. Incledon
knew no music, and who could sing so well now? Give her a good English
ballad: it was a thousand times sweeter than your "Figaros" and
"Semiramides."

In spite of these objections, however, and with amazing perseverance and
cheerfulness, Mrs. Walker pursued the method of study pointed out to her
by her master. As soon as her husband went to the City in the morning
her operations began; if he remained away at dinner, her labours still
continued: nor is it necessary for me to particularise her course of
study, nor, indeed, possible; for, between ourselves, none of the
male Fitz-Boodles ever could sing a note, and the jargon of scales and
solfeggios is quite unknown to me. But as no man can have seen persons
addicted to music without remarking the prodigious energies they display
in the pursuit, as there is no father of daughters, however ignorant,
but is aware of the piano-rattling and voice-exercising which go on in
his house from morning till night, so let all fancy, without further
inquiry, how the heroine of our story was at this stage of her existence
occupied.

Walker was delighted with her progress, and did everything but pay
Baroski, her instructor. We know why he didn't pay. It was his nature
not to pay bills, except on extreme compulsion; but why did not Baroski
employ that extreme compulsion? Because, if he had received his money,
he would have lost his pupil, and because he loved his pupil more than
money. Rather than lose her, he would have given her a guinea as well
as her cachet. He would sometimes disappoint a great personage, but he
never missed his attendance on HER; and the truth must out, that he was
in love with her, as Woolsey and Eglantine had been before.

"By the immortel Chofe!" he would say, "dat letell ding sents me mad vid
her big ice! But only vait avile: in six veeks I can bring any voman
in England on her knees to me and you shall see vat I vill do vid my
Morgiana." He attended her for six weeks punctually, and yet Morgiana
was never brought down on her knees; he exhausted his best stock of
"gomblimends," and she never seemed disposed to receive them with
anything but laughter. And, as a matter of course, he only grew more
infatuated with the lovely creature who was so provokingly good-humoured
and so laughingly cruel.

Benjamin Baroski was one of the chief ornaments of the musical
profession in London; he charged a guinea for a lesson of three-quarters
of an hour abroad, and he had, furthermore, a school at his own
residence, where pupils assembled in considerable numbers, and of that
curious mixed kind which those may see who frequent these places of
instruction. There were very innocent young ladies with their mammas,
who would hurry them off trembling to the farther corner of the room
when certain doubtful professional characters made their appearance.
There was Miss Grigg, who sang at the "Foundling," and Mr. Johnson,
who sang at the "Eagle Tavern," and Madame Fioravanti (a very doubtful
character), who sang nowhere, but was always coming out at the Italian
Opera. There was Lumley Limpiter (Lord Tweedledale's son), one of the
most accomplished tenors in town, and who, we have heard, sings with
the professionals at a hundred concerts; and with him, too, was Captain
Guzzard, of the Guards, with his tremendous bass voice, which all the
world declared to be as fine as Porto's, and who shared the applause of
Baroski's school with Mr. Bulger, the dentist of Sackville Street, who
neglected his ivory and gold plates for his voice, as every unfortunate
individual will do who is bitten by the music mania. Then among
the ladies there were a half-score of dubious pale governesses and
professionals with turned frocks and lank damp bandeaux of hair under
shabby little bonnets; luckless creatures these, who were parting with
their poor little store of half-guineas to be enabled to say they were
pupils of Signor Baroski, and so get pupils of their own among the
British youths, or employment in the choruses of the theatres.

The prima donna of the little company was Amelia Larkins, Baroski's own
articled pupil, on whose future reputation the eminent master staked his
own, whose profits he was to share, and whom he had farmed, to this end,
from her father, a most respectable sheriff's officer's assistant, and
now, by his daughter's exertions, a considerable capitalist. Amelia is
blonde and blue-eyed, her complexion is as bright as snow, her ringlets
of the colour of straw, her figure--but why describe her figure? Has not
all the world seen her at the Theatres Royal and in America under the
name of Miss Ligonier?

Until Mrs. Walker arrived, Miss Larkins was the undisputed princess of
the Baroski company--the Semiramide, the Rosina, the Tamina, the Donna
Anna. Baroski vaunted her everywhere as the great rising genius of the
day, bade Catalani look to her laurels, and questioned whether Miss
Stephens could sing a ballad like his pupil. Mrs. Howard Walker arrived,
and created, on the first occasion, no small sensation. She improved,
and the little society became speedily divided into Walkerites and
Larkinsians; and between these two ladies (as indeed between Guzzard and
Bulger before mentioned, between Miss Brunck and Miss Horsman, the two
contraltos, and between the chorus-singers, after their kind) a great
rivalry arose. Larkins was certainly the better singer; but could
her straw-coloured curls and dumpy high-shouldered figure bear any
comparison with the jetty ringlets and stately form of Morgiana? Did not
Mrs. Walker, too, come to the music-lesson in her carriage, and with a
black velvet gown and Cashmere shawl, while poor Larkins meekly stepped
from Bell Yard, Temple Bar, in an old print gown and clogs, which she
left in the hall? "Larkins sing!" said Mrs. Crump, sarcastically; "I'm
sure she ought; her mouth's big enough to sing a duet." Poor Larkins had
no one to make epigrams in her behoof; her mother was at home tending
the younger ones, her father abroad following the duties of his
profession; she had but one protector, as she thought, and that one
was Baroski. Mrs. Crump did not fail to tell Lumley Limpiter of her own
former triumphs, and to sing him "Tink-a-tink," which we have previously
heard, and to state how in former days she had been called the
Ravenswing. And Lumley, on this hint, made a poem, in which he compared
Morgiana's hair to the plumage of the Raven's wing, and Larkinissa's to
that of the canary; by which two names the ladies began soon to be known
in the school.

Ere long the flight of the Ravenswing became evidently stronger, whereas
that of the canary was seen evidently to droop. When Morgiana sang, all
the room would cry "Bravo!" when Amelia performed, scarce a hand
was raised for applause of her, except Morgiana's own, and that the
Larkinses thought was lifted in odious triumph, rather than in sympathy,
for Miss L. was of an envious turn, and little understood the generosity
of her rival.

At last, one day, the crowning victory of the Ravenswing came. In the
trio of Baroski's own opera of "Eliogabalo," "Rosy lips and rosy wine,"
Miss Larkins, who was evidently unwell, was taking the part of the
English captive, which she had sung in public concerts before royal
dukes, and with considerable applause, and, from some reason, performed
it so ill, that Baroski, slapping down the music on the piano in a fury,
cried, "Mrs. Howard Walker, as Miss Larkins cannot sing to-day, will
you favour us by taking the part of Boadicetta?" Mrs. Walker got up
smilingly to obey--the triumph was too great to be withstood; and, as
she advanced to the piano, Miss Larkins looked wildly at her, and stood
silent for a while, and, at last, shrieked out, "BENJAMIN!" in a tone of
extreme agony, and dropped fainting down on the ground. Benjamin looked
extremely red, it must be confessed, at being thus called by what
we shall denominate his Christian name, and Limpiter looked round at
Guzzard, and Miss Brunck nudged Miss Horsman, and the lesson concluded
rather abruptly that day; for Miss Larkins was carried off to the next
room, laid on a couch, and sprinkled with water.

Good-natured Morgiana insisted that her mother should take Miss Larkins
to Bell Yard in her carriage, and went herself home on foot; but I don't
know that this piece of kindness prevented Larkins from hating her. I
should doubt if it did.

Hearing so much of his wife's skill as a singer, the astute Captain
Walker determined to take advantage of it for the purpose of increasing
his "connection." He had Lumley Limpiter at his house before long, which
was, indeed, no great matter, for honest Lum would go anywhere for a
good dinner--and an opportunity to show off his voice afterwards,
and Lumley was begged to bring any more clerks in the Treasury of his
acquaintance; Captain Guzzard was invited, and any officers of the
Guards whom he might choose to bring; Bulger received occasional
cards:--in a word, and after a short time, Mrs. Howard Walker's
musical parties began to be considerably suivies. Her husband had the
satisfaction to see his rooms filled by many great personages; and once
or twice in return (indeed, whenever she was wanted, or when people
could not afford to hire the first singers) she was asked to parties
elsewhere, and treated with that killing civility which our English
aristocracy knows how to bestow on artists. Clever and wise aristocracy!
It is sweet to mark your ways, and study your commerce with inferior
men.

I was just going to commence a tirade regarding the aristocracy
here, and to rage against that cool assumption of superiority which
distinguishes their lordships' commerce with artists of all sorts: that
politeness which, if it condescends to receive artists at all, takes
care to have them altogether, so that there can be no mistake about
their rank--that august patronage of art which rewards it with a silly
flourish of knighthood, to be sure, but takes care to exclude it from
any contact with its betters in society--I was, I say, just going to
commence a tirade against the aristocracy for excluding artists from
their company, and to be extremely satirical upon them, for instance,
for not receiving my friend Morgiana, when it suddenly came into my head
to ask, was Mrs. Walker fit to move in the best society?--to which query
it must humbly be replied that she was not. Her education was not such
as to make her quite the equal of Baker Street. She was a kind honest
and clever creature; but, it must be confessed, not refined. Wherever
she went she had, if not the finest, at any rate the most showy gown
in the room; her ornaments were the biggest; her hats, toques, berets,
marabouts, and other fallals, always the most conspicuous. She drops
"h's" here and there. I have seen her eat peas with a knife (and Walker,
scowling on the opposite side of the table, striving in vain to catch
her eye); and I shall never forget Lady Smigsmag's horror when she
asked for porter at dinner at Richmond, and began to drink it out of the
pewter pot. It was a fine sight. She lifted up the tankard with one of
the finest arms, covered with the biggest bracelets ever seen; and had
a bird of paradise on her head, that curled round the pewter disc of the
pot as she raised it, like a halo. These peculiarities she had, and has
still. She is best away from the genteel world, that is the fact. When
she says that "The weather is so 'ot that it is quite debiliating;" when
she laughs, when she hits her neighbour at dinner on the side of the
waistcoat (as she will if he should say anything that amuses her), she
does what is perfectly natural and unaffected on her part, but what
is not customarily done among polite persons, who can sneer at her
odd manners and her vanity, but don't know the kindness, honesty, and
simplicity which distinguish her. This point being admitted, it follows,
of course, that the tirade against the aristocracy would, in the present
instance, be out of place--so it shall be reserved for some other
occasion.

The Ravenswing was a person admirably disposed by nature to be happy.
She had a disposition so kindly that any small attention would satisfy
it; was pleased when alone; was delighted in a crowd; was charmed with
a joke, however old; was always ready to laugh, to sing, to dance, or to
be merry; was so tender-hearted that the smallest ballad would make her
cry: and hence was supposed, by many persons, to be extremely affected,
and by almost all to be a downright coquette. Several competitors for
her favour presented themselves besides Baroski. Young dandies used to
canter round her phaeton in the park, and might be seen haunting her
doors in the mornings. The fashionable artist of the day made a drawing
of her, which was engraved and sold in the shops; a copy of it was
printed in a song, "Black-eyed Maiden of Araby," the words by Desmond
Mulligan, Esquire, the music composed and dedicated to MRS. HOWARD
WALKER, by her most faithful and obliged servant, Benjamin Baroski; and
at night her Opera-box was full. Her Opera-box? Yes, the heiress of the
"Bootjack" actually had an Opera-box, and some of the most fashionable
manhood of London attended it.

Now, in fact, was the time of her greatest prosperity; and her husband
gathering these fashionable characters about him, extended his "agency"
considerably, and began to thank his stars that he had married a woman
who was as good as a fortune to him.

In extending his agency, however, Mr. Walker increased his expenses
proportionably, and multiplied his debts accordingly. More furniture and
more plate, more wines and more dinner-parties, became necessary; the
little pony-phaeton was exchanged for a brougham of evenings; and we may
fancy our old friend Mr. Eglantine's rage and disgust, as he looked from
the pit of the Opera, to see Mrs. Walker surrounded by what he called
"the swell young nobs" about London, bowing to my Lord, and laughing
with his Grace, and led to carriage by Sir John.

The Ravenswing's position at this period was rather an exceptional
one. She was an honest woman, visited by that peculiar class of our
aristocracy who chiefly associate with ladies who are NOT honest. She
laughed with all, but she encouraged none. Old Crump was constantly at
her side now when she appeared in public, the most watchful of mammas,
always awake at the Opera, though she seemed to be always asleep; but no
dandy debauchee could deceive her vigilance, and for this reason Walker,
who disliked her (as every man naturally will, must, and should dislike
his mother-in-law), was contented to suffer her in his house to act as a
chaperon to Morgiana.

None of the young dandies ever got admission of mornings to the little
mansion in the Edgware Road; the blinds were always down; and though you
might hear Morgiana's voice half across the Park as she was practising,
yet the youthful hall-porter in the sugar-loaf buttons was instructed to
deny her, and always declared that his mistress was gone out, with the
most admirable assurance.

After some two years of her life of splendour, there were, to be sure, a
good number of morning visitors, who came with SINGLE knocks, and asked
for Captain Walker; but these were no more admitted than the dandies
aforesaid, and were referred, generally, to the Captain's office,
whither they went or not at their convenience. The only man who obtained
admission into the house was Baroski, whose cab transported him thrice
a week to the neighbourhood of Connaught Square, and who obtained ready
entrance in his professional capacity.

But even then, and much to the wicked little music-master's
disappointment, the dragon Crump was always at the piano, with her
endless worsted work, or else reading her unfailing Sunday Times; and
Baroski could only employ "de langvitch of de ice," as he called it,
with his fair pupil, who used to mimic his manner of rolling his eyes
about afterwards, and perform "Baroski in love" for the amusement of her
husband and her mamma. The former had his reasons for overlooking the
attentions of the little music-master; and as for the latter, had she
not been on the stage, and had not many hundreds of persons, in jest or
earnest, made love to her? What else can a pretty woman expect who is
much before the public? And so the worthy mother counselled her daughter
to bear these attentions with good humour, rather than to make them a
subject of perpetual alarm and quarrel.

Baroski, then, was allowed to go on being in love, and was never in the
least disturbed in his passion; and if he was not successful, at least
the little wretch could have the pleasure of HINTING that he was, and
looking particularly roguish when the Ravenswing was named, and assuring
his friends at the club, that "upon his vort dere vas no trut IN DAT
REBORT."

At last one day it happened that Mrs. Crump did not arrive in time for
her daughter's lesson (perhaps it rained and the omnibus was full--a
smaller circumstance than that has changed a whole life ere now)--Mrs.
Crump did not arrive, and Baroski did, and Morgiana, seeing no great
harm, sat down to her lesson as usual, and in the midst of it down
went the music-master on his knees, and made a declaration in the most
eloquent terms he could muster.

"Don't be a fool, Baroski!" said the lady--(I can't help it if her
language was not more choice, and if she did not rise with cold dignity,
exclaiming, "Unhand me, sir!")--"Don't be a fool!" said Mrs. Walker,
"but get up and let's finish the lesson."

"You hard-hearted adorable little greature, vill you not listen to me?"

"No, I vill not listen to you, Benjamin!" concluded the lady. "Get up
and take a chair, and don't go on in that ridiklous way, don't!"

But Baroski, having a speech by heart, determined to deliver himself
of it in that posture, and begged Morgiana not to turn avay her divine
hice, and to listen to de voice of his despair, and so forth; he seized
the lady's hand, and was going to press it to his lips, when she said,
with more spirit, perhaps, than grace,--

"Leave go my hand, sir; I'll box your ears if you don't!"

But Baroski wouldn't release her hand, and was proceeding to imprint
a kiss upon it; and Mrs. Crump, who had taken the omnibus at a
quarter-past twelve instead of that at twelve, had just opened the
drawing-room door and was walking in, when Morgiana, turning as red as
a peony, and unable to disengage her left hand, which the musician held,
raised up her right hand, and, with all her might and main, gave her
lover such a tremendous slap in the face as caused him abruptly to
release the hand which he held, and would have laid him prostrate on
the carpet but for Mrs. Crump, who rushed forward and prevented him from
falling by administering right and left a whole shower of slaps, such as
he had never endured since the day he was at school.

"What imperence!" said that worthy lady; "you'll lay hands on my
daughter, will you? (one, two). You'll insult a woman in distress, will
you, you little coward? (one, two). Take that, and mind your manners,
you filthy monster!"

Baroski bounced up in a fury. "By Chofe, you shall hear of dis!" shouted
he; "you shall pay me dis!"

"As many more as you please, little Benjamin," cried the widow.
"Augustus" (to the page), "was that the Captain's knock?" At this
Baroski made for his hat. "Augustus, show this imperence to the door;
and if he tries to come in again, call a policeman: do you hear?"

The music-master vanished very rapidly, and the two ladies, instead of
being frightened or falling into hysterics, as their betters would have
done, laughed at the odious monster's discomfiture, as they called him.
"Such a man as that set himself up against my Howard!" said Morgiana,
with becoming pride; but it was agreed between them that Howard should
know nothing of what had occurred, for fear of quarrels, or lest he
should be annoyed. So when he came home not a word was said; and only
that his wife met him with more warmth than usual, you could not have
guessed that anything extraordinary had occurred. It is not my fault
that my heroine's sensibilities were not more keen, that she had not the
least occasion for sal-volatile or symptom of a fainting fit; but so it
was, and Mr. Howard Walker knew nothing of the quarrel between his wife
and her instructor until--

Until he was arrested next day at the suit of Benjamin Baroski for two
hundred and twenty guineas, and, in default of payment, was conducted by
Mr. Tobias Larkins to his principal's lock-up house in Chancery Lane.



CHAPTER V. IN WHICH MR. WALKER FALLS INTO DIFFICULTIES, AND MRS. WALKER
MAKES MANY FOOLISH ATTEMPTS TO RESCUE HIM.

I hope the beloved reader is not silly enough to imagine that Mr.
Walker, on finding himself inspunged for debt in Chancery Lane, was
so foolish as to think of applying to any of his friends (those great
personages who have appeared every now and then in the course of this
little history, and have served to give it a fashionable air). No, no;
he knew the world too well; and that, though Billingsgate would give him
as many dozen of claret as he could carry away under his belt, as the
phrase is (I can't help it, madam, if the phrase is not more genteel),
and though Vauxhall would lend him his carriage, slap him on the back,
and dine at his house,--their lordships would have seen Mr. Walker
depending from a beam in front of the Old Bailey rather than have helped
him to a hundred pounds.

And why, forsooth, should we expect otherwise in the world? I observe
that men who complain of its selfishness are quite as selfish as the
world is, and no more liberal of money than their neighbours; and I am
quite sure with regard to Captain Walker that he would have treated a
friend in want exactly as he when in want was treated. There was only
his lady who was in the least afflicted by his captivity; and as for the
club, that went on, we are bound to say, exactly as it did on the day
previous to his disappearance.

By the way, about clubs--could we not, but for fear of detaining the
fair reader too long, enter into a wholesome dissertation here on the
manner of friendship established in those institutions, and the noble
feeling of selfishness which they are likely to encourage in the male
race? I put out of the question the stale topics of complaint, such as
leaving home, encouraging gormandising and luxurious habits, etc.; but
look also at the dealings of club-men with one another. Look at the rush
for the evening paper! See how Shiverton orders a fire in the dog-days,
and Swettenham opens the windows in February. See how Cramley takes
the whole breast of the turkey on his plate, and how many times Jenkins
sends away his beggarly half-pint of sherry! Clubbery is organised
egotism. Club intimacy is carefully and wonderfully removed from
friendship. You meet Smith for twenty years, exchange the day's news
with him, laugh with him over the last joke, grow as well acquainted as
two men may be together--and one day, at the end of the list of members
of the club, you read in a little paragraph by itself, with all the
honours,

     MEMBER DECEASED.
     Smith, John, Esq.;

or he, on the other hand, has the advantage of reading your own name
selected for a similar typographical distinction. There it is, that
abominable little exclusive list at the end of every club-catalogue--you
can't avoid it. I belong to eight clubs myself, and know that one year
Fitz-Boodle, George Savage, Esq. (unless it should please fate to remove
my brother and his six sons, when of course it would be Fitz-Boodle, Sir
George Savage, Bart.), will appear in the dismal category. There is that
list; down I must go in it:--the day will come, and I shan't be seen in
the bow-window, someone else will be sitting in the vacant armchair:
the rubber will begin as usual, and yet somehow Fitz will not be there.
"Where's Fitz?" says Trumpington, just arrived from the Rhine. "Don't
you know?" says Punter, turning down his thumb to the carpet. "You led
the club, I think?" says Ruff to his partner (the OTHER partner!), and
the waiter snuffs the candles.

                    *****

I hope in the course of the above little pause, every single member of
a club who reads this has profited by the perusal. He may belong, I
say, to eight clubs; he will die, and not be missed by any of the five
thousand members. Peace be to him; the waiters will forget him, and his
name will pass away, and another great-coat will hang on the hook whence
his own used to be dependent.

And this, I need not say, is the beauty of the club-institutions. If it
were otherwise--if, forsooth, we were to be sorry when our friends died,
or to draw out our purses when our friends were in want, we should be
insolvent, and life would be miserable. Be it ours to button up our
pockets and our hearts; and to make merry--it is enough to swim down
this life-stream for ourselves; if Poverty is clutching hold of our
heels, or Friendship would catch an arm, kick them both off. Every man
for himself, is the word, and plenty to do too.

My friend Captain Walker had practised the above maxims so long and
resolutely as to be quite aware when he came himself to be in distress,
that not a single soul in the whole universe would help him, and he took
his measures accordingly.

When carried to Mr. Bendigo's lock-up house, he summoned that gentleman
in a very haughty way, took a blank banker's cheque out of his
pocket-book, and filling it up for the exact sum of the writ, orders Mr.
Bendigo forthwith to open the door and let him go forth.

Mr. Bendigo, smiling with exceeding archness, and putting a finger
covered all over with diamond rings to his extremely aquiline nose,
inquired of Mr. Walker whether he saw anything green about his face?
intimating by this gay and good-humoured interrogatory his suspicion
of the unsatisfactory nature of the document handed over to him by Mr.
Walker.

"Hang it, sir!" says Mr. Walker, "go and get the cheque cashed, and be
quick about it. Send your man in a cab, and here's a half-crown to pay
for it." The confident air somewhat staggers the bailiff, who asked him
whether he would like any refreshment while his man was absent getting
the amount of the cheque, and treated his prisoner with great civility
during the time of the messenger's journey.

But as Captain Walker had but a balance of two pounds five and twopence
(this sum was afterwards divided among his creditors, the law expenses
being previously deducted from it), the bankers of course declined to
cash the Captain's draft for two hundred and odd pounds, simply writing
the words "No effects" on the paper; on receiving which reply Walker,
far from being cast down, burst out laughing very gaily, produced a real
five-pound note, and called upon his host for a bottle of champagne,
which the two worthies drank in perfect friendship and good-humour. The
bottle was scarcely finished, and the young Israelitish gentleman who
acts as waiter in Cursitor Street had only time to remove the flask and
the glasses, when poor Morgiana with a flood of tears rushed into her
husband's arms, and flung herself on his neck, and calling him her
"dearest, blessed Howard," would have fainted at his feet; but that he,
breaking out in a fury of oaths, asked her how, after getting him into
that scrape through her infernal extravagance, she dared to show her
face before him? This address speedily frightened the poor thing out
of her fainting fit--there is nothing so good for female hysterics as a
little conjugal sternness, nay, brutality, as many husbands can aver who
are in the habit of employing the remedy.

"My extravagance, Howard?" said she, in a faint way; and quite put off
her purpose of swooning by the sudden attack made upon her--"Surely, my
love, you have nothing to complain of--"

"To complain of, ma'am?" roared the excellent Walker. "Is two hundred
guineas to a music-master nothing to complain of? Did you bring me such
a fortune as to authorise your taking guinea lessons? Haven't I raised
you out of your sphere of life and introduced you to the best of the
land? Haven't I dressed you like a duchess? Haven't I been for you such
a husband as very few women in the world ever had, madam?--answer me
that."

"Indeed, Howard, you were always very kind," sobbed the lady.

"Haven't I toiled and slaved for you--been out all day working for you?
Haven't I allowed your vulgar old mother to come to your house--to my
house, I say? Haven't I done all this?"

She could not deny it, and Walker, who was in a rage (and when a man is
in a rage, for what on earth is a wife made but that he should vent his
rage on her?), continued for some time in this strain, and so abused,
frightened, and overcame poor Morgiana that she left her husband fully
convinced that she was the most guilty of beings, and bemoaning his
double bad fortune, that her Howard was ruined and she the cause of his
misfortunes.

When she was gone, Mr. Walker resumed his equanimity (for he was not
one of those men whom a few months of the King's Bench were likely to
terrify), and drank several glasses of punch in company with his host;
with whom in perfect calmness he talked over his affairs. That he
intended to pay his debt and quit the spunging-house next day is a
matter of course; no one ever was yet put in a spunging-house that did
not pledge his veracity he intended to quit it to-morrow. Mr. Bendigo
said he should be heartily glad to open the door to him, and in the
meantime sent out diligently to see among his friends if there were
any more detainers against the Captain, and to inform the Captain's
creditors to come forward against him.

Morgiana went home in profound grief, it may be imagined, and could
hardly refrain from bursting into tears when the sugar-loaf page asked
whether master was coming home early, or whether he had taken his key;
she lay awake tossing and wretched the whole night, and very early in
the morning rose up, and dressed, and went out.

Before nine o'clock she was in Cursitor Street, and once more joyfully
bounced into her husband's arms; who woke up yawning and swearing
somewhat, with a severe headache, occasioned by the jollification of the
previous night: for, strange though it may seem, there are perhaps no
places in Europe where jollity is more practised than in prisons for
debt; and I declare for my own part (I mean, of course, that I went
to visit a friend) I have dined at Mr. Aminadab's as sumptuously as at
Long's.

But it is necessary to account for Morgiana's joyfulness; which was
strange in her husband's perplexity, and after her sorrow of the
previous night. Well, then, when Mrs. Walker went out in the morning,
she did so with a very large basket under her arm. "Shall I carry the
basket, ma'am?" said the page, seizing it with much alacrity.

"No, thank you," cried his mistress, with equal eagerness: "it's only--"

"Of course, ma'am," replied the boy, sneering, "I knew it was that."

"Glass," continued Mrs. Walker, turning extremely red. "Have
the goodness to call a coach, sir, and not to speak till you are
questioned."

The young gentleman disappeared upon his errand: the coach was called
and came. Mrs. Walker slipped into it with her basket, and the page went
downstairs to his companions in the kitchen, and said, "It's a-comin'!
master's in quod, and missus has gone out to pawn the plate." When the
cook went out that day, she somehow had by mistake placed in her basket
a dozen of table-knives and a plated egg-stand. When the lady's-maid
took a walk in the course of the afternoon, she found she had occasion
for eight cambric pocket-handkerchiefs, (marked with her mistress's
cipher), half-a-dozen pair of shoes, gloves, long and short, some silk
stockings, and a gold-headed scent-bottle. "Both the new cashmeres is
gone," said she, "and there's nothing left in Mrs. Walker's trinket-box
but a paper of pins and an old coral bracelet." As for the page, he
rushed incontinently to his master's dressing-room and examined every
one of the pockets of his clothes; made a parcel of some of them, and
opened all the drawers which Walker had not locked before his departure.
He only found three-halfpence and a bill stamp, and about forty-five
tradesmen's accounts, neatly labelled and tied up with red tape.
These three worthies, a groom who was a great admirer of Trimmer the
lady's-maid, and a policeman a friend of the cook's, sat down to a
comfortable dinner at the usual hour, and it was agreed among them all
that Walker's ruin was certain. The cook made the policeman a present of
a china punch-bowl which Mrs. Walker had given her; and the lady's-maid
gave her friend the "Book of Beauty" for last year, and the third volume
of Byron's poems from the drawing-room table.

"I'm dash'd if she ain't taken the little French clock, too," said the
page, and so indeed Mrs. Walker had; it slipped in the basket where
it lay enveloped in one of her shawls, and then struck madly and
unnaturally a great number of times, as Morgiana was lifting her store
of treasures out of the hackney-coach. The coachman wagged his head
sadly as he saw her walking as quick as she could under her heavy load,
and disappearing round the corner of the street at which Mr. Balls's
celebrated jewellery establishment is situated. It is a grand shop, with
magnificent silver cups and salvers, rare gold-headed canes, flutes,
watches, diamond brooches, and a few fine specimens of the old masters
in the window, and under the words--

     BALLS, JEWELLER,

you read

       Money Lent.

in the very smallest type, on the door.

The interview with Mr. Balls need not be described; but it must have
been a satisfactory one, for at the end of half an hour Morgiana
returned and bounded into the coach with sparkling eyes, and told the
driver to GALLOP to Cursitor Street; which, smiling, he promised to do,
and accordingly set off in that direction at the rate of four miles an
hour. "I thought so," said the philosophic charioteer. "When a man's
in quod, a woman don't mind her silver spoons;" and he was so delighted
with her action, that he forgot to grumble when she came to settle
accounts with him, even though she gave him only double his fare.

"Take me to him," said she to the young Hebrew who opened the door.

"To whom?" says the sarcastic youth; "there's twenty HIM'S here. You're
precious early."

"To Captain Walker, young man," replied Morgiana haughtily; whereupon
the youth opening the second door, and seeing Mr. Bendigo in a flowered
dressing-gown descending the stairs, exclaimed, "Papa, here's a lady for
the Captain." "I'm come to free him," said she, trembling, and holding
out a bundle of bank-notes. "Here's the amount of your claim, sir--two
hundred and twenty guineas, as you told me last night." The Jew took the
notes, and grinned as he looked at her, and grinned double as he looked
at his son, and begged Mrs. Walker to step into his study and take a
receipt. When the door of that apartment closed upon the lady and his
father, Mr. Bendigo the younger fell back in an agony of laughter, which
it is impossible to describe in words, and presently ran out into a
court where some of the luckless inmates of the house were already
taking the air, and communicated something to them which made those
individuals also laugh as uproariously as he had previously done.

Well, after joyfully taking the receipt from Mr. Bendigo (how her cheeks
flushed and her heart fluttered as she dried it on the blotting-book!),
and after turning very pale again on hearing that the Captain had had a
very bad night: "And well he might, poor dear!" said she (at which Mr.
Bendigo, having no person to grin at, grinned at a marble bust of
Mr. Pitt, which ornamented his sideboard)--Morgiana, I say, these
preliminaries being concluded, was conducted to her husband's apartment,
and once more flinging her arms round her dearest Howard's neck, told
him with one of the sweetest smiles in the world, to make haste and
get up and come home, for breakfast was waiting and the carriage at the
door.

"What do you mean, love?" said the Captain, starting up and looking
exceedingly surprised.

"I mean that my dearest is free; that the odious little creature is
paid--at least the horrid bailiff is."

"Have you been to Baroski?" said Walker, turning very red.

"Howard!" said his wife, quite indignant.

"Did--did your mother give you the money?" asked the Captain.

"No; I had it by me" replies Mrs. Walker, with a very knowing look.

Walker was more surprised than ever. "Have you any more by you?" said
he.

Mrs. Walker showed him her purse with two guineas. "That is all, love,"
she said. "And I wish," continued she, "you would give me a draft to pay
a whole list of little bills that have somehow all come in within the
last few days."

"Well, well, you shall have the cheque," continued Mr. Walker, and began
forthwith to make his toilet, which completed, he rang for Mr. Bendigo,
and his bill, and intimated his wish to go home directly.

The honoured bailiff brought the bill, but with regard to his being
free, said it was impossible.

"How impossible?" said Mrs. Walker, turning very red: and then very
pale. "Did I not pay just now?"

"So you did, and you've got the reshipt; but there's another detainer
against the Captain for a hundred and fifty. Eglantine and Mossrose, of
Bond Street;--perfumery for five years, you know."

"You don't mean to say you were such a fool as to pay without asking if
there were any more detainers?" roared Walker to his wife.

"Yes, she was though," chuckled Mr. Bendigo; "but she'll know better the
next time: and, besides, Captain, what's a hundred and fifty pounds to
you?"

Though Walker desired nothing so much in the world at that moment as
the liberty to knock down his wife, his sense of prudence overcame his
desire for justice: if that feeling may be called prudence on his part,
which consisted in a strong wish to cheat the bailiff into the idea that
he (Walker) was an exceedingly respectable and wealthy man. Many worthy
persons indulge in this fond notion, that they are imposing upon the
world; strive to fancy, for instance, that their bankers consider
them men of property because they keep a tolerable balance, pay little
tradesmen's bills with ostentatious punctuality, and so forth--but the
world, let us be pretty sure, is as wise as need be, and guesses our
real condition with a marvellous instinct, or learns it with curious
skill. The London tradesman is one of the keenest judges of human nature
extant; and if a tradesman, how much more a bailiff? In reply to the
ironic question, "What's a hundred and fifty pounds to you?" Walker,
collecting himself, answers, "It is an infamous imposition, and I owe
the money no more than you do; but, nevertheless, I shall instruct
my lawyers to pay it in the course of the morning: under protest, of
course."

"Oh, of course," said Mr. Bendigo, bowing and quitting the room, and
leaving Mrs. Walker to the pleasure of a tete-a-tete with her husband.

And now being alone with the partner of his bosom, the worthy gentleman
began an address to her which cannot be put down on paper here; because
the world is exceedingly squeamish, and does not care to hear the whole
truth about rascals, and because the fact is that almost every other
word of the Captain's speech was a curse, such as would shock the
beloved reader were it put in print.

Fancy, then, in lieu of the conversation, a scoundrel, disappointed and
in a fury, wreaking his brutal revenge upon an amiable woman, who sits
trembling and pale, and wondering at this sudden exhibition of wrath.
Fancy how he clenches his fists and stands over her, and stamps and
screams out curses with a livid face, growing wilder and wilder in his
rage; wrenching her hand when she wants to turn away, and only stopping
at last when she has fallen off the chair in a fainting fit, with
a heart-breaking sob that made the Jew-boy who was listening at the
key-hole turn quite pale and walk away. Well, it is best, perhaps, that
such a conversation should not be told at length:--at the end of
it, when Mr. Walker had his wife lifeless on the floor, he seized a
water-jug and poured it over her; which operation pretty soon brought
her to herself, and shaking her black ringlets, she looked up once more
again timidly into his face, and took his hand, and began to cry.

He spoke now in a somewhat softer voice, and let her keep paddling on
with his hand as before; he COULDN'T speak very fiercely to the poor
girl in her attitude of defeat, and tenderness, and supplication.
"Morgiana," said he, "your extravagance and carelessness have brought me
to ruin, I'm afraid. If you had chosen to have gone to Baroski, a word
from you would have made him withdraw the writ, and my property wouldn't
have been sacrificed, as it has now been, for nothing. It mayn't be yet
too late, however, to retrieve ourselves. This bill of Eglantine's is
a regular conspiracy, I am sure, between Mossrose and Bendigo here: you
must go to Eglantine--he's an old--an old flame of yours, you know."

She dropped his hand: "I can't go to Eglantine after what has passed
between us," she said; but Walker's face instantly began to wear a
certain look, and she said with a shudder, "Well, well, dear, I WILL
go." "You will go to Eglantine, and ask him to take a bill for the
amount of this shameful demand--at any date, never mind what. Mind,
however, to see him alone, and I'm sure if you choose you can settle the
business. Make haste; set off directly, and come back, as there may be
more detainers in."

Trembling, and in a great flutter, Morgiana put on her bonnet and
gloves, and went towards the door. "It's a fine morning," said Mr.
Walker, looking out: "a walk will do you good; and--Morgiana--didn't you
say you had a couple of guineas in your pocket?"

"Here it is," said she, smiling all at once, and holding up her face to
be kissed. She paid the two guineas for the kiss. Was it not a mean act?
"Is it possible that people can love where they do not respect?" says
Miss Prim: "_I_ never would." Nobody asked you, Miss Prim: but recollect
Morgiana was not born with your advantages of education and breeding;
and was, in fact, a poor vulgar creature, who loved Mr. Walker, not
because her mamma told her, nor because he was an exceedingly eligible
and well-brought-up young man, but because she could not help it, and
knew no better. Nor is Mrs. Walker set up as a model of virtue: ah, no!
when I want a model of virtue I will call in Baker Street, and ask for a
sitting of my dear (if I may be permitted to say so) Miss Prim.

We have Mr. Howard Walker safely housed in Mr. Bendigo's establishment
in Cursitor Street, Chancery Lane; and it looks like mockery and want of
feeling towards the excellent hero of this story (or, as should rather
be said, towards the husband of the heroine) to say what he might have
been but for the unlucky little circumstance of Baroski's passion for
Morgiana.

If Baroski had not fallen in love with Morgiana, he would not have given
her two hundred guineas' worth of lessons; he would not have so far
presumed as to seize her hand, and attempt to kiss it; if he had not
attempted to kiss her, she would not have boxed his ears; he would not
have taken out the writ against Walker; Walker would have been free,
very possibly rich, and therefore certainly respected: he always said
that a month's more liberty would have set him beyond the reach of
misfortune.

The assertion is very likely a correct one; for Walker had a flashy
enterprising genius, which ends in wealth sometimes; in the King's Bench
not seldom; occasionally, alas! in Van Diemen's Land. He might have been
rich, could he have kept his credit, and had not his personal expenses
and extravagances pulled him down. He had gallantly availed himself of
his wife's fortune; nor could any man in London, as he proudly said,
have made five hundred pounds go so far. He had, as we have seen,
furnished a house, sideboard, and cellar with it: he had a carriage, and
horses in his stable, and with the remainder he had purchased shares
in four companies--of three of which he was founder and director, had
conducted innumerable bargains in the foreign stocks, had lived and
entertained sumptuously, and made himself a very considerable income. He
had set up THE CAPITOL Loan and Life Assurance Company, had discovered
the Chimborazo gold mines, and the Society for Recovering and Draining
the Pontine Marshes; capital ten millions; patron HIS HOLINESS THE POPE.
It certainly was stated in an evening paper that His Holiness had made
him a Knight of the Spur, and had offered to him the rank of Count; and
he was raising a loan for His Highness, the Cacique of Panama, who had
sent him (by way of dividend) the grand cordon of His Highness's order
of the Castle and Falcon, which might be seen any day at his office in
Bond Street, with the parchments signed and sealed by the Grand Master
and Falcon King-at-arms of His Highness. In a week more Walker would
have raised a hundred thousand pounds on His Highness's twenty per cent.
loan; he would have had fifteen thousand pounds commission for himself;
his companies would have risen to par, he would have realised his
shares; he would have gone into Parliament; he would have been made a
baronet, who knows? a peer, probably! "And I appeal to you, sir," Walker
would say to his friends, "could any man have shown better proof of his
affection for his wife than by laying out her little miserable money as
I did? They call me heartless, sir, because I didn't succeed; sir, my
life has been a series of sacrifices for that woman, such as no man ever
performed before."

A proof of Walker's dexterity and capability for business may be seen
in the fact that he had actually appeased and reconciled one of his
bitterest enemies--our honest friend Eglantine. After Walker's marriage
Eglantine, who had now no mercantile dealings with his former agent,
became so enraged with him, that, as the only means of revenge in his
power, he sent him in his bill for goods supplied to the amount of
one hundred and fifty guineas, and sued him for the amount. But Walker
stepped boldly over to his enemy, and in the course of half an hour they
were friends.

Eglantine promised to forego his claim; and accepted in lieu of it three
hundred-pound shares of the ex-Panama stock, bearing twenty-five per
cent., payable half-yearly at the house of Hocus Brothers, St. Swithin's
Lane; three hundred-pound shares, and the SECOND class of the order
of the Castle and Falcon, with the riband and badge. "In four years,
Eglantine, my boy, I hope to get you the Grand Cordon of the order,"
said Walker: "I hope to see you a KNIGHT GRAND CROSS, with a grant of a
hundred thousand acres reclaimed from the Isthmus."

To do my poor Eglantine justice, he did not care for the hundred
thousand acres--it was the star that delighted him--ah! how his fat
chest heaved with delight as he sewed on the cross and riband to his
dress-coat, and lighted up four wax candles and looked at himself in
the glass. He was known to wear a great-coat after that--it was that he
might wear the cross under it. That year he went on a trip to Boulogne.
He was dreadfully ill during the voyage, but as the vessel entered
the port he was seen to emerge from the cabin, his coat open, the star
blazing on his chest; the soldiers saluted him as he walked the streets,
he was called Monsieur le Chevalier, and when he went home he entered
into negotiations with Walker to purchase a commission in His Highness's
service. Walker said he would get him the nominal rank of Captain, the
fees at the Panama War Office were five-and-twenty pounds, which
sum honest Eglantine produced, and had his commission, and a pack of
visiting cards printed as Captain Archibald Eglantine, K.C.F. Many a
time he looked at them as they lay in his desk, and he kept the cross in
his dressing-table, and wore it as he shaved every morning.

His Highness the Cacique, it is well known, came to England, and had
lodgings in Regent Street, where he held a levee, at which Eglantine
appeared in the Panama uniform, and was most graciously received by
his Sovereign. His Highness proposed to make Captain Eglantine his
aide-de-camp with the rank of Colonel, but the Captain's exchequer
was rather low at that moment, and the fees at the "War Office" were
peremptory. Meanwhile His Highness left Regent Street, was said by some
to have returned to Panama, by others to be in his native city of Cork,
by others to be leading a life of retirement in the New Cut, Lambeth;
at any rate was not visible for some time, so that Captain Eglantine's
advancement did not take place. Eglantine was somehow ashamed to mention
his military and chivalric rank to Mr. Mossrose, when that gentleman
came into partnership with him; and kept these facts secret, until
they were detected by a very painful circumstance. On the very day when
Walker was arrested at the suit of Benjamin Baroski, there appeared in
the newspapers an account of the imprisonment of His Highness the Prince
of Panama for a bill owing to a licensed victualler in Ratcliff Highway.
The magistrate to whom the victualler subsequently came to complain
passed many pleasantries on the occasion. He asked whether His Highness
did not drink like a swan with two necks; whether he had brought any
Belles savages with him from Panama, and so forth; and the whole court,
said the report, "was convulsed with laughter when Boniface produced a
green and yellow riband with a large star of the order of the Castle
and Falcon, with which His Highness proposed to gratify him, in lieu of
paying his little bill."

It was as he was reading the above document with a bleeding heart that
Mr. Mossrose came in from his daily walk to the City. "Vell, Eglantine,"
says he, "have you heard the newsh?"

"About His Highness?"

"About your friend Valker; he's arrested for two hundred poundsh!"

Eglantine at this could contain no more; but told his story of how he
had been induced to accept three hundred pounds of Panama stock for
his account against Walker, and cursed his stars for his folly. "Vell,
you've only to bring in another bill," said the younger perfumer;
"swear he owes you a hundred and fifty pounds, and we'll have a writ out
against him this afternoon."

And so a second writ was taken out against Captain Walker.

"You'll have his wife here very likely in a day or two," said Mr.
Mossrose to his partner; "them chaps always sends their wives, and I
hope you know how to deal with her."

"I don't value her a fig's hend," said Eglantine. "I'll treat her like
the dust of the hearth. After that woman's conduct to me, I should like
to see her have the haudacity to come here; and if she does, you'll see
how I'll serve her."

The worthy perfumer was, in fact, resolved to be exceedingly
hard-hearted in his behaviour towards his old love, and acted over at
night in bed the scene which was to occur when the meeting should take
place. Oh, thought he, but it will be a grand thing to see the proud
Morgiana on her knees to me; and me a-pointing to the door, and saying,
"Madam, you've steeled this 'eart against you, you have;--bury the
recollection of old times, of those old times when I thought my 'eart
would have broke, but it didn't--no: 'earts are made of sterner stuff. I
didn't die, as I thought I should; I stood it, and live to see the woman
I despised at my feet--ha, ha, at my feet!"

In the midst of these thoughts Mr. Eglantine fell asleep; but it
was evident that the idea of seeing Morgiana once more agitated him
considerably, else why should he have been at the pains of preparing
so much heroism? His sleep was exceedingly fitful and troubled; he saw
Morgiana in a hundred shapes; he dreamed that he was dressing her hair;
that he was riding with her to Richmond; that the horse turned into a
dragon, and Morgiana into Woolsey, who took him by the throat and choked
him, while the dragon played the key-bugle. And in the morning when
Mossrose was gone to his business in the City, and he sat reading the
Morning Post in his study, ah! what a thump his heart gave as the lady
of his dreams actually stood before him!

Many a lady who purchased brushes at Eglantine's shop would have given
ten guineas for such a colour as his when he saw her. His heart beat
violently, he was almost choking in his stays: he had been prepared for
the visit, but his courage failed him now it had come. They were both
silent for some minutes.

"You know what I am come for," at last said Morgiana from under her
veil, but she put it aside as she spoke.

"I--that is--yes--it's a painful affair, mem," he said, giving one look
at her pale face, and then turning away in a flurry. "I beg to refer
you to Blunt, Hone, and Sharpus, my lawyers, mem," he added, collecting
himself.

"I didn't expect this from YOU, Mr. Eglantine," said the lady, and began
to sob.

"And after what's 'appened, I didn't expect a visit from YOU, mem.
I thought Mrs. Capting Walker was too great a dame to visit poor
Harchibald Eglantine (though some of the first men in the country DO
visit him). Is there anything in which I can oblige you, mem?"

"O heavens!" cried the poor woman; "have I no friend left? I never
thought that you, too, would have deserted me, Mr. Archibald."

The "Archibald," pronounced in the old way, had evidently an effect on
the perfumer; he winced and looked at her very eagerly for a moment.
"What can I do for you, mem?" at last said he.

"What is this bill against Mr. Walker, for which he is now in prison?"

"Perfumery supplied for five years; that man used more 'air-brushes than
any duke in the land, and as for eau-de-Cologne, he must have bathed
himself in it. He hordered me about like a lord. He never paid me one
shilling--he stabbed me in my most vital part--but ah! ah! never mind
THAT: and I said I would be revenged, and I AM."

The perfumer was quite in a rage again by this time, and wiped his fat
face with his pocket-handkerchief, and glared upon Mrs. Walker with a
most determined air.

"Revenged on whom? Archibald--Mr. Eglantine, revenged on me--on a poor
woman whom you made miserable! You would not have done so once."

"Ha! and a precious way you treated me ONCE," said Eglantine: "don't
talk to me, mem, of ONCE. Bury the recollection of once for hever!
I thought my 'eart would have broke once, but no: 'earts are made of
sterner stuff. I didn't die, as I thought I should; I stood it--and I
live to see the woman who despised me at my feet."

"Oh, Archibald!" was all the lady could say, and she fell to sobbing
again: it was perhaps her best argument with the perfumer.

"Oh, Harchibald, indeed!" continued he, beginning to swell; "don't call
me Harchibald, Morgiana. Think what a position you might have held if
you'd chose: when, when--you MIGHT have called me Harchibald. Now
it's no use," added he, with harrowing pathos; "but, though I've been
wronged, I can't bear to see women in tears--tell me what I can do."

"Dear good Mr. Eglantine, send to your lawyers and stop this horrid
prosecution--take Mr. Walker's acknowledgment for the debt. If he is
free, he is sure to have a very large sum of money in a few days, and
will pay you all. Do not ruin him--do not ruin me by persisting now. Be
the old kind Eglantine you were."

Eglantine took a hand, which Morgiana did not refuse; he thought about
old times. He had known her since childhood almost; as a girl he dandled
her on his knee at the "Kidneys;" as a woman he had adored her--his
heart was melted.

"He did pay me in a sort of way," reasoned the perfumer with
himself--"these bonds, though they are not worth much, I took 'em for
better or for worse, and I can't bear to see her crying, and to trample
on a woman in distress. Morgiana," he added, in a loud cheerful voice,
"cheer up; I'll give you a release for your husband: I WILL be the old
kind Eglantine I was."

"Be the old kind jackass you vash!" here roared a voice that made Mr.
Eglantine start. "Vy, vat an old fat fool you are, Eglantine, to give up
our just debts because a voman comes snivelling and crying to you--and
such a voman, too!" exclaimed Mr. Mossrose, for his was the voice.

"Such a woman, sir?" cried the senior partner.

"Yes; such a woman--vy, didn't she jilt you herself?--hasn't she been
trying the same game with Baroski; and are you so green as to give up
a hundred and fifty pounds because she takes a fancy to come vimpering
here? I won't, I can tell you. The money's as much mine as it is yours,
and I'll have it or keep Walker's body, that's what I will."

At the presence of his partner, the timid good genius of Eglantine,
which had prompted him to mercy and kindness, at once outspread its
frightened wings and flew away.

"You see how it is, Mrs. W.," said he, looking down; "it's an affair
of business--in all these here affairs of business Mr. Mossrose is the
managing man; ain't you, Mr. Mossrose?"

"A pretty business it would be if I wasn't," replied Mossrose, doggedly.
"Come, ma'am," says he, "I'll tell you vat I do: I take fifty per shent;
not a farthing less--give me that, and out your husband goes."

"Oh, sir, Howard will pay you in a week."

"Vell, den, let him stop at my uncle Bendigo's for a week, and come out
den--he's very comfortable there," said Shylock with a grin. "Hadn't
you better go to the shop, Mr. Eglantine," continued he, "and look after
your business? Mrs. Walker can't want you to listen to her all day."

Eglantine was glad of the excuse, and slunk out of the studio; not into
the shop, but into his parlour; where he drank off a great glass of
maraschino, and sat blushing and exceedingly agitated, until Mossrose
came to tell him that Mrs. W. was gone, and wouldn't trouble him any
more. But although he drank several more glasses of maraschino, and went
to the play that night, and to the Cider-cellars afterwards, neither
the liquor, nor the play, nor the delightful comic songs at the cellars,
could drive Mrs. Walker out of his head, and the memory of old times,
and the image of her pale weeping face.

Morgiana tottered out of the shop, scarcely heeding the voice of Mr.
Mossrose, who said, "I'll take forty per shent" (and went back to his
duty cursing himself for a soft-hearted fool for giving up so much of
his rights to a puling woman). Morgiana, I say, tottered out of the
shop, and went up Conduit Street, weeping, weeping with all her eyes.
She was quite faint, for she had taken nothing that morning but the
glass of water which the pastry-cook in the Strand had given her, and
was forced to take hold of the railings of a house for support just as
a little gentleman with a yellow handkerchief under his arm was issuing
from the door.

"Good heavens, Mrs. Walker!" said the gentleman. It was no other than
Mr. Woolsey, who was going forth to try a body-coat for a customer. "Are
you ill?--what's the matter?--for God's sake come in!" and he took her
arm under his, and led her into his back-parlour, and seated her, and
had some wine and water before her in one minute, before she had said
one single word regarding herself.

As soon as she was somewhat recovered, and with the interruption of
a thousand sobs, the poor thing told as well as she could her little
story. Mr. Eglantine had arrested Mr. Walker: she had been trying to
gain time for him; Eglantine had refused.

"The hard-hearted cowardly brute to refuse HER anything!" said loyal Mr.
Woolsey. "My dear," says he, "I've no reason to love your husband, and I
know too much about him to respect him; but I love and respect YOU, and
will spend my last shilling to serve you." At which Morgiana could only
take his hand and cry a great deal more than ever. She said Mr. Walker
would have a great deal of money in a week, that he was the best of
husbands, and she was sure Mr. Woolsey would think better of him when
he knew him; that Mr. Eglantine's bill was one hundred and fifty pounds,
but that Mr. Mossrose would take forty per cent. if Mr. Woolsey could
say how much that was.

"I'll pay a thousand pound to do you good," said Mr. Woolsey, bouncing
up; "stay here for ten minutes, my dear, until my return, and all shall
be right, as you will see." He was back in ten minutes, and had called
a cab from the stand opposite (all the coachmen there had seen and
commented on Mrs. Walker's woebegone looks), and they were off for
Cursitor Street in a moment. "They'll settle the whole debt for twenty
pounds," said he, and showed an order to that effect from Mr. Mossrose
to Mr. Bendigo, empowering the latter to release Walker on receiving Mr.
Woolsey's acknowledgment for the above sum.

"There's no use paying it," said Mr. Walker, doggedly; "it would only
be robbing you, Mr. Woolsey--seven more detainers have come in while my
wife has been away. I must go through the court now; but," he added in a
whisper to the tailor, "my good sir, my debts of HONOUR are sacred, and
if you will have the goodness to lend ME the twenty pounds, I pledge you
my word as a gentleman to return it when I come out of quod."

It is probable that Mr. Woolsey declined this; for, as soon as he was
gone, Walker, in a tremendous fury, began cursing his wife for dawdling
three hours on the road. "Why the deuce, ma'am, didn't you take a cab?"
roared he, when he heard she had walked to Bond Street. "Those writs
have only been in half an hour, and I might have been off but for you."

"Oh, Howard," said she, "didn't you take--didn't I give you my--my last
shilling?" and fell back and wept again more bitterly than ever.

"Well, love," said her amiable husband, turning rather red, "never mind,
it wasn't your fault. It is but going through the court. It is no great
odds. I forgive you."



CHAPTER VI. IN WHICH MR. WALKER STILL REMAINS IN DIFFICULTIES, BUT SHOWS
GREAT RESIGNATION UNDER HIS MISFORTUNES.

The exemplary Walker, seeing that escape from his enemies was hopeless,
and that it was his duty as a man to turn on them and face them, now
determined to quit the splendid though narrow lodgings which Mr.
Bendigo had provided for him, and undergo the martyrdom of the Fleet.
Accordingly, in company with that gentleman, he came over to Her
Majesty's prison, and gave himself into the custody of the officers
there; and did not apply for the accommodation of the Rules (by which
in those days the captivity of some debtors was considerably lightened),
because he knew perfectly well that there was no person in the wide
world who would give a security for the heavy sums for which Walker was
answerable. What these sums were is no matter, and on this head we do
not think it at all necessary to satisfy the curiosity of the reader. He
may have owed hundreds--thousands, his creditors only can tell; he paid
the dividend which has been formerly mentioned, and showed thereby his
desire to satisfy all claims upon him to the uttermost farthing.

As for the little house in Connaught Square, when, after quitting her
husband, Morgiana drove back thither, the door was opened by the page,
who instantly thanked her to pay his wages; and in the drawing-room, on
a yellow satin sofa, sat a seedy man (with a pot of porter beside him
placed on an album for fear of staining the rosewood table), and the
seedy man signified that he had taken possession of the furniture in
execution for a judgment debt. Another seedy man was in the dining-room,
reading a newspaper, and drinking gin; he informed Mrs. Walker that
he was the representative of another judgment debt and of another
execution:--"There's another on 'em in the kitchen," said the page,
"taking an inwentory of the furniture; and he swears he'll have you took
up for swindling, for pawning the plate."

"Sir," said Mr. Woolsey, for that worthy man had conducted Morgiana
home--"sir," said he, shaking his stick at the young page, "if you give
any more of your impudence, I'll beat every button off your jacket:" and
as there were some four hundred of these ornaments, the page was silent.
It was a great mercy for Morgiana that the honest and faithful tailor
had accompanied her. The good fellow had waited very patiently for her
for an hour in the parlour or coffee-room of the lock-up house, knowing
full well that she would want a protector on her way homewards; and his
kindness will be more appreciated when it is stated that, during
the time of his delay in the coffee-room, he had been subject to the
entreaties, nay, to the insults, of Cornet Fipkin of the Blues, who was
in prison at the suit of Linsey, Woolsey and Co., and who happened to be
taking his breakfast in the apartment when his obdurate creditor entered
it. The Cornet (a hero of eighteen, who stood at least five feet three
in his boots, and owed fifteen thousand pounds) was so enraged at the
obduracy of his creditor that he said he would have thrown him out of
the window but for the bars which guarded it; and entertained serious
thoughts of knocking the tailor's head off, but that the latter, putting
his right leg forward and his fists in a proper attitude, told the
young officer to "come on;" on which the Cornet cursed the tailor for a
"snob," and went back to his breakfast.

The execution people having taken charge of Mr. Walker's house, Mrs.
Walker was driven to take refuge with her mamma near "Sadler's Wells,"
and the Captain remained comfortably lodged in the Fleet. He had some
ready money, and with it managed to make his existence exceedingly
comfortable. He lived with the best society of the place, consisting of
several distinguished young noblemen and gentlemen. He spent the morning
playing at fives and smoking cigars; the evening smoking cigars and
dining comfortably. Cards came after dinner; and, as the Captain was
an experienced player, and near a score of years older than most of his
friends, he was generally pretty successful: indeed, if he had received
all the money that was owed to him, he might have come out of prison
and paid his creditors twenty shillings in the pound--that is, if he had
been minded to do so. But there is no use in examining into that point
too closely, for the fact is, young Fipkin only paid him forty pounds
out of seven hundred, for which he gave him I.O.U.'s; Algernon Deuceace
not only did not pay him three hundred and twenty which he lost at blind
hookey, but actually borrowed seven and sixpence in money from Walker,
which has never been repaid to this day; and Lord Doublequits actually
lost nineteen thousand pounds to him at heads and tails, which he never
paid, pleading drunkenness and his minority. The reader may recollect a
paragraph which went the round of the papers entitled--

"Affair of honour in the Fleet Prison.--Yesterday morning (behind the
pump in the second court) Lord D-bl-qu-ts and Captain H-w-rd W-lk-r (a
near relative, we understand, of his Grace the Duke of N-rf-lk) had
a hostile meeting and exchanged two shots. These two young sprigs of
nobility were attended to the ground by Major Flush, who, by the way,
is FLUSH no longer, and Captain Pam, late of the ---- Dragoons. Play is
said to have been the cause of the quarrel, and the gallant Captain is
reported to have handled the noble lord's nose rather roughly at one
stage of the transactions."

When Morgiana at "Sadler's Wells" heard these news, she was ready to
faint with terror; and rushed to the Fleet Prison, and embraced her lord
and master with her usual expansion and fits of tears: very much to that
gentleman's annoyance, who happened to be in company with Pain and Flush
at the time, and did not care that his handsome wife should be seen
too much in the dubious precincts of the Fleet. He had at least so much
shame about him, and had always rejected her entreaties to be allowed to
inhabit the prison with him.

"It is enough," would he say, casting his eyes heavenward, and with a
most lugubrious countenance--"it is enough, Morgiana, that _I_ should
suffer, even though your thoughtlessness has been the cause of my ruin.
But enough of THAT! I will not rebuke you for faults for which I know
you are now repentant; and I never could bear to see you in the midst
of the miseries of this horrible place. Remain at home with your mother,
and let me drag on the weary days here alone. If you can get me any more
of that pale sherry, my love, do. I require something to cheer me in
solitude, and have found my chest very much relieved by that wine. Put
more pepper and eggs, my dear, into the next veal-pie you make me. I
can't eat the horrible messes in the coffee-room here."

It was Walker's wish, I can't tell why, except that it is the wish of
a great number of other persons in this strange world, to make his
wife believe that he was wretched in mind and ill in health; and all
assertions to this effect the simple creature received with numberless
tears of credulity: she would go home to Mrs. Crump, and say how her
darling Howard was pining away, how he was ruined for HER, and with what
angelic sweetness he bore his captivity. The fact is, he bore it with so
much resignation that no other person in the world could see that he
was unhappy. His life was undisturbed by duns; his day was his own from
morning till night; his diet was good, his acquaintances jovial, his
purse tolerably well supplied, and he had not one single care to annoy
him.

Mrs. Crump and Woolsey, perhaps, received Morgiana's account of her
husband's miseries with some incredulity. The latter was now a daily
visitor to "Sadler's Wells." His love for Morgiana had become a warm
fatherly generous regard for her; it was out of the honest fellow's
cellar that the wine used to come which did so much good to Mr. Walker's
chest; and he tried a thousand ways to make Morgiana happy.

A very happy day, indeed, it was when, returning from her visit to the
Fleet, she found in her mother's sitting-room her dear grand rosewood
piano, and every one of her music-books, which the kind-hearted tailor
had purchased at the sale of Walker's effects. And I am not ashamed
to say that Morgiana herself was so charmed, that when, as usual, Mr.
Woolsey came to drink tea in the evening, she actually gave him a kiss;
which frightened Mr. Woolsey, and made him blush exceedingly. She
sat down, and played him that evening every one of the songs which
he liked--the OLD songs--none of your Italian stuff. Podmore, the old
music-master, was there too, and was delighted and astonished at the
progress in singing which Morgiana had made; and when the little party
separated, he took Mr. Woolsey by the hand, and said, "Give me leave to
tell you, sir, that you're a TRUMP."

"That he is," said Canterfield, the first tragic; "an honour to human
nature. A man whose hand is open as day to melting charity, and whose
heart ever melts at the tale of woman's distress."

"Pooh, pooh, stuff and nonsense, sir," said the tailor; but, upon my
word, Mr. Canterfield's words were perfectly correct. I wish as much
could be said in favour of Woolsey's old rival, Mr. Eglantine, who
attended the sale too, but it was with a horrid kind of satisfaction
at the thought that Walker was ruined. He bought the yellow satin
sofa before mentioned, and transferred it to what he calls his
"sitting-room," where it is to this day, bearing many marks of the best
bear's grease. Woolsey bid against Baroski for the piano, very nearly
up to the actual value of the instrument, when the artist withdrew from
competition; and when he was sneering at the ruin of Mr. Walker, the
tailor sternly interrupted him by saying, "What the deuce are YOU
sneering at? You did it, sir; and you're paid every shilling of your
claim, ain't you?" On which Baroski turned round to Miss Larkins,
and said, Mr. Woolsey was a "snop;" the very word, though pronounced
somewhat differently, which the gallant Cornet Fipkin had applied to
him.

Well; so he WAS a snob. But, vulgar as he was, I declare, for my part,
that I have a greater respect for Mr. Woolsey than for any single
nobleman or gentleman mentioned in this true history.

It will be seen from the names of Messrs. Canterfield and Podmore
that Morgiana was again in the midst of the widow Crump's favourite
theatrical society; and this, indeed, was the case. The widow's little
room was hung round with the pictures which were mentioned at the
commencement of the story as decorating the bar of the "Bootjack;" and
several times in a week she received her friends from "The Wells," and
entertained them with such humble refreshments of tea and crumpets as
her modest means permitted her to purchase. Among these persons Morgiana
lived and sang quite as contentedly as she had ever done among the
demireps of her husband's society; and, only she did not dare to own it
to herself, was a great deal happier than she had been for many a day.
Mrs. Captain Walker was still a great lady amongst them. Even in his
ruin, Walker, the director of three companies, and the owner of the
splendid pony-chaise, was to these simple persons an awful character;
and when mentioned they talked with a great deal of gravity of his being
in the country, and hoped Mrs. Captain W. had good news of him. They all
knew he was in the Fleet; but had he not in prison fought a duel with a
viscount? Montmorency (of the Norfolk Circuit) was in the Fleet too;
and when Canterfield went to see poor Montey, the latter had pointed out
Walker to his friend, who actually hit Lord George Tennison across the
shoulders in play with a racket-bat; which event was soon made known to
the whole green-room.

"They had me up one day," said Montmorency, "to sing a comic song, and
give my recitations; and we had champagne and lobster-salad: SUCH nobs!"
added the player. "Billingsgate and Vauxhall were there too, and left
college at eight o'clock."

When Morgiana was told of the circumstance by her mother, she hoped her
dear Howard had enjoyed the evening, and was thankful that for once he
could forget his sorrows. Nor, somehow, was she ashamed of herself for
being happy afterwards, but gave way to her natural good-humour without
repentance or self-rebuke. I believe, indeed (alas! why are we made
acquainted with the same fact regarding ourselves long after it is past
and gone?)--I believe these were the happiest days of Morgiana's whole
life. She had no cares except the pleasant one of attending on her
husband, an easy smiling temperament which made her regardless of
to-morrow; and, add to this, a delightful hope relative to a certain
interesting event which was about to occur, and which I shall not
particularise further than by saying, that she was cautioned against too
much singing by Mr. Squills, her medical attendant; and that widow Crump
was busy making up a vast number of little caps and diminutive cambric
shirts, such as delighted GRANDMOTHERS are in the habit of fashioning.
I hope this is as genteel a way of signifying the circumstance which
was about to take place in the Walker family as Miss Prim herself could
desire. Mrs. Walker's mother was about to become a grandmother. There's
a phrase! The Morning Post, which says this story is vulgar, I'm sure
cannot quarrel with that. I don't believe the whole Court Guide would
convey an intimation more delicately.

Well, Mrs. Crump's little grandchild was born, entirely to the
dissatisfaction, I must say, of his father; who, when the infant was
brought to him in the Fleet, had him abruptly covered up in his cloak
again, from which he had been removed by the jealous prison doorkeepers:
why, do you think? Walker had a quarrel with one of them, and the wretch
persisted in believing that the bundle Mrs. Crump was bringing to her
son-in-law was a bundle of disguised brandy!

"The brutes!" said the lady; "and the father's a brute, too," said she.
"He takes no more notice of me than if I was a kitchen-maid, and of
Woolsey than if he was a leg of mutton--the dear blessed little cherub!"

Mrs. Crump was a mother-in-law; let us pardon her hatred of her
daughter's husband.

The Woolsey compared in the above sentence both to a leg of mutton and
a cherub, was not the eminent member of the firm of Linsey, Woolsey, and
Co., but the little baby, who was christened Howard Woolsey Walker, with
the full consent of the father; who said the tailor was a deuced good
fellow, and felt really obliged to him for the sherry, for a frock-coat
which he let him have in prison, and for his kindness to Morgiana. The
tailor loved the little boy with all his soul; he attended his mother
to her churching, and the child to the font; and, as a present to his
little godson on his christening, he sent two yards of the finest white
kerseymere in his shop, to make him a cloak. The Duke had had a pair of
inexpressibles off that very piece.

House-furniture is bought and sold, music-lessons are given, children
are born and christened, ladies are confined and churched--time, in
other words, passes--and yet Captain Walker still remains in prison!
Does it not seem strange that he should still languish there between
palisaded walls near Fleet Market, and that he should not be restored to
that active and fashionable world of which he was an ornament? The fact
is, the Captain had been before the court for the examination of his
debts; and the Commissioner, with a cruelty quite shameful towards
a fallen man, had qualified his ways of getting money in most severe
language, and had sent him back to prison again for the space of nine
calendar months, an indefinite period, and until his accounts could
be made up. This delay Walker bore like a philosopher, and, far from
repining, was still the gayest fellow of the tennis-court, and the soul
of the midnight carouse.

There is no use in raking up old stories, and hunting through files
of dead newspapers, to know what were the specific acts which made the
Commissioner so angry with Captain Walker. Many a rogue has come before
the Court, and passed through it since then: and I would lay a wager
that Howard Walker was not a bit worse than his neighbours. But as he
was not a lord, and as he had no friends on coming out of prison, and
had settled no money on his wife, and had, as it must be confessed, an
exceedingly bad character, it is not likely that the latter would
be forgiven him when once more free in the world. For instance, when
Doublequits left the Fleet, he was received with open arms by his
family, and had two-and-thirty horses in his stables before a week
was over. Pam, of the Dragoons, came out, and instantly got a place as
government courier--a place found so good of late years (and no wonder,
it is better pay than that of a colonel), that our noblemen and gentry
eagerly press for it. Frank Hurricane was sent out as registrar of
Tobago, or Sago, or Ticonderago; in fact, for a younger son of good
family it is rather advantageous to get into debt twenty or thirty
thousand pounds: you are sure of a good place afterwards in the
colonies. Your friends are so anxious to get rid of you, that they will
move heaven and earth to serve you. And so all the above companions of
misfortune with Walker were speedily made comfortable; but HE had no
rich parents; his old father was dead in York jail. How was he to start
in the world again? What friendly hand was there to fill his pocket with
gold, and his cup with sparkling champagne? He was, in fact, an object
of the greatest pity--for I know of no greater than a gentleman of his
habits without the means of gratifying them. He must live well, and
he has not the means. Is there a more pathetic case? As for a mere low
beggar--some labourless labourer, or some weaver out of place--don't
let us throw away our compassion upon THEM. Psha! they're accustomed
to starve. They CAN sleep upon boards, or dine off a crust; whereas
a gentleman would die in the same situation. I think this was poor
Morgiana's way of reasoning. For Walker's cash in prison beginning
presently to run low, and knowing quite well that the dear fellow could
not exist there without the luxuries to which he had been accustomed,
she borrowed money from her mother, until the poor old lady was a sec.
She even confessed, with tears, to Woolsey, that she was in particular
want of twenty pounds, to pay a poor milliner, whose debt she could not
bear to put in her husband's schedule. And I need not say she carried
the money to her husband, who might have been greatly benefited by
it--only he had a bad run of luck at the cards; and how the deuce can a
man help THAT?

Woolsey had repurchased for her one of the Cashmere shawls. She left it
behind her one day at the Fleet prison, and some rascal stole it there;
having the grace, however, to send Woolsey the ticket, signifying the
place where it had been pawned. Who could the scoundrel have been?
Woolsey swore a great oath, and fancied he knew; but if it was Walker
himself (as Woolsey fancied, and probably as was the case) who made away
with the shawl, being pressed thereto by necessity, was it fair to call
him a scoundrel for so doing, and should we not rather laud the delicacy
of his proceeding? He was poor: who can command the cards? But he did
not wish his wife should know HOW poor: he could not bear that she
should suppose him arrived at the necessity of pawning a shawl.

She who had such beautiful ringlets, of a sudden pleaded cold in the
head, and took to wearing caps. One summer evening, as she and the baby
and Mrs. Crump and Woolsey (let us say all four babies together) were
laughing and playing in Mrs. Crump's drawing-room--playing the most
absurd gambols, fat Mrs. Crump, for instance, hiding behind the sofa,
Woolsey chuck-chucking, cock-a-doodle-dooing, and performing those
indescribable freaks which gentlemen with philoprogenitive organs will
execute in the company of children--in the midst of their play the baby
gave a tug at his mother's cap; off it came--her hair was cut close to
her head!

Morgiana turned as red as sealing-wax, and trembled very much; Mrs.
Crump screamed, "My child, where is your hair?" and Woolsey, bursting
out with a most tremendous oath against Walker that would send Miss Prim
into convulsions, put his handkerchief to his face, and actually wept.
"The infernal bubble-ubble-ackguard!" said he, roaring and clenching his
fists.

As he had passed the Bower of Bloom a few days before, he saw Mossrose,
who was combing out a jet-black ringlet, and held it up, as if for
Woolsey's examination, with a peculiar grin. The tailor did not
understand the joke, but he saw now what had happened. Morgiana had sold
her hair for five guineas; she would have sold her arm had her husband
bidden her. On looking in her drawers it was found she had sold almost
all her wearing apparel; the child's clothes were all there, however.
It was because her husband talked of disposing of a gilt coral that
the child had, that she had parted with the locks which had formed her
pride.

"I'll give you twenty guineas for that hair, you infamous fat coward,"
roared the little tailor to Eglantine that evening. "Give it up, or I'll
kill you-"

"Mr. Mossrose! Mr. Mossrose!" shouted the perfumer.

"Vell, vatsh de matter, vatsh de row, fight avay, my boys; two to one
on the tailor," said Mr. Mossrose, much enjoying the sport (for Woolsey,
striding through the shop without speaking to him, had rushed into the
studio, where he plumped upon Eglantine).

"Tell him about that hair, sir."

"That hair! Now keep yourself quiet, Mister Timble, and don't tink for
to bully ME. You mean Mrs. Valker's 'air? Vy, she sold it me."

"And the more blackguard you for buying it! Will you take twenty guineas
for it?"

"No," said Mossrose.

"Twenty-five?"

"Can't," said Mossrose.

"Hang it! will you take forty? There!"

"I vish I'd kep it," said the Hebrew gentleman, with unfeigned regret.
"Eglantine dressed it this very night."

"For Countess Baldenstiern, the Swedish Hambassador's lady," says
Eglantine (his Hebrew partner was by no means a favourite with the
ladies, and only superintended the accounts of the concern). "It's this
very night at Devonshire 'Ouse, with four hostrich plumes, lappets, and
trimmings. And now, Mr. Woolsey, I'll trouble you to apologise."

Mr. Woolsey did not answer, but walked up to Mr. Eglantine, and snapped
his fingers so close under the perfumer's nose that the latter started
back and seized the bell-rope. Mossrose burst out laughing, and the
tailor walked majestically from the shop, with both hands stuck between
the lappets of his coat.

"My dear," said he to Morgiana a short time afterwards, "you must
not encourage that husband of yours in his extravagance, and sell the
clothes off your poor back that he may feast and act the fine gentleman
in prison."

"It is his health, poor dear soul!" interposed Mrs. Walker: "his chest.
Every farthing of the money goes to the doctors, poor fellow!"

"Well, now listen: I am a rich man" (it was a great fib, for Woolsey's
income, as a junior partner of the firm, was but a small one); "I can
very well afford to make him an allowance while he is in the Fleet, and
have written to him to say so. But if you ever give him a penny, or sell
a trinket belonging to you, upon my word and honour I will withdraw
the allowance, and, though it would go to my heart, I'll never see you
again. You wouldn't make me unhappy, would you?"

"I'd go on my knees to serve you, and Heaven bless you," said the wife.

"Well, then, you must give me this promise." And she did. "And now,"
said he, "your mother, and Podmore, and I have been talking over
matters, and we've agreed that you may make a very good income for
yourself; though, to be sure, I wish it could have been managed any
other way; but needs must, you know. You're the finest singer in the
universe."

"La!" said Morgiana, highly delighted.

"_I_ never heard anything like you, though I'm no judge. Podmore says he
is sure you will do very well, and has no doubt you might get very good
engagements at concerts or on the stage; and as that husband will never
do any good, and you have a child to support, sing you must."

"Oh! how glad I should be to pay his debts and repay all he has done for
me," cried Mrs. Walker. "Think of his giving two hundred guineas to Mr.
Baroski to have me taught. Was not that kind of him? Do you REALLY think
I should succeed?

"There's Miss Larkins has succeeded."

"The little high-shouldered vulgar thing!" says Morgiana. "I'm sure I
ought to succeed if SHE did."

"She sing against Morgiana?" said Mrs. Crump. "I'd like to see her,
indeed! She ain't fit to snuff a candle to her."

"I dare say not," said the tailor, "though I don't understand the thing
myself: but if Morgiana can make a fortune, why shouldn't she?"

"Heaven knows we want it, Woolsey," cried Mrs. Crump. "And to see her on
the stage was always the wish of my heart:" and so it had formerly been
the wish of Morgiana; and now, with the hope of helping her husband and
child, the wish became a duty, and she fell to practising once more from
morning till night.

One of the most generous of men and tailors who ever lived now promised,
if further instruction should be considered necessary (though that he
could hardly believe possible), that he would lend Morgiana any sum
required for the payment of lessons; and accordingly she once more
betook herself, under Podmore's advice, to the singing school. Baroski's
academy was, after the passages between them, out of the question,
and she placed herself under the instruction of the excellent English
composer Sir George Thrum, whose large and awful wife, Lady Thrum,
dragon of virtue and propriety, kept watch over the master and the
pupils, and was the sternest guardian of female virtue on or off any
stage.

Morgiana came at a propitious moment. Baroski had launched Miss Larkins
under the name of Ligonier. The Ligonier was enjoying considerable
success, and was singing classical music to tolerable audiences; whereas
Miss Butts, Sir George's last pupil, had turned out a complete failure,
and the rival house was only able to make a faint opposition to the new
star with Miss M'Whirter, who, though an old favourite, had lost her
upper notes and her front teeth, and, the fact was, drew no longer.

Directly Sir George heard Mrs. Walker, he tapped Podmore, who
accompanied her, on the waistcoat, and said, "Poddy, thank you; we'll
cut the orange boy's throat with that voice." It was by the familiar
title of orange boy that the great Baroski was known among his
opponents.

"We'll crush him, Podmore," said Lady Thrum, in her deep hollow voice.
"You may stop and dine." And Podmore stayed to dinner, and ate cold
mutton, and drank Marsala with the greatest reverence for the great
English composer. The very next day Lady Thrum hired a pair of horses,
and paid a visit to Mrs. Crump and her daughter at "Sadler's Wells."

All these things were kept profoundly secret from Walker, who received
very magnanimously the allowance of two guineas a week which Woolsey
made him, and with the aid of the few shillings his wife could bring
him, managed to exist as best he might. He did not dislike gin when he
could get no claret, and the former liquor, under the name of "tape,"
used to be measured out pretty liberally in what was formerly Her
Majesty's prison of the Fleet.

Morgiana pursued her studies under Thrum, and we shall hear in the next
chapter how it was she changed her name to RAVENSWING.



CHAPTER VII. IN WHICH MORGIANA ADVANCES TOWARDS FAME AND HONOUR, AND IN
WHICH SEVERAL GREAT LITERARY CHARACTERS MAKE THEIR APPEARANCE.

"We must begin, my dear madam," said Sir George Thrum, "by unlearning
all that Mr. Baroski (of whom I do not wish to speak with the slightest
disrespect) has taught you!"

Morgiana knew that every professor says as much, and submitted to
undergo the study requisite for Sir George's system with perfect good
grace. Au fond, as I was given to understand, the methods of the two
artists were pretty similar; but as there was rivalry between them, and
continual desertion of scholars from one school to another, it was
fair for each to take all the credit he could get in the success of
any pupil. If a pupil failed, for instance, Thrum would say Baroski had
spoiled her irretrievably; while the German would regret "Dat dat yong
voman, who had a good organ, should have trown away her dime wid dat old
Drum." When one of these deserters succeeded, "Yes, yes," would either
professor cry, "I formed her; she owes her fortune to me." Both of them
thus, in future days, claimed the education of the famous Ravenswing;
and even Sir George Thrum, though he wished to ecraser the Ligonier,
pretended that her present success was his work because once she had
been brought by her mother, Mrs. Larkins, to sing for Sir George's
approval.

When the two professors met it was with the most delighted cordiality
on the part of both. "Mein lieber Herr," Thrum would say (with some
malice), "your sonata in x flat is divine." "Chevalier," Baroski would
reply, "dat andante movement in w is worthy of Beethoven. I gif you
my sacred honour," and so forth. In fact, they loved each other as
gentlemen in their profession always do.

The two famous professors conduct their academies on very opposite
principles. Baroski writes ballet music; Thrum, on the contrary, says
"he cannot but deplore the dangerous fascinations of the dance," and
writes more for Exeter Hall and Birmingham. While Baroski drives a cab
in the Park with a very suspicious Mademoiselle Leocadie, or Amenaide,
by his side, you may see Thrum walking to evening church with his lady,
and hymns are sung there of his own composition. He belongs to the
"Athenaeum Club," he goes to the Levee once a year, he does
everything that a respectable man should; and if, by the means of this
respectability, he manages to make his little trade far more profitable
than it otherwise would be, are we to quarrel with him for it?

Sir George, in fact, had every reason to be respectable. He had been a
choir-boy at Windsor, had played to the old King's violoncello, had
been intimate with him, and had received knighthood at the hand of his
revered sovereign. He had a snuff-box which His Majesty gave him, and
portraits of him and the young princes all over the house. He had also
a foreign order (no other, indeed, than the Elephant and Castle of
Kalbsbraten-Pumpernickel), conferred upon him by the Grand Duke when
here with the allied sovereigns in 1814. With this ribbon round his
neck, on gala days, and in a white waistcoat, the old gentleman looked
splendid as he moved along in a blue coat with the Windsor button, and
neat black small-clothes, and silk stockings. He lived in an old tall
dingy house, furnished in the reign of George III., his beloved master,
and not much more cheerful now than a family vault. They are awfully
funereal, those ornaments of the close of the last century--tall gloomy
horse-hair chairs, mouldy Turkey carpets with wretched druggets to guard
them, little cracked sticking-plaster miniatures of people in tours and
pigtails over high-shouldered mantelpieces, two dismal urns on each side
of a lanky sideboard, and in the midst a queer twisted receptacle
for worn-out knives with green handles. Under the sideboard stands a
cellaret that looks as if it held half a bottle of currant wine, and
a shivering plate-warmer that never could get any comfort out of the
wretched old cramped grate yonder. Don't you know in such houses the
grey gloom that hangs over the stairs, the dull-coloured old carpet that
winds its way up the same, growing thinner, duller, and more threadbare
as it mounts to the bedroom floors? There is something awful in the
bedroom of a respectable old couple of sixty-five. Think of the old
feathers, turbans, bugles, petticoats, pomatum-pots, spencers, white
satin shoes, false fronts, the old flaccid boneless stays tied up in
faded riband, the dusky fans, the old forty-years-old baby linen, the
letters of Sir George when he was young, the doll of poor Maria who died
in 1803, Frederick's first corduroy breeches, and the newspaper which
contains the account of his distinguishing himself at the siege of
Seringapatam. All these lie somewhere, damp and squeezed down into glum
old presses and wardrobes. At that glass the wife has sat many times
these fifty years; in that old morocco bed her children were born. Where
are they now? Fred the brave captain, and Charles the saucy colleger:
there hangs a drawing of him done by Mr. Beechey, and that sketch by
Cosway was the very likeness of Louisa before--

"Mr. Fitz-Boodle! for Heaven's sake come down. What are you doing in a
lady's bedroom?"

"The fact is, madam, I had no business there in life; but, having had
quite enough wine with Sir George, my thoughts had wandered upstairs
into the sanctuary of female excellence, where your Ladyship nightly
reposes. You do not sleep so well now as in old days, though there is no
patter of little steps to wake you overhead."

They call that room the nursery still, and the little wicket still hangs
at the upper stairs: it has been there for forty years--bon Dieu! Can't
you see the ghosts of little faces peering over it? I wonder whether
they get up in the night as the moonlight shines into the blank vacant
old room, and play there solemnly with little ghostly horses, and the
spirits of dolls, and tops that turn and turn but don't hum.

Once more, sir, come down to the lower storey--that is to the Morgiana
story--with which the above sentences have no more to do than this
morning's leading article in The Times; only it was at this house of
Sir George Thrum's that I met Morgiana. Sir George, in old days, had
instructed some of the female members of our family, and I recollect
cutting my fingers as a child with one of those attenuated green-handled
knives in the queer box yonder.

In those days Sir George Thrum was the first great musical teacher
of London, and the royal patronage brought him a great number of
fashionable pupils, of whom Lady Fitz-Boodle was one. It was a long long
time ago: in fact, Sir George Thrum was old enough to remember persons
who had been present at Mr. Braham's first appearance, and the old
gentleman's days of triumph had been those of Billington and Incledon,
Catalani and Madame Storace.

He was the author of several operas ("The Camel Driver," "Britons
Alarmed; or, the Siege of Bergen-op-Zoom," etc. etc.), and, of course,
of songs which had considerable success in their day, but are forgotten
now, and are as much faded and out of fashion as those old carpets which
we have described in the professor's house, and which were, doubtless,
very brilliant once. But such is the fate of carpets, of flowers, of
music, of men, and of the most admirable novels--even this story will
not be alive for many centuries. Well, well, why struggle against Fate?

But, though his heyday of fashion was gone, Sir George still held his
place among the musicians of the old school, conducted occasionally
at the Ancient Concerts and the Philharmonic, and his glees are
still favourites after public dinners, and are sung by those old
bacchanalians, in chestnut wigs, who attend for the purpose of amusing
the guests on such occasions of festivity. The great old people at
the gloomy old concerts before mentioned always pay Sir George marked
respect; and, indeed, from the old gentleman's peculiar behaviour to his
superiors, it is impossible they should not be delighted with him, so he
leads at almost every one of the concerts in the old-fashioned houses in
town.

Becomingly obsequious to his superiors, he is with the rest of the world
properly majestic, and has obtained no small success by his admirable
and undeviating respectability. Respectability has been his great card
through life; ladies can trust their daughters at Sir George Thrum's
academy. "A good musician, madam," says he to the mother of a new pupil,
"should not only have a fine ear, a good voice, and an indomitable
industry, but, above all, a faultless character--faultless, that is, as
far as our poor nature will permit. And you will remark that those young
persons with whom your lovely daughter, Miss Smith, will pursue her
musical studies, are all, in a moral point of view, as spotless as that
charming young lady. How should it be otherwise? I have been myself the
father of a family; I have been honoured with the intimacy of the wisest
and best of kings, my late sovereign George III., and I can proudly show
an example of decorum to my pupils in my Sophia. Mrs. Smith, I have the
honour of introducing to you my Lady Thrum."

The old lady would rise at this, and make a gigantic curtsey, such a
one as had begun the minuet at Ranelagh fifty years ago; and, the
introduction ended, Mrs. Smith would retire, after having seen the
portraits of the princes, his late Majesty's snuff-box, and a piece of
music which he used to play, noted by himself--Mrs. Smith, I say, would
drive back to Baker Street, delighted to think that her Frederica had
secured so eligible and respectable a master. I forgot to say that,
during the interview between Mrs. Smith and Sir George, the latter would
be called out of his study by his black servant, and my Lady Thrum would
take that opportunity of mentioning when he was knighted, and how he
got his foreign order, and deploring the sad condition of OTHER musical
professors, and the dreadful immorality which sometimes arose in
consequence of their laxness. Sir George was a good deal engaged to
dinners in the season, and if invited to dine with a nobleman, as he
might possibly be on the day when Mrs. Smith requested the honour of
his company, he would write back "that he should have had the sincerest
happiness in waiting upon Mrs. Smith in Baker Street, if, previously, my
Lord Tweedledale had not been so kind as to engage him." This letter,
of course, shown by Mrs. Smith to her friends, was received by them with
proper respect; and thus, in spite of age and new fashions, Sir George
still reigned pre-eminent for a mile round Cavendish Square. By the
young pupils of the academy he was called Sir Charles Grandison;
and, indeed, fully deserved this title on account of the indomitable
respectability of his whole actions.

It was under this gentleman that Morgiana made her debut in public life.
I do not know what arrangements may have been made between Sir George
Thrum and his pupil regarding the profits which were to accrue to the
former from engagements procured by him for the latter; but there was,
no doubt, an understanding between them. For Sir George, respectable as
he was, had the reputation of being extremely clever at a bargain; and
Lady Thrum herself, in her great high-tragedy way, could purchase a pair
of soles or select a leg of mutton with the best housekeeper in London.

When, however, Morgiana had been for some six months under his tuition,
he began, for some reason or other, to be exceedingly hospitable, and
invited his friends to numerous entertainments: at one of which, as I
have said, I had the pleasure of meeting Mrs. Walker.

Although the worthy musician's dinners were not good, the old knight
had some excellent wine in his cellar, and his arrangement of his party
deserves to be commended.

For instance, he meets me and Bob Fitz-Urse in Pall Mall, at whose
paternal house he was also a visitor. "My dear young gentlemen," says
he, "will you come and dine with a poor musical composer? I have some
Comet hock, and, what is more curious to you, perhaps, as men of wit,
one or two of the great literary characters of London whom you would
like to see--quite curiosities, my dear young friends." And we agreed to
go.

To the literary men he says: "I have a little quiet party at home: Lord
Roundtowers, the Honourable Mr. Fitz-Urse of the Life Guards, and a few
more. Can you tear yourself away from the war of wits, and take a quiet
dinner with a few mere men about town?"

The literary men instantly purchase new satin stocks and white gloves,
and are delighted to fancy themselves members of the world of fashion.
Instead of inviting twelve Royal Academicians, or a dozen authors, or
a dozen men of science to dinner, as his Grace the Duke of ---- and the
Right Honourable Sir Robert ---- are in the habit of doing once a
year, this plan of fusion is the one they should adopt. Not invite all
artists, as they would invite all farmers to a rent dinner; but they
should have a proper commingling of artists and men of the world. There
is one of the latter whose name is George Savage Fitz-Boodle, who-- But
let us return to Sir George Thrum.

Fitz-Urse and I arrive at the dismal old house, and are conducted up the
staircase by a black servant, who shouts out, "Missa Fiss-Boodle--the
HONOURABLE Missa Fiss-Urse!" It was evident that Lady Thrum had
instructed the swarthy groom of the chambers (for there is nothing
particularly honourable in my friend Fitz's face that I know of, unless
an abominable squint may be said to be so). Lady Thrum, whose figure is
something like that of the shot-tower opposite Waterloo Bridge, makes a
majestic inclination and a speech to signify her pleasure at receiving
under her roof two of the children of Sir George's best pupils. A
lady in black velvet is seated by the old fireplace, with whom a stout
gentleman in an exceedingly light coat and ornamental waistcoat is
talking very busily. "The great star of the night," whispers our host.
"Mrs. Walker, gentlemen--the RAVENSWING! She is talking to the famous
Mr. Slang, of the ---- Theatre."

"Is she a fine singer?" says Fitz-Urse. "She's a very fine woman."

"My dear young friends, you shall hear to-night! I, who have heard every
fine voice in Europe, confidently pledge my respectability that the
Ravenswing is equal to them all. She has the graces, sir, of a Venus
with the mind of a Muse. She is a siren, sir, without the dangerous
qualities of one. She is hallowed, sir, by her misfortunes as by her
genius; and I am proud to think that my instructions have been the means
of developing the wondrous qualities that were latent within her until
now."

"You don't say so!" says gobemouche Fitz-Urse.

Having thus indoctrinated Mr. Fitz-Urse, Sir George takes another of his
guests, and proceeds to work upon him. "My dear Mr. Bludyer, how do you
do? Mr. Fitz-Boodle, Mr. Bludyer, the brilliant and accomplished
wit, whose sallies in the Tomahawk delight us every Saturday. Nay, no
blushes, my dear sir; you are very wicked, but oh! SO pleasant. Well,
Mr. Bludyer, I am glad to see you, sir, and hope you will have
a favourable opinion of our genius, sir. As I was saying to Mr.
Fitz-Boodle, she has the graces of a Venus with the mind of a Muse. She
is a siren, without the dangerous qualities of one," etc. This
little speech was made to half-a-dozen persons in the course of the
evening--persons, for the most part, connected with the public journals
or the theatrical world. There was Mr. Squinny, the editor of the
Flowers of Fashion; Mr. Desmond Mulligan, the poet, and reporter for
a morning paper; and other worthies of their calling. For though
Sir George is a respectable man, and as high-minded and moral an old
gentleman as ever wore knee-buckles, he does not neglect the little arts
of popularity, and can condescend to receive very queer company if need
be.

For instance, at the dinner-party at which I had the honour of
assisting, and at which, on the right hand of Lady Thrum, sat the oblige
nobleman, whom the Thrums were a great deal too wise to omit (the sight
of a lord does good to us commoners, or why else should we be so anxious
to have one?). In the second place of honour, and on her ladyship's left
hand, sat Mr. Slang, the manager of one of the theatres; a gentleman
whom my Lady Thrum would scarcely, but for a great necessity's sake,
have been induced to invite to her table. He had the honour of leading
Mrs. Walker to dinner, who looked splendid in black velvet and turban,
full of health and smiles.

Lord Roundtowers is an old gentleman who has been at the theatres five
times a week for these fifty years, a living dictionary of the stage,
recollecting every actor and actress who has appeared upon it for half a
century. He perfectly well remembered Miss Delancy in Morgiana; he knew
what had become of Ali Baba, and how Cassim had left the stage, and was
now the keeper of a public-house. All this store of knowledge he
kept quietly to himself, or only delivered in confidence to his next
neighbour in the intervals of the banquet, which he enjoys prodigiously.
He lives at an hotel: if not invited to dine, eats a mutton-chop
very humbly at his club, and finishes his evening after the play at
Crockford's, whither he goes not for the sake of the play, but of the
supper there. He is described in the Court Guide as of "Simmer's Hotel,"
and of Roundtowers, county Cork. It is said that the round towers really
exist. But he has not been in Ireland since the rebellion; and his
property is so hampered with ancestral mortgages, and rent-charges, and
annuities, that his income is barely sufficient to provide the modest
mutton-chop before alluded to. He has, any time these fifty years, lived
in the wickedest company in London, and is, withal, as harmless, mild,
good-natured, innocent an old gentleman as can readily be seen.

"Roundy," shouts the elegant Mr. Slang, across the table, with a voice
which makes Lady Thrum shudder, "Tuff, a glass of wine."

My Lord replies meekly, "Mr. Slang, I shall have very much pleasure.
What shall it be?"

"There is Madeira near you, my Lord," says my Lady, pointing to a tall
thin decanter of the fashion of the year.

"Madeira! Marsala, by Jove, your Ladyship means!" shouts Mr. Slang. "No,
no, old birds are not caught with chaff. Thrum, old boy, let's have some
of your Comet hock."

"My Lady Thrum, I believe that IS Marsala," says the knight, blushing a
little, in reply to a question from his Sophia. "Ajax, the hock to Mr.
Slang."

"I'm in that," yells Bludyer from the end of the table. "My Lord, I'll
join you."

"Mr. ----, I beg your pardon--I shall be very happy to take wine with
you, sir."

"It is Mr. Bludyer, the celebrated newspaper writer," whispers Lady
Thrum.

"Bludyer, Bludyer? A very clever man, I dare say. He has a very loud
voice, and reminds me of Brett. Does your Ladyship remember Brett, who
played the 'Fathers' at the Haymarket in 1802?"

"What an old stupid Roundtowers is!" says Slang, archly, nudging Mrs.
Walker in the side. "How's Walker, eh?"

"My husband is in the country," replied Mrs. Walker, hesitatingly.

"Gammon! _I_ know where he is! Law bless you!--don't blush. I've been
there myself a dozen times. We were talking about quod, Lady Thrum. Were
you ever in college?"

"I was at the Commemoration at Oxford in 1814, when the sovereigns were
there, and at Cambridge when Sir George received his degree of Doctor of
Music."

"Laud, Laud, THAT'S not the college WE mean."

"There is also the college in Gower Street, where my grandson--"

"This is the college in QUEER STREET, ma'am, haw, haw! Mulligan, you
divvle (in an Irish accent), a glass of wine with you. Wine, here, you
waiter! What's your name, you black nigger? 'Possum up a gum-tree, eh?
Fill him up. Dere he go" (imitating the Mandingo manner of speaking
English)

In this agreeable way would Mr. Slang rattle on, speedily making himself
the centre of the conversation, and addressing graceful familiarities to
all the gentlemen and ladies round him.

It was good to see how the little knight, the most moral and calm of
men, was compelled to receive Mr. Slang's stories and the frightened air
with which, at the conclusion of one of them, he would venture upon
a commendatory grin. His lady, on her part too, had been laboriously
civil; and, on the occasion on which I had the honour of meeting this
gentleman and Mrs. Walker, it was the latter who gave the signal for
withdrawing to the lady of the house, by saying, "I think, Lady Thrum,
it is quite time for us to retire." Some exquisite joke of Mr. Slang's
was the cause of this abrupt disappearance. But, as they went upstairs
to the drawing-room, Lady Thrum took occasion to say, "My dear, in
the course of your profession you will have to submit to many such
familiarities on the part of persons of low breeding, such as I fear Mr.
Slang is. But let me caution you against giving way to your temper
as you did. Did you not perceive that _I_ never allowed him to see my
inward dissatisfaction? And I make it a particular point that you should
be very civil to him to-night. Your interests--our interests depend upon
it."

"And are my interests to make me civil to a wretch like that?"

"Mrs. Walker, would you wish to give lessons in morality and behaviour
to Lady Thrum?" said the old lady, drawing herself up with great
dignity. It was evident that she had a very strong desire indeed to
conciliate Mr. Slang; and hence I have no doubt that Sir George was to
have a considerable share of Morgiana's earnings.

Mr. Bludyer, the famous editor of the Tomahawk, whose jokes Sir George
pretended to admire so much (Sir George who never made a joke in his
life), was a press bravo of considerable talent and no principle, and
who, to use his own words, would "back himself for a slashing article
against any man in England!" He would not only write, but fight on a
pinch; was a good scholar, and as savage in his manner as with his
pen. Mr. Squinny is of exactly the opposite school, as delicate as
milk-and-water, harmless in his habits, fond of the flute when the state
of his chest will allow him, a great practiser of waltzing and dancing
in general, and in his journal mildly malicious. He never goes beyond
the bounds of politeness, but manages to insinuate a great deal that is
disagreeable to an author in the course of twenty lines of criticism.
Personally he is quite respectable, and lives with two maiden aunts at
Brompton. Nobody, on the contrary, knows where Mr. Bludyer lives. He has
houses of call, mysterious taverns, where he may be found at particular
hours by those who need him, and where panting publishers are in the
habit of hunting him up. For a bottle of wine and a guinea he will write
a page of praise or abuse of any man living, or on any subject, or on
any line of politics. "Hang it, sir!" says he, "pay me enough and I will
write down my own father!" According to the state of his credit, he
is dressed either almost in rags or else in the extremest flush of the
fashion. With the latter attire he puts on a haughty and aristocratic
air, and would slap a duke on the shoulder. If there is one thing more
dangerous than to refuse to lend him a sum of money when he asks for it,
it is to lend it to him; for he never pays, and never pardons a man to
whom he owes. "Walker refused to cash a bill for me," he had been heard
to say, "and I'll do for his wife when she comes out on the stage!" Mrs.
Walker and Sir George Thrum were in an agony about the Tomahawk; hence
the latter's invitation to Mr. Bludyer. Sir George was in a great tremor
about the Flowers of Fashion, hence his invitation to Mr. Squinny. Mr.
Squinny was introduced to Lord Roundtowers and Mr. Fitz-Urse as one of
the most delightful and talented of our young men of genius; and Fitz,
who believes everything anyone tells him, was quite pleased to have
the honour of sitting near the live editor of a paper. I have reason to
think that Mr. Squinny himself was no less delighted: I saw him giving
his card to Fitz-Urse at the end of the second course.

No particular attention was paid to Mr. Desmond Mulligan. Political
enthusiasm is his forte. He lives and writes in a rapture. He is,
of course, a member of an inn of court, and greatly addicted to
after-dinner speaking as a preparation for the bar, where as a young man
of genius he hopes one day to shine. He is almost the only man to whom
Bludyer is civil; for, if the latter will fight doggedly when there is
a necessity for so doing, the former fights like an Irishman, and has a
pleasure in it. He has been "on the ground" I don't know how many
times, and quitted his country on account of a quarrel with Government
regarding certain articles published by him in the Phoenix newspaper.
With the third bottle, he becomes overpoweringly great on the wrongs
of Ireland, and at that period generally volunteers a couple or more of
Irish melodies, selecting the most melancholy in the collection. At five
in the afternoon, you are sure to see him about the House of Commons,
and he knows the "Reform Club" (he calls it the Refawrum) as well as if
he were a member. It is curious for the contemplative mind to mark those
mysterious hangers-on of Irish members of Parliament--strange runners
and aides-de-camp which all the honourable gentlemen appear to possess.
Desmond, in his political capacity, is one of these, and besides his
calling as reporter to a newspaper, is "our well-informed correspondent"
of that famous Munster paper, the Green Flag of Skibbereen.

With Mr. Mulligan's qualities and history I only became subsequently
acquainted. On the present evening he made but a brief stay at the
dinner-table, being compelled by his professional duties to attend the
House of Commons.

The above formed the party with whom I had the honour to dine. What
other repasts Sir George Thrum may have given, what assemblies of men
of mere science he may have invited to give their opinion regarding his
prodigy, what other editors of papers he may have pacified or rendered
favourable, who knows? On the present occasion, we did not quit the
dinner-table until Mr. Slang the manager was considerably excited
by wine, and music had been heard for some time in the drawing-room
overhead during our absence. An addition had been made to the Thrum
party by the arrival of several persons to spend the evening,--a man to
play on the violin between the singing, a youth to play on the piano,
Miss Horsman to sing with Mrs. Walker, and other scientific characters.
In a corner sat a red-faced old lady, of whom the mistress of the
mansion took little notice; and a gentleman with a royal button, who
blushed and looked exceedingly modest.

"Hang me!" says Mr. Bludyer, who had perfectly good reasons for
recognising Mr Woolsey, and who on this day chose to assume his
aristocratic air; "there's a tailor in the room! What do they mean by
asking ME to meet tradesmen?"

"Delancy, my dear," cries Slang, entering the room with a reel, "how's
your precious health? Give us your hand! When ARE we to be married? Make
room for me on the sofa, that's a duck!"

"Get along, Slang," says Mrs. Crump, addressed by the manager by her
maiden name (artists generally drop the title of honour which people
adopt in the world, and call each other by their simple surnames)--"get
along, Slang, or I'll tell Mrs. S.!" The enterprising manager replies by
sportively striking Mrs. Crump on the side a blow which causes a great
giggle from the lady insulted, and a most good-humoured threat to box
Slang's ears. I fear very much that Morgiana's mother thought Mr. Slang
an exceedingly gentlemanlike and agreeable person; besides, she was
eager to have his good opinion of Mrs. Walker's singing.

The manager stretched himself out with much gracefulness on the sofa,
supporting two little dumpy legs encased in varnished boots on a chair.

"Ajax, some tea to Mr. Slang," said my Lady, looking towards that
gentleman with a countenance expressive of some alarm, I thought.

"That's right, Ajax, my black prince!" exclaimed Slang when the negro
brought the required refreshment; "and now I suppose you'll be wanted in
the orchestra yonder. Don't Ajax play the cymbals, Sir George?"

"Ha, ha, ha! very good--capital!" answered the knight, exceedingly
frightened; "but ours is not a MILITARY band. Miss Horsman, Mr. Craw,
my dear Mrs. Ravenswing, shall we begin the trio? Silence, gentlemen, if
you please; it is a little piece from my opera of the 'Brigand's Bride.'
Miss Horsman takes the Page's part, Mr. Craw is Stiletto the Brigand, my
accomplished pupil is the Bride;" and the music began.

          "THE BRIDE.

     "My heart with joy is beating,
        My eyes with tears are dim;

          "THE PAGE.

     "Her heart with joy is beating
        Her eyes are fixed on him;

          "THE BRIGAND.

     "My heart with rage is beating,
        In blood my eye-balls swim!"

What may have been the merits of the music or the singing, I, of course,
cannot guess. Lady Thrum sat opposite the tea-cups, nodding her head
and beating time very gravely. Lord Roundtowers, by her side, nodded his
head too, for awhile, and then fell asleep. I should have done the same
but for the manager, whose actions were worth of remark. He sang with
all the three singers, and a great deal louder than any of them; he
shouted bravo! or hissed as he thought proper; he criticised all the
points of Mrs. Walker's person. "She'll do, Crump, she'll do--a splendid
arm--you'll see her eyes in the shilling gallery! What sort of a
foot has she? She's five feet three, if she's an inch! Bravo--slap
up--capital--hurrah!" And he concluded by saying, with the aid of the
Ravenswing, he would put Ligonier's nose out of Joint!

The enthusiasm of Mr. Slang almost reconciled Lady Thrum to the
abruptness of his manners, and even caused Sir George to forget that
his chorus had been interrupted by the obstreperous familiarity of the
manager.

"And what do YOU think, Mr. Bludyer," said the tailor, delighted that
his protegee should be thus winning all hearts: "isn't Mrs. Walker a
tip-top singer, eh, sir?"

"I think she's a very bad one, Mr. Woolsey," said the illustrious
author, wishing to abbreviate all communications with a tailor to whom
he owed forty pounds.

"Then, sir," says Mr. Woolsey, fiercely, "I'll--I'll thank you to pay me
my little bill!"

It is true there was no connection between Mrs. Walker's singing and
Woolsey's little bill; that the "THEN, sir," was perfectly illogical on
Woolsey's part; but it was a very happy hit for the future fortunes of
Mrs. Walker. Who knows what would have come of her debut but for that
"Then, sir," and whether a "smashing article" from the Tomahawk might
not have ruined her for ever?

"Are you a relation of Mrs. Walker's?" said Mr. Bludyer, in reply to the
angry tailor.

"What's that to you, whether I am or not?" replied Woolsey, fiercely.
"But I'm the friend of Mrs. Walker, sir; proud am I to say so, sir; and,
as the poet says, sir, 'a little learning's a dangerous thing,' sir;
and I think a man who don't pay his bills may keep his tongue quiet at
least, sir, and not abuse a lady, sir, whom everybody else praises,
sir. You shan't humbug ME any more, sir; you shall hear from my attorney
to-morrow, so mark that!"

"Hush, my dear Mr. Woolsey," cried the literary man, "don't make a
noise; come into this window: is Mrs. Walker REALLY a friend of yours?"

"I've told you so, sir."

"Well, in that case, I shall do my utmost to serve her and, look you,
Woolsey, any article you choose to send about her to the Tomahawk I
promise you I'll put in."

"WILL you, though? then we'll say nothing about the little bill."

"You may do on that point," answered Bludyer, haughtily, "exactly as
you please. I am not to be frightened from my duty, mind that; and mind,
too, that I can write a slashing article better than any man in England:
I could crush her by ten lines."

The tables were now turned, and it was Woolsey's turn to be alarmed.

"Pooh! pooh! I WAS angry," said he, "because you abuse Mrs. Walker,
who's an angel on earth; but I'm very willing to apologise. I
say--come--let me take your measure for some new clothes, eh! Mr. B.?"

"I'll come to your shop," answered the literary man, quite appeased.
"Silence! they're beginning another song."

The songs, which I don't attempt to describe (and, upon my word and
honour, as far as I can understand matters, I believe to this day that
Mrs. Walker was only an ordinary singer)--the songs lasted a great deal
longer than I liked; but I was nailed, as it were, to the spot, having
agreed to sup at Knightsbridge barracks with Fitz-Urse, whose carriage
was ordered at eleven o'clock.

"My dear Mr. Fitz-Boodle," said our old host to me, "you can do me the
greatest service in the world."

"Speak, sir!" said I.

"Will you ask your honourable and gallant friend, the Captain, to drive
home Mr. Squinny to Brompton?"

"Can't Mr. Squinny get a cab?"

Sir George looked particularly arch. "Generalship, my dear young
friend--a little harmless generalship. Mr. Squinny will not give much
for MY opinion of my pupil, but he will value very highly the opinion of
the Honourable Mr. FitzUrse."

For a moral man, was not the little knight a clever fellow? He had
bought Mr. Squinny for a dinner worth ten shillings, and for a ride in
a carriage with a lord's son. Squinny was carried to Brompton, and set
down at his aunts' door, delighted with his new friends, and exceedingly
sick with a cigar they had made him smoke.



CHAPTER VIII. IN WHICH MR. WALKER SHOWS GREAT PRUDENCE AND FORBEARANCE.

The describing of all these persons does not advance Morgiana's story
much. But, perhaps, some country readers are not acquainted with the
class of persons by whose printed opinions they are guided, and are
simple enough to imagine that mere merit will make a reputation on the
stage or elsewhere. The making of a theatrical success is a much more
complicated and curious thing than such persons fancy it to be. Immense
are the pains taken to get a good word from Mr. This of the Star, or Mr.
That of the Courier, to propitiate the favour of the critic of the day,
and get the editors of the metropolis into a good humour,--above all, to
have the name of the person to be puffed perpetually before the public.
Artists cannot be advertised like Macassar oil or blacking, and they
want it to the full as much; hence endless ingenuity must be practised
in order to keep the popular attention awake. Suppose a great actor
moves from London to Windsor, the Brentford Champion must state that
"Yesterday Mr. Blazes and suite passed rapidly through our city; the
celebrated comedian is engaged, we hear, at Windsor, to give some of his
inimitable readings of our great national bard to the MOST ILLUSTRIOUS
AUDIENCE in the realm." This piece of intelligence the Hammersmith
Observer will question the next week, as thus:--"A contemporary, the
Brentford Champion, says that Blazes is engaged to give Shakspearian
readings at Windsor to "the most illustrious audience in the realm." We
question this fact very much. We would, indeed, that it were true; but
the MOST ILLUSTRIOUS AUDIENCE in the realm prefer FOREIGN melodies to
THE NATIVE WOOD-NOTES WILD of the sweet song-bird of Avon. Mr. Blazes
is simply gone to Eton, where his son, Master Massinger Blazes, is
suffering, we regret to hear, under a severe attack of the chicken-pox.
This complaint (incident to youth) has raged, we understand, with
frightful virulence in Eton School."

And if, after the above paragraphs, some London paper chooses to attack
the folly of the provincial press, which talks of Mr. Blazes, and
chronicles his movements, as if he were a crowned head, what harm is
done? Blazes can write in his own name to the London journal, and say
that it is not HIS fault if provincial journals choose to chronicle
his movements, and that he was far from wishing that the afflictions of
those who are dear to him should form the subject of public comment,
and be held up to public ridicule. "We had no intention of hurting the
feelings of an estimable public servant," writes the editor; "and our
remarks on the chicken-pox were general, not personal. We sincerely
trust that Master Massinger Blazes has recovered from that complaint,
and that he may pass through the measles, the whooping-cough, the fourth
form, and all other diseases to which youth is subject, with comfort to
himself, and credit to his parents and teachers." At his next appearance
on the stage after this controversy, a British public calls for Blazes
three times after the play; and somehow there is sure to be someone with
a laurel-wreath in a stage-box, who flings that chaplet at the inspired
artist's feet.

I don't know how it was, but before the debut of Morgiana, the English
press began to heave and throb in a convulsive manner, as if indicative
of the near birth of some great thing. For instance, you read in one
paper,--

"Anecdote of Karl Maria Von Weber.--When the author of 'Oberon' was in
England, he was invited by a noble duke to dinner, and some of the most
celebrated of our artists were assembled to meet him. The signal being
given to descend to the salle-a-manger, the German composer was invited
by his noble host (a bachelor) to lead the way. 'Is it not the fashion
in your country,' said he, simply, 'for the man of the first eminence to
take the first place? Here is one whose genius entitles him to be first
ANYWHERE.' And, so saying, he pointed to our admirable English composer,
Sir George Thrum. The two musicians were friends to the last, and Sir
George has still the identical piece of rosin which the author of the
'Freischutz' gave him."--The Moon (morning paper), June 2.

"George III. a composer.--Sir George Thrum has in his possession the
score of an air, the words from 'Samson Agonistes,' an autograph of the
late revered monarch. We hear that that excellent composer has in store
for us not only an opera, but a pupil, with whose transcendent merits
the elite of our aristocracy are already familiar."--Ibid., June 5.

"Music with a Vengeance.--The march to the sound of which the 49th and
75th regiments rushed up the breach of Badajoz was the celebrated air
from 'Britons Alarmed; or, The Siege of Bergen-op-Zoom,' by our famous
English composer, Sir George Thrum. Marshal Davoust said that the
French line never stood when that air was performed to the charge of the
bayonet. We hear the veteran musician has an opera now about to
appear, and have no doubt that Old England will now, as then, show its
superiority over ALL foreign opponents."--Albion.

"We have been accused of preferring the produit of the etranger to the
talent of our own native shores; but those who speak so, little know
us. We are fanatici per la musica wherever it be, and welcome merit dans
chaque pays du monde. What do we say? Le merite n'a point de pays, as
Napoleon said; and Sir George Thrum (Chevalier de l'Ordre de l'Elephant
et Chateau de Kalbsbraten-Pumpernickel,) is a maestro whose fame
appartient a l'Europe.

"We have just heard the lovely eleve, whose rare qualities the Cavaliere
has brought to perfection,--we have heard THE RAVENSWING (pourquoi
cacher un nom que demain un monde va saluer?), and a creature more
beautiful and gifted never bloomed before dans nos climats. She sang
the delicious duet of the 'Nabucodonosore,' with Count Pizzicato, with
a bellezza, a grandezza, a raggio, that excited in the bosom of the
audience a corresponding furore: her scherzando was exquisite, though we
confess we thought the concluding fioritura in the passage in Y flat a
leetle, a very leetle sforzata. Surely the words,

     'Giorno d'orrore,
      Delire, dolore,
      Nabucodonosore,'

should be given andante, and not con strepito: but this is a faute bien
legere in the midst of such unrivalled excellence, and only mentioned
here that we may have SOMETHING to criticise.

"We hear that the enterprising impresario of one of the royal theatres
has made an engagement with the Diva; and, if we have a regret, it is
that she should be compelled to sing in the unfortunate language of our
rude northern clime, which does not preter itself near so well to the
bocca of the cantatrice as do the mellifluous accents of the Lingua
Toscana, the langue par excellence of song.

"The Ravenswing's voice is a magnificent contra-basso of nine octaves,"
etc.--Flowers of Fashion, June 10.

"Old Thrum, the composer, is bringing out an opera and a pupil. The
opera is good, the pupil first-rate. The opera will do much more than
compete with the infernal twaddle and disgusting slip-slop of Donizetti,
and the milk-and-water fools who imitate him: it will (and we ask the
readers of the Tomahawk, were we EVER mistaken?) surpass all these; it
is GOOD, of downright English stuff. The airs are fresh and pleasing,
the choruses large and noble, the instrumentation solid and rich, the
music is carefully written. We wish old Thrum and his opera well.

"His pupil is a SURE CARD, a splendid woman, and a splendid singer. She
is so handsome that she might sing as much out of tune as Miss Ligonier,
and the public would forgive her; and sings so well, that were she as
ugly as the aforesaid Ligonier, the audience would listen to her. The
Ravenswing, that is her fantastical theatrical name (her real name is
the same with that of a notorious scoundrel in the Fleet, who invented
the Panama swindle, the Pontine Marshes' swindle, the Soap swindle--HOW
ARE YOU OFF FOR SOAP NOW, Mr. W-lk-r?)--the Ravenswing, we say, will do.
Slang has engaged her at thirty guineas per week, and she appears next
month in Thrum's opera, of which the words are written by a great ass
with some talent--we mean Mr. Mulligan.

"There is a foreign fool in the Flowers of Fashion who is doing his best
to disgust the public by his filthy flattery. It is enough to make
one sick. Why is the foreign beast not kicked out of the paper?"--The
Tomahawk, June 17.

The first three "anecdotes" were supplied by Mulligan to his paper,
with many others which need not here be repeated: he kept them up
with amazing energy and variety. Anecdotes of Sir George Thrum met you
unexpectedly in queer corners of country papers: puffs of the English
school of music appeared perpetually in "Notices to Correspondents" in
the Sunday prints, some of which Mr. Slang commanded, and in others over
which the indefatigable Mulligan had a control. This youth was the soul
of the little conspiracy for raising Morgiana into fame: and humble as
he is, and great and respectable as is Sir George Thrum, it is my belief
that the Ravenswing would never have been the Ravenswing she is but for
the ingenuity and energy of the honest Hibernian reporter.

It is only the business of the great man who writes the leading articles
which appear in the large type of the daily papers to compose those
astonishing pieces of eloquence; the other parts of the paper are
left to the ingenuity of the sub-editor, whose duty it is to select
paragraphs, reject or receive horrid accidents, police reports,
etc.; with which, occupied as he is in the exercise of his tremendous
functions, the editor himself cannot be expected to meddle. The fate
of Europe is his province; the rise and fall of empires, and the great
questions of State demand the editor's attention: the humble puff,
the paragraph about the last murder, or the state of the crops, or the
sewers in Chancery Lane, is confided to the care of the sub; and it
is curious to see what a prodigious number of Irishmen exist among the
sub-editors of London. When the Liberator enumerates the services of his
countrymen, how the battle of Fontenoy was won by the Irish Brigade, how
the battle of Waterloo would have been lost but for the Irish regiments,
and enumerates other acts for which we are indebted to Milesian heroism
and genius--he ought at least to mention the Irish brigade of the press,
and the amazing services they do to this country.

The truth is, the Irish reporters and soldiers appear to do their duty
right well; and my friend Mr. Mulligan is one of the former. Having the
interests of his opera and the Ravenswing strongly at heart, and being
amongst his brethren an exceedingly popular fellow, he managed matters
so that never a day passed but some paragraph appeared somewhere
regarding the new singer, in whom, for their countryman's sake, all his
brothers and sub-editors felt an interest.

These puffs, destined to make known to all the world the merits of
the Ravenswing, of course had an effect upon a gentleman very closely
connected with that lady, the respectable prisoner in the Fleet, Captain
Walker. As long as he received his weekly two guineas from Mr. Woolsey,
and the occasional half-crowns which his wife could spare in her almost
daily visits to him, he had never troubled himself to inquire what her
pursuits were, and had allowed her (though the worthy woman longed with
all her might to betray herself) to keep her secret. He was far from
thinking, indeed, that his wife would prove such a treasure to him.

But when the voice of fame and the columns of the public journals
brought him each day some new story regarding the merits, genius, and
beauty of the Ravenswing; when rumours reached him that she was the
favourite pupil of Sir George Thrum; when she brought him five guineas
after singing at the "Philharmonic" (other five the good soul had spent
in purchasing some smart new cockades, hats, cloaks, and laces, for her
little son); when, finally, it was said that Slang, the great manager,
offered her an engagement at thirty guineas per week, Mr. Walker became
exceedingly interested in his wife's proceedings, of which he demanded
from her the fullest explanation.

Using his marital authority, he absolutely forbade Mrs. Walker's
appearance on the public stage; he wrote to Sir George Thrum a letter
expressive of his highest indignation that negotiations so important
should ever have been commenced without his authorisation; and he wrote
to his dear Slang (for these gentlemen were very intimate, and in the
course of his transactions as an agent Mr. W. had had many dealings
with Mr. S.) asking his dear Slang whether the latter thought his friend
Walker would be so green as to allow his wife to appear on the stage,
and he remain in prison with all his debts on his head?

And it was a curious thing now to behold how eager those very creditors
who but yesterday (and with perfect correctness) had denounced Mr.
Walker as a swindler; who had refused to come to any composition with
him, and had sworn never to release him; how they on a sudden became
quite eager to come to an arrangement with him, and offered, nay, begged
and prayed him to go free,--only giving them his own and Mrs. Walker's
acknowledgment of their debt, with a promise that a part of the lady's
salary should be devoted to the payment of the claim.

"The lady's salary!" said Mr. Walker, indignantly, to these gentlemen
and their attorneys. "Do you suppose I will allow Mrs. Walker to go on
the stage?--do you suppose I am such a fool as to sign bills to the full
amount of these claims against me, when in a few months more I can walk
out of prison without paying a shilling? Gentlemen, you take Howard
Walker for an idiot. I like the Fleet, and rather than pay I'll stay
here for these ten years."

In other words, it was the Captain's determination to make some
advantageous bargain for himself with his creditors and the gentlemen
who were interested in bringing forward Mrs. Walker on the stage. And
who can say that in so determining he did not act with laudable prudence
and justice?

"You do not, surely, consider, my very dear sir, that half the amount of
Mrs. Walker's salaries is too much for my immense trouble and pains in
teaching her?" cried Sir George Thrum (who, in reply to Walker's note,
thought it most prudent to wait personally on that gentleman). "Remember
that I am the first master in England; that I have the best interest in
England; that I can bring her out at the Palace, and at every concert
and musical festival in England; that I am obliged to teach her every
single note that she utters; and that without me she could no more sing
a song than her little baby could walk without its nurse."

"I believe about half what you say," said Mr. Walker.

"My dear Captain Walker! would you question my integrity? Who was it
that made Mrs. Millington's fortune,--the celebrated Mrs. Millington,
who has now got a hundred thousand pounds? Who was it that brought out
the finest tenor in Europe, Poppleton? Ask the musical world, ask
those great artists themselves, and they will tell you they owe their
reputation, their fortune, to Sir George Thrum."

"It is very likely," replied the Captain, coolly. "You ARE a good
master, I dare say, Sir George; but I am not going to article Mrs.
Walker to you for three years, and sign her articles in the Fleet. Mrs.
Walker shan't sing till I'm a free man, that's flat: if I stay here till
you're dead she shan't."

"Gracious powers, sir!" exclaimed Sir George, "do you expect me to pay
your debts?"

"Yes, old boy," answered the Captain, "and to give me something handsome
in hand, too; and that's my ultimatum: and so I wish you good morning,
for I'm engaged to play a match at tennis below."

This little interview exceedingly frightened the worthy knight, who
went home to his lady in a delirious state of alarm occasioned by the
audacity of Captain Walker.

Mr. Slang's interview with him was scarcely more satisfactory. He
owed, he said, four thousand pounds. His creditors might be brought to
compound for five shillings in the pound. He would not consent to allow
his wife to make a single engagement until the creditors were satisfied,
and until he had a handsome sum in hand to begin the world with. "Unless
my wife comes out, you'll be in the Gazette yourself, you know you will.
So you may take her or leave her, as you think fit."

"Let her sing one night as a trial," said Mr. Slang.

"If she sings one night, the creditors will want their money in full,"
replied the Captain. "I shan't let her labour, poor thing, for the
profit of those scoundrels!" added the prisoner, with much feeling. And
Slang left him with a much greater respect for Walker than he had ever
before possessed. He was struck with the gallantry of the man who could
triumph over misfortunes, nay, make misfortune itself an engine of good
luck.

Mrs. Walker was instructed instantly to have a severe sore throat. The
journals in Mr. Slang's interest deplored this illness pathetically;
while the papers in the interest of the opposition theatre magnified it
with great malice. "The new singer," said one, "the great wonder which
Slang promised us, is as hoarse as a RAVEN!" "Doctor Thorax pronounces,"
wrote another paper, "that the quinsy, which has suddenly prostrated
Mrs. Ravenswing, whose singing at the Philharmonic, previous to her
appearance at the 'T.R----,' excited so much applause, has destroyed the
lady's voice for ever. We luckily need no other prima donna, when that
place, as nightly thousands acknowledge, is held by Miss Ligonier." The
Looker-on said, "That although some well-informed contemporaries had
declared Mrs. W. Ravenswing's complaint to be a quinsy, others, on
whose authority they could equally rely, had pronounced it to be a
consumption. At all events, she was in an exceedingly dangerous state;
from which, though we do not expect, we heartily trust she may recover.
Opinions differ as to the merits of this lady, some saying that she was
altogether inferior to Miss Ligonier, while other connoisseurs declare
the latter lady to be by no means so accomplished a person. This point,
we fear," continued the Looker-on, "can never now be settled; unless,
which we fear is improbable, Mrs. Ravenswing should ever so far recover
as to be able to make her debut; and even then, the new singer will
not have a fair chance unless her voice and strength shall be fully
restored. This information, which we have from exclusive resources, may
be relied on," concluded the Looker-on, "as authentic."

It was Mr. Walker himself, that artful and audacious Fleet prisoner, who
concocted those very paragraphs against his wife's health which appeared
in the journals of the Ligonier party. The partisans of that lady were
delighted, the creditors of Mr. Walker astounded, at reading them.
Even Sir George Thrum was taken in, and came to the Fleet prison in
considerable alarm.

"Mum's the word, my good sir!" said Mr. Walker. "Now is the time to make
arrangements with the creditors."

Well, these arrangements were finally made. It does not matter how many
shillings in the pound satisfied the rapacious creditors of Morgiana's
husband. But it is certain that her voice returned to her all of a
sudden upon the Captain's release. The papers of the Mulligan faction
again trumpeted her perfections; the agreement with Mr. Slang was
concluded; that with Sir George Thrum the great composer satisfactorily
arranged; and the new opera underlined in immense capitals in the
bills, and put in rehearsal with immense expenditure on the part of the
scene-painter and costumier.

Need we tell with what triumphant success the "Brigand's Bride" was
received? All the Irish sub-editors the next morning took care to have
such an account of it as made Miss Ligonier and Baroski die with envy.
All the reporters who could spare time were in the boxes to support
their friend's work. All the journeymen tailors of the establishment of
Linsey, Woolsey, and Co. had pit tickets given to them, and applauded
with all their might. All Mr. Walker's friends of the "Regent Club"
lined the side-boxes with white kid gloves; and in a little box by
themselves sat Mrs. Crump and Mr. Woolsey, a great deal too much
agitated to applaud--so agitated, that Woolsey even forgot to fling down
the bouquet he had brought for the Ravenswing.

But there was no lack of those horticultural ornaments. The theatre
servants wheeled away a wheelbarrow-full (which were flung on the stage
the next night over again); and Morgiana, blushing, panting, weeping,
was led off by Mr. Poppleton, the eminent tenor, who had crowned her
with one of the most conspicuous of the chaplets.

Here she flew to her husband, and flung her arms round his neck. He was
flirting behind the side-scenes with Mademoiselle Flicflac, who had
been dancing in the divertissement; and was probably the only man in
the theatre of those who witnessed the embrace that did not care for it.
Even Slang was affected, and said with perfect sincerity that he wished
he had been in Walker's place. The manager's fortune was made, at least
for the season. He acknowledged so much to Walker, who took a week's
salary for his wife in advance that very night.

There was, as usual, a grand supper in the green-room. The terrible Mr.
Bludyer appeared in a new coat of the well-known Woolsey cut, and the
little tailor himself and Mrs. Crump were not the least happy of the
party. But when the Ravenswing took Woolsey's hand, and said she never
would have been there but for him, Mr. Walker looked very grave,
and hinted to her that she must not, in her position, encourage the
attentions of persons in that rank of life. "I shall pay," said he,
proudly, "every farthing that is owing to Mr. Woolsey, and shall employ
him for the future. But you understand, my love, that one cannot at
one's own table receive one's own tailor."

Slang proposed Morgiana's health in a tremendous speech, which elicited
cheers, and laughter, and sobs, such as only managers have the art of
drawing from the theatrical gentlemen and ladies in their employ. It
was observed, especially among the chorus-singers at the bottom of the
table, that their emotion was intense. They had a meeting the next day
and voted a piece of plate to Adolphus Slang, Esquire, for his eminent
services in the cause of the drama.

Walker returned thanks for his lady. That was, he said, the proudest
moment of his life. He was proud to think that he had educated her for
the stage, happy to think that his sufferings had not been in vain, and
that his exertions in her behalf were crowned with full success. In her
name and his own he thanked the company, and sat down, and was once more
particularly attentive to Mademoiselle Flicflac.

Then came an oration from Sir George Thrum, in reply to Slang's toast
to HIM. It was very much to the same effect as the speech by Walker,
the two gentlemen attributing to themselves individually the merit of
bringing out Mrs. Walker. He concluded by stating that he should always
hold Mrs. Walker as the daughter of his heart, and to the last moment of
his life should love and cherish her. It is certain that Sir George was
exceedingly elated that night, and would have been scolded by his lady
on his return home, but for the triumph of the evening.

Mulligan's speech of thanks, as author of the "Brigand's Bride," was, it
must be confessed, extremely tedious. It seemed there would be no end
to it; when he got upon the subject of Ireland especially, which somehow
was found to be intimately connected with the interests of music and the
theatre. Even the choristers pooh-poohed this speech, coming though it
did from the successful author, whose songs of wine, love, and battle,
they had been repeating that night.

The "Brigand's Bride" ran for many nights. Its choruses were tuned on
the organs of the day. Morgiana's airs, "The Rose upon my Balcony"
and the "Lightning on the Cataract" (recitative and scena) were on
everybody's lips, and brought so many guineas to Sir George Thrum that
he was encouraged to have his portrait engraved, which still may be
seen in the music-shops. Not many persons, I believe, bought proof
impressions of the plate, price two guineas; whereas, on the contrary,
all the young clerks in banks, and all the FAST young men of the
universities, had pictures of the Ravenswing in their apartments--as
Biondetta (the brigand's bride), as Zelyma (in the "Nuptials of
Benares"), as Barbareska (in the "Mine of Tobolsk"), and in all her
famous characters. In the latter she disguises herself as a Uhlan, in
order to save her father, who is in prison; and the Ravenswing looked so
fascinating in this costume in pantaloons and yellow boots, that Slang
was for having her instantly in Captain Macheath, whence arose their
quarrel.

She was replaced at Slang's theatre by Snooks, the rhinoceros-tamer,
with his breed of wild buffaloes. Their success was immense. Slang gave
a supper, at which all the company burst into tears; and assembling
in the green-room next day, they, as usual, voted a piece of plate to
Adolphus Slang, Esquire, for his eminent services to the drama.

In the Captain Macheath dispute Mr. Walker would have had his wife
yield; but on this point, and for once, she disobeyed her husband and
left the theatre. And when Walker cursed her (according to his wont) for
her abominable selfishness and disregard of his property, she burst
into tears and said she had spent but twenty guineas on herself and baby
during the year, that her theatrical dressmaker's bills were yet unpaid,
and that she had never asked him how much he spent on that odious French
figurante.

All this was true, except about the French figurante. Walker, as the
lord and master, received all Morgiana's earnings, and spent them as
a gentleman should. He gave very neat dinners at a cottage in Regent's
Park (Mr. and Mrs. Walker lived at Green Street, Grosvenor Square), he
played a good deal at the "Regent;" but as to the French figurante, it
must be confessed, that Mrs. Walker was in a sad error: THAT lady and
the Captain had parted long ago; it was Madame Dolores de Tras-os-Montes
who inhabited the cottage in St. John's Wood now.

But if some little errors of this kind might be attributable to the
Captain, on the other hand, when his wife was in the provinces, he was
the most attentive of husbands; made all her bargains, and received
every shilling before he would permit her to sing a note. Thus he
prevented her from being cheated, as a person of her easy temper
doubtless would have been, by designing managers and needy
concert-givers. They always travelled with four horses; and Walker was
adored in every one of the principal hotels in England. The waiters flew
at his bell. The chambermaids were afraid he was a sad naughty man, and
thought his wife no such great beauty; the landlords preferred him to
any duke. HE never looked at their bills, not he! In fact his income was
at least four thousand a year for some years of his life.

Master Woolsey Walker was put to Doctor Wapshot's seminary, whence,
after many disputes on the Doctor's part as to getting his half-year's
accounts paid, and after much complaint of ill-treatment on the little
boy's side, he was withdrawn, and placed under the care of the Reverend
Mr. Swishtail, at Turnham Green; where all his bills are paid by his
godfather, now the head of the firm of Woolsey and Co.

As a gentleman, Mr. Walker still declines to see him; but he has not,
as far as I have heard, paid the sums of money which he threatened to
refund; and, as he is seldom at home the worthy tailor can come to Green
Street at his leisure. He and Mrs. Crump, and Mrs. Walker often take the
omnibus to Brentford, and a cake with them to little Woolsey at school;
to whom the tailor says he will leave every shilling of his property.

The Walkers have no other children; but when she takes her airing in the
Park she always turns away at the sight of a low phaeton, in which sits
a woman with rouged cheeks, and a great number of overdressed children
and a French bonne, whose name, I am given to understand, is Madame
Dolores de Tras-os-Montes. Madame de Tras-os-Montes always puts a great
gold glass to her eye as the Ravenswing's carriage passes, and looks
into it with a sneer. The two coachmen used always to exchange queer
winks at each other in the ring, until Madame de Tras-os-Montes lately
adopted a tremendous chasseur, with huge whiskers and a green and gold
livery; since which time the formerly named gentlemen do not recognise
each other.

The Ravenswing's life is one of perpetual triumph on the stage; and, as
every one of the fashionable men about town have been in love with her,
you may fancy what a pretty character she has. Lady Thrum would die
sooner than speak to that unhappy young woman; and, in fact, the Thrums
have a new pupil, who is a siren without the dangerous qualities of one,
who has the person of Venus, and the mind of a Muse, and who is coming
out at one of the theatres immediately. Baroski says, "De liddle
Rafenschwing is just as font of me as effer!" People are very shy about
receiving her in society; and when she goes to sing at a concert, Miss
Prim starts up and skurries off in a state of the greatest alarm, lest
"that person" should speak to her.

Walker is voted a good, easy, rattling, gentlemanly fellow, and nobody's
enemy but his own. His wife, they say, is dreadfully extravagant: and,
indeed, since his marriage, and in spite of his wife's large income,
he has been in the Bench several times; but she signs some bills and
he comes out again, and is as gay and genial as ever. All mercantile
speculations he has wisely long since given up; he likes to throw a
main of an evening, as I have said, and to take his couple of bottles at
dinner. On Friday he attends at the theatre for his wife's salary, and
transacts no other business during the week. He grows exceedingly stout,
dyes his hair, and has a bloated purple look about the nose and cheeks,
very different from that which first charmed the heart of Morgiana.

By the way, Eglantine has been turned out of the Bower of Bloom, and now
keeps a shop at Tunbridge Wells. Going down thither last year without a
razor, I asked a fat seedy man lolling in a faded nankeen jacket at the
door of a tawdry little shop in the Pantiles, to shave me. He said in
reply, "Sir, I do not practise in that branch of the profession!" and
turned back into the little shop. It was Archibald Eglantine. But in the
wreck of his fortunes he still has his captain's uniform, and his grand
cross of the order of the Castle and Falcon of Panama.

                    *****

POSTSCRIPT.

G. Fitz-Boodle, Esq., to O. Yorke, Esq.

ZUM TRIERISCHEN HOP, COBLENZ: July 10, 1843.

MY DEAR YORKE,--The story of the Ravenswing was written a long time
since, and I never could account for the bad taste of the publishers of
the metropolis who refused it an insertion in their various magazines.
This fact would never have been alluded to but for the following
circumstance:--

Only yesterday, as I was dining at this excellent hotel, I remarked a
bald-headed gentleman in a blue coat and brass buttons, who looked
like a colonel on half-pay, and by his side a lady and a little boy
of twelve, whom the gentleman was cramming with an amazing quantity of
cherries and cakes. A stout old dame in a wonderful cap and ribands was
seated by the lady's side, and it was easy to see they were English, and
I thought I had already made their acquaintance elsewhere.

The younger of the ladies at last made a bow with an accompanying blush.

"Surely," said I, "I have the honour of speaking to Mrs. Ravenswing?"

"Mrs. Woolsey, sir," said the gentleman; "my wife has long since left
the stage:" and at this the old lady in the wonderful cap trod on my
toes very severely, and nodded her head and all her ribands in a most
mysterious way. Presently the two ladies rose and left the table, the
elder declaring that she heard the baby crying.

"Woolsey, my dear, go with your mamma," said Mr. Woolsey, patting the
boy on the head. The young gentleman obeyed the command, carrying off a
plate of macaroons with him.

"Your son is a fine boy, sir," said I.

"My step-son, sir," answered Mr. Woolsey; and added, in a louder voice,
"I knew you, Mr. Fitz-Boodle, at once, but did not mention your name
for fear of agitating my wife. She don't like to have the memory of old
times renewed, sir; her former husband, whom you know, Captain Walker,
made her very unhappy. He died in America, sir, of this, I fear"
(pointing to the bottle), "and Mrs. W. quitted the stage a year before I
quitted business. Are you going on to Wiesbaden?"

They went off in their carriage that evening, the boy on the box making
great efforts to blow out of the postilion's tasselled horn.

I am glad that poor Morgiana is happy at last, and hasten to inform
you of the fact. I am going to visit the old haunts of my youth at
Pumpernickel. Adieu.

Yours,

G. F.-B.




MR. AND MRS. FRANK BERRY.



CHAPTER I. THE FIGHT AT SLAUGHTER HOUSE.

I am very fond of reading about battles, and have most of Marlborough's
and Wellington's at my fingers' ends; but the most tremendous combat I
ever saw, and one that interests me to think of more than Malplaquet or
Waterloo (which, by the way, has grown to be a downright nuisance, so
much do men talk of it after dinner, prating most disgustingly about
"the Prussians coming up," and what not)--I say the most tremendous
combat ever known was that between Berry and Biggs the gown-boy, which
commenced in a certain place called Middle Briars, situated in the midst
of the cloisters that run along the side of the playground of Slaughter
House School, near Smithfield, London. It was there, madam, that your
humble servant had the honour of acquiring, after six years' labour,
that immense fund of classical knowledge which in after life has been so
exceedingly useful to him.

The circumstances of the quarrel were these:--Biggs, the gown-boy (a
man who, in those days, I thought was at least seven feet high, and was
quite thunderstruck to find in after life that he measured no more than
five feet four), was what we called "second cock" of the school; the
first cock was a great big, good-humoured, lazy, fair-haired fellow,
Old Hawkins by name, who, because he was large and good-humoured, hurt
nobody. Biggs, on the contrary, was a sad bully; he had half-a-dozen
fags, and beat them all unmercifully. Moreover, he had a little brother,
a boarder in Potky's house, whom, as a matter of course, he hated and
maltreated worse than anyone else.

Well, one day, because young Biggs had not brought his brother his
hoops, or had not caught a ball at cricket, or for some other equally
good reason, Biggs the elder so belaboured the poor little fellow, that
Berry, who was sauntering by, and saw the dreadful blows which the
elder brother was dealing to the younger with his hockey-stick, felt
a compassion for the little fellow (perhaps he had a jealousy against
Biggs, and wanted to try a few rounds with him, but that I can't vouch
for); however, Berry passing by, stopped and said, "Don't you think
you have thrashed the boy enough, Biggs?" He spoke this in a very civil
tone, for he never would have thought of interfering rudely with the
sacred privilege that an upper boy at a public school always has of
beating a junior, especially when they happen to be brothers.

The reply of Biggs, as might be expected, was to hit young Biggs with
the hockey-stick twice as hard as before, until the little wretch howled
with pain. "I suppose it's no business of yours, Berry," said Biggs,
thumping away all the while, and laid on worse and worse.

Until Berry (and, indeed, little Biggs) could bear it no longer, and the
former, bouncing forward, wrenched the stick out of old Biggs's hands,
and sent it whirling out of the cloister window, to the great wonder of
a crowd of us small boys, who were looking on. Little boys always like
to see a little companion of their own soundly beaten.

"There!" said Berry, looking into Biggs's face, as much as to say, "I've
gone and done it;" and he added to the brother, "Scud away, you little
thief; I've saved you this time."

"Stop, young Biggs!" roared out his brother after a pause; "or I'll
break every bone in your infernal scoundrelly skin!"

Young Biggs looked at Berry, then at his brother, then came at his
brother's order, as if back to be beaten again; but lost heart, and ran
away as fast as his little legs could carry him.

"I'll do for him another time," said Biggs. "Here, under-boy, take my
coat;" and we all began to gather round and formed a ring.

"We had better wait till after school, Biggs," cried Berry, quite cool,
but looking a little pale. "There are only five minutes now, and it will
take you more than that to thrash me."

Biggs upon this committed a great error; for he struck Berry slightly
across the face with the back of his hand, saying, "You are in a funk."
But this was a feeling which Frank Berry did not in the least entertain;
for, in reply to Biggs's back-hander, and as quick as thought, and with
all his might and main--pong! he delivered a blow upon old Biggs's nose
that made the claret spirt, and sent the second cock down to the ground
as if he had been shot.

He was up again, however, in a minute, his face white and gashed with
blood, his eyes glaring, a ghastly spectacle; and Berry, meanwhile,
had taken his coat off, and by this time there were gathered in the
cloisters, on all the windows, and upon each other's shoulders, one
hundred and twenty young gentlemen at the very least, for the news had
gone out through the playground of "a fight between Berry and Biggs."

But Berry was quite right in his remark about the propriety of deferring
the business, for at this minute Mr. Chip, the second master, came down
the cloisters going into school, and grinned in his queer way as he saw
the state of Biggs's face. "Holloa, Mr. Biggs," said he, "I suppose you
have run against a finger-post." That was the regular joke with us at
school, and you may be sure we all laughed heartily: as we always did
when Mr. Chip made a joke, or anything like a joke. "You had better go
to the pump, sir, and get yourself washed, and not let Doctor Buckle see
you in that condition." So saying, Mr. Chip disappeared to his duties in
the under-school, whither all we little boys followed him.

It was Wednesday, a half-holiday, as everybody knows, and boiled-beef
day at Slaughter House. I was in the same boarding-house with Berry,
and we all looked to see whether he ate a good dinner, just as one would
examine a man who was going to be hanged. I recollected, in after-life,
in Germany, seeing a friend who was going to fight a duel eat five larks
for his breakfast, and thought I had seldom witnessed greater courage.
Berry ate moderately of the boiled beef--BOILED CHILD we used to call it
at school, in our elegant jocular way; he knew a great deal better than
to load his stomach upon the eve of such a contest as was going to take
place.

Dinner was very soon over, and Mr. Chip, who had been all the while
joking Berry, and pressing him to eat, called him up into his study,
to the great disappointment of us all, for we thought he was going to
prevent the fight; but no such thing. The Reverend Edward Chip took
Berry into his study, and poured him out two glasses of port-wine, which
he made him take with a biscuit, and patted him on the back, and went
off. I have no doubt he was longing, like all of us, to see the battle;
but etiquette, you know, forbade.

When we went out into the green, Old Hawkins was there--the great
Hawkins, the cock of the school. I have never seen the man since, but
still think of him as of something awful, gigantic, mysterious: he who
could thrash everybody, who could beat all the masters; how we longed
for him to put in his hand and lick Buckle! He was a dull boy, not very
high in the school, and had all his exercises written for him. Buckle
knew this, but respected him; never called him up to read Greek plays;
passed over all his blunders, which were many; let him go out of
half-holidays into the town as he pleased: how should any man dare to
stop him--the great calm magnanimous silent Strength! They say he licked
a Life-Guardsman: I wonder whether it was Shaw, who killed all those
Frenchmen? No, it could not be Shaw, for he was dead au champ d'honneur;
but he WOULD have licked Shaw if he had been alive. A bargeman I know he
licked, at Jack Randall's in Slaughter House Lane. Old Hawkins was too
lazy to play at cricket; he sauntered all day in the sunshine about the
green, accompanied by little Tippins, who was in the sixth form, laughed
and joked at Hawkins eternally, and was the person who wrote all his
exercises.

Instead of going into town this afternoon, Hawkins remained at Slaughter
House, to see the great fight between the second and third cocks.

The different masters of the school kept boarding-houses (such as
Potky's, Chip's, Wickens's, Pinney's, and so on), and the playground, or
"green" as it was called, although the only thing green about the place
was the broken glass on the walls that separate Slaughter House from
Wilderness Row and Goswell Street--(many a time have I seen Mr. Pickwick
look out of his window in that street, though we did not know him
then)--the playground, or green, was common to all. But if any stray
boy from Potky's was found, for instance, in, or entering into, Chip's
house, the most dreadful tortures were practised upon him: as I can
answer in my own case.

Fancy, then, our astonishment at seeing a little three-foot wretch, of
the name of Wills, one of Hawkins's fags (they were both in Potky's),
walk undismayed amongst us lions at Chip's house, as the "rich and rare"
young lady did in Ireland. We were going to set upon him and devour or
otherwise maltreat him, when he cried out in a little shrill impertinent
voice, "TELL BERRY I WANT HIM!"

We all roared with laughter. Berry was in the sixth form, and Wills or
any under-boy would as soon have thought of "wanting" him, as I should
of wanting the Duke of Wellington.

Little Wills looked round in an imperious kind of way. "Well," says he,
stamping his foot, "do you hear? TELL BERRY THAT HAWKINS WANTS HIM!"

As for resisting the law of Hawkins, you might as soon think of
resisting immortal Jove. Berry and Tolmash, who was to be his
bottle-holder, made their appearance immediately, and walked out into
the green where Hawkins was waiting, and, with an irresistible audacity
that only belonged to himself, in the face of nature and all the
regulations of the place, was smoking a cigar. When Berry and Tolmash
found him, the three began slowly pacing up and down in the sunshine,
and we little boys watched them.

Hawkins moved his arms and hands every now and then, and was evidently
laying down the law about boxing. We saw his fists darting out every now
and then with mysterious swiftness, hitting one, two, quick as thought,
as if in the face of an adversary; now his left hand went up, as if
guarding his own head, now his immense right fist dreadfully flapped
the air, as if punishing his imaginary opponent's miserable ribs. The
conversation lasted for some ten minutes, about which time gown-boys'
dinner was over, and we saw these youths, in their black horned-button
jackets and knee-breeches, issuing from their door in the cloisters.
There were no hoops, no cricket-bats, as usual on a half-holiday. Who
would have thought of play in expectation of such tremendous sport as
was in store for us?

Towering among the gown-boys, of whom he was the head and the tyrant,
leaning upon Bushby's arm, and followed at a little distance by many
curious pale awe-stricken boys, dressed in his black silk stockings,
which he always sported, and with a crimson bandanna tied round his
waist, came BIGGS. His nose was swollen with the blow given before
school, but his eyes flashed fire. He was laughing and sneering with
Bushby, and evidently intended to make minced meat of Berry.

The betting began pretty freely: the bets were against poor Berry. Five
to three were offered--in ginger-beer. I took six to four in raspberry
open tarts. The upper boys carried the thing farther still: and I know
for a fact, that Swang's book amounted to four pound three (but he
hedged a good deal), and Tittery lost seventeen shillings in a single
bet to Pitts, who took the odds.

As Biggs and his party arrived, I heard Hawkins say to Berry, "For
heaven's sake, my boy, fib with your right, and MIND HIS LEFT HAND!"

Middle Briars was voted to be too confined a space for the combat, and
it was agreed that it should take place behind the under-school in
the shade, whither we all went. Hawkins, with his immense silver
hunting-watch, kept the time; and water was brought from the pump close
to Notley's the pastrycook's, who did not admire fisticuffs at all on
half-holidays, for the fights kept the boys away from his shop. Gutley
was the only fellow in the school who remained faithful to him, and
he sat on the counter--the great gormandising brute!--eating tarts the
whole day.

This famous fight, as every Slaughter House man knows, lasted for two
hours and twenty-nine minutes, by Hawkins's immense watch. All this time
the air resounded with cries of "Go it, Berry!" "Go it, Biggs!" "Pitch
into him!" "Give it him!" and so on. Shall I describe the hundred and
two rounds of the combat?--No!--It would occupy too much space, and the
taste for such descriptions has passed away. [3]

1st round. Both the combatants fresh, and in prime order. The weight
and inches somewhat on the gown-boy's side. Berry goes gallantly in,
and delivers a clinker on the gown-boy's jaw. Biggs makes play with his
left. Berry down.

                    *****

4th round. Claret drawn in profusion from the gown-boy's grogshop. (He
went down, and had his front tooth knocked out, but the blow cut Berry's
knuckles a great deal.)

                    *****

15th round. Chancery. Fibbing. Biggs makes dreadful work with his
left. Break away. Rally. Biggs down. Betting still six to four on the
gown-boy.

                    *****

20th round. The men both dreadfully punished. Berry somewhat shy of his
adversary's left hand.

                    *****

29th to 42nd round. The Chipsite all this while breaks away from the
gown-boy's left, and goes down on a knee. Six to four on the gown-boy,
until the fortieth round, when the bets became equal.

                    *****

102nd and last round. For half-an-hour the men had stood up to each
other, but were almost too weary to strike. The gown-boy's face hardly
to be recognised, swollen and streaming with blood. The Chipsite in
a similar condition, and still more punished about his side from his
enemy's left hand. Berry gives a blow at his adversary's face, and falls
over him as he falls.

The gown-boy can't come up to time. And thus ended the great fight of
Berry and Biggs.

And what, pray, has this horrid description of a battle and parcel of
schoolboys to do with Men's Wives?

What has it to do with Men's Wives?--A great deal more, madam, than you
think for. Only read Chapter II., and you shall hear.



CHAPTER II. THE COMBAT AT VERSAILLES.

I afterwards came to be Berry's fag, and, though beaten by him daily, he
allowed, of course, no one else to lay a hand upon me, and I got no more
thrashing than was good for me. Thus an intimacy grew up between us,
and after he left Slaughter House and went into the dragoons, the honest
fellow did not forget his old friend, but actually made his appearance
one day in the playground in moustaches and a braided coat, and gave
me a gold pencil-case and a couple of sovereigns. I blushed when I took
them, but take them I did; and I think the thing I almost best recollect
in my life, is the sight of Berry getting behind an immense bay
cab-horse, which was held by a correct little groom, and was waiting
near the school in Slaughter House Square. He proposed, too, to have me
to "Long's," where he was lodging for the time; but this invitation
was refused on my behalf by Doctor Buckle, who said, and possibly with
correctness, that I should get little good by spending my holiday with
such a scapegrace.

Once afterwards he came to see me at Christ Church, and we made a show
of writing to one another, and didn't, and always had a hearty mutual
goodwill; and though we did not quite burst into tears on parting, were
yet quite happy when occasion threw us together, and so almost lost
sight of each other. I heard lately that Berry was married, and am
rather ashamed to say, that I was not so curious as even to ask the
maiden name of his lady.

Last summer I was at Paris, and had gone over to Versailles to meet a
party, one of which was a young lady to whom I was tenderly--But, never
mind. The day was rainy, and the party did not keep its appointment;
and after yawning through the interminable Palace picture-galleries, and
then making an attempt to smoke a cigar in the Palace garden--for which
crime I was nearly run through the body by a rascally sentinel--I was
driven, perforce, into the great bleak lonely place before the Palace,
with its roads branching off to all the towns in the world, which Louis
and Napoleon once intended to conquer, and there enjoyed my favourite
pursuit at leisure, and was meditating whether I should go back to
"Vefour's" for dinner, or patronise my friend M. Duboux of the "Hotel
des Reservoirs" who gives not only a good dinner, but as dear a one as
heart can desire. I was, I say, meditating these things, when a carriage
passed by. It was a smart low calash, with a pair of bay horses and a
postilion in a drab jacket that twinkled with innumerable buttons, and
I was too much occupied in admiring the build of the machine, and
the extreme tightness of the fellow's inexpressibles, to look at the
personages within the carriage, when the gentleman roared out "Fitz!"
and the postilion pulled up, and the lady gave a shrill scream, and
a little black-muzzled spaniel began barking and yelling with all his
might, and a man with moustaches jumped out of the vehicle, and began
shaking me by the hand.

"Drive home, John," said the gentleman: "I'll be with you, my love, in
an instant--it's an old friend. Fitz, let me present you to Mrs. Berry."

The lady made an exceedingly gentle inclination of her black-velvet
bonnet, and said, "Pray, my love, remember that it is just dinner-time.
However, never mind ME." And with another slight toss and a nod to the
postilion, that individual's white leather breeches began to jump up
and down again in the saddle, and the carriage disappeared, leaving me
shaking my old friend Berry by the hand.

He had long quitted the army, but still wore his military beard,
which gave to his fair pink face a fierce and lion-like look. He was
extraordinarily glad to see me, as only men are glad who live in a small
town, or in dull company. There is no destroyer of friendships like
London, where a man has no time to think of his neighbour, and has
far too many friends to care for them. He told me in a breath of his
marriage, and how happy he was, and straight insisted that I must
come home to dinner, and see more of Angelica, who had invited me
herself--didn't I hear her?

"Mrs. Berry asked YOU, Frank; but I certainly did not hear her ask ME!"

"She would not have mentioned the dinner but that she meant me to ask
you. I know she did," cried Frank Berry. "And, besides--hang it--I'm
master of the house. So come you shall. No ceremony, old boy--one or two
friends--snug family party--and we'll talk of old times over a bottle of
claret."

There did not seem to me to be the slightest objection to this
arrangement, except that my boots were muddy, and my coat of the morning
sort. But as it was quite impossible to go to Paris and back again in
a quarter of an hour, and as a man may dine with perfect comfort to
himself in a frock-coat, it did not occur to me to be particularly
squeamish, or to decline an old friend's invitation upon a pretext so
trivial.

Accordingly we walked to a small house in the Avenue de Paris, and were
admitted first into a small garden ornamented by a grotto, a fountain,
and several nymphs in plaster-of-Paris, then up a mouldy old steep stair
into a hall, where a statue of Cupid and another of Venus welcomed us
with their eternal simper; then through a salle-a-manger where covers
were laid for six; and finally to a little saloon, where Fido the dog
began to howl furiously according to his wont.

It was one of the old pavilions that had been built for a pleasure-house
in the gay days of Versailles, ornamented with abundance of damp Cupids
and cracked gilt cornices, and old mirrors let into the walls, and
gilded once, but now painted a dingy French white. The long low windows
looked into the court, where the fountain played its ceaseless dribble,
surrounded by numerous rank creepers and weedy flowers, but in the midst
of which the statues stood with their bases quite moist and green.

I hate fountains and statues in dark confined places: that cheerless,
endless plashing of water is the most inhospitable sound ever heard. The
stiff grin of those French statues, or ogling Canova Graces, is by no
means more happy, I think, than the smile of a skeleton, and not so
natural. Those little pavilions in which the old roues sported were
never meant to be seen by daylight, depend on't. They were lighted up
with a hundred wax-candles, and the little fountain yonder was meant
only to cool their claret. And so, my first impression of Berry's
place of abode was rather a dismal one. However, I heard him in the
salle-a-manger drawing the corks, which went off with a CLOOP, and that
consoled me.

As for the furniture of the rooms appertaining to the Berrys, there
was a harp in a leather case, and a piano, and a flute-box, and a huge
tambour with a Saracen's nose just begun, and likewise on the table
a multiplicity of those little gilt books, half sentimental and half
religious, which the wants of the age and of our young ladies have
produced in such numbers of late. I quarrel with no lady's taste in that
way; but heigho! I had rather that Mrs. Fitz-Boodle should read "Humphry
Clinker!"

Besides these works, there was a "Peerage," of course. What genteel
family was ever without one?

I was making for the door to see Frank drawing the corks, and was
bounced at by the amiable little black-muzzled spaniel, who fastened his
teeth in my pantaloons, and received a polite kick in consequence, which
sent him howling to the other end of the room, and the animal was just
in the act of performing that feat of agility, when the door opened
and madame made her appearance. Frank came behind her, peering over her
shoulder with rather an anxious look.

Mrs. Berry is an exceedingly white and lean person. She has thick
eyebrows, which meet rather dangerously over her nose, which is Grecian,
and a small mouth with no lips--a sort of feeble pucker in the face as
it were. Under her eyebrows are a pair of enormous eyes, which she is
in the habit of turning constantly ceiling-wards. Her hair is rather
scarce, and worn in bandeaux, and she commonly mounts a sprig of laurel,
or a dark flower or two, which with the sham tour--I believe that is the
name of the knob of artificial hair that many ladies sport--gives her
a rigid and classical look. She is dressed in black, and has invariably
the neatest of silk stockings and shoes: for forsooth her foot is a fine
one, and she always sits with it before her, looking at it, stamping it,
and admiring it a great deal. "Fido," she says to her spaniel, "you have
almost crushed my poor foot;" or, "Frank," to her husband, "bring me a
footstool:" or, "I suffer so from cold in the feet," and so forth; but
be the conversation what it will, she is always sure to put HER FOOT
into it.

She invariably wears on her neck the miniature of her late father, Sir
George Catacomb, apothecary to George III.; and she thinks those two men
the greatest the world ever saw. She was born in Baker Street, Portman
Square, and that is saying almost enough of her. She is as long, as
genteel, and as dreary, as that deadly-lively place, and sports, by
way of ornament, her papa's hatchment, as it were, as every tenth Baker
Street house has taught her.

What induced such a jolly fellow as Frank Berry to marry Miss Angelica
Catacomb no one can tell. He met her, he says, at a ball at Hampton
Court, where his regiment was quartered, and where, to this day, lives
"her aunt Lady Pash." She alludes perpetually in conversation to that
celebrated lady; and if you look in the "Baronetage" to the pedigree
of the Pash family, you may see manuscript notes by Mrs. Frank Berry,
relative to them and herself. Thus, when you see in print that Sir John
Pash married Angelica, daughter of Graves Catacomb, Esquire, in a neat
hand you find written, AND SISTER OF THE LATE SIR GEORGE CATACOMB, OF
BAKER STREET, PORTMAN SQUARE: "A.B." follows of course. It is a wonder
how fond ladies are of writing in books, and signing their charming
initials! Mrs. Berry's before-mentioned little gilt books are scored
with pencil-marks, or occasionally at the margin with a!--note of
interjection, or the words "TOO TRUE, A.B." and so on. Much may be
learned with regard to lovely woman by a look at the books she reads in;
and I had gained no inconsiderable knowledge of Mrs. Berry by the ten
minutes spent in the drawing-room, while she was at her toilet in the
adjoining bedchamber.

"You have often heard me talk of George Fitz," says Berry, with an
appealing look to madame.

"Very often," answered his lady, in a tone which clearly meant "a great
deal too much." "Pray, sir," continued she, looking at my boots with all
her might, "are we to have your company at dinner?"

"Of course you are, my dear; what else do you think he came for? You
would not have the man go back to Paris to get his evening coat, would
you?"

"At least, my love, I hope you will go and put on YOURS, and change
those muddy boots. Lady Pash will be here in five minutes, and you know
Dobus is as punctual as clockwork." Then turning to me with a sort of
apology that was as consoling as a box on the ear, "We have some friends
at dinner, sir, who are rather particular persons; but I am sure when
they hear that you only came on a sudden invitation, they will excuse
your morning dress.--Bah! what a smell of smoke!"

With this speech madame placed herself majestically on a sofa, put out
her foot, called Fido, and relapsed into an icy silence. Frank had long
since evacuated the premises, with a rueful look at his wife, but never
daring to cast a glance at me. I saw the whole business at once: here
was this lion of a fellow tamed down by a she Van Amburgh, and fetching
and carrying at her orders a great deal more obediently than her little
yowling black-muzzled darling of a Fido.

I am not, however, to be tamed so easily, and was determined in this
instance not to be in the least disconcerted, or to show the smallest
sign of ill-humour: so to renouer the conversation, I began about Lady
Pash.

"I heard you mention the name of Pash, I think?" said I. "I know a lady
of that name, and a very ugly one it is too."

"It is most probably not the same person," answered Mrs. Berry, with
a look which intimated that a fellow like me could never have had the
honour to know so exalted a person.

"I mean old Lady Pash of Hampton Court. Fat woman--fair, ain't she?--and
wears an amethyst in her forehead, has one eye, a blond wig, and dresses
in light green?"

"Lady Pash, sir, is MY AUNT," answered Mrs. Berry (not altogether
displeased, although she expected money from the old lady; but you know
we love to hear our friends abused when it can be safely done).

"Oh, indeed! she was a daughter of old Catacomb's of Windsor, I
remember, the undertaker. They called her husband Callipash, and her
ladyship Pishpash. So you see, madam, that I know the whole family!"

"Mr. Fitz-Simons!" exclaimed Mrs. Berry, rising, "I am not accustomed to
hear nicknames applied to myself and my family; and must beg you,
when you honour us with your company, to spare our feelings as much as
possible. Mr. Catacomb had the confidence of his SOVEREIGN, sir, and Sir
John Pash was of Charles II.'s creation. The one was my uncle, sir; the
other my grandfather!"

"My dear madam, I am extremely sorry, and most sincerely apologise
for my inadvertence. But you owe me an apology too: my name is not
Fitz-Simons, but Fitz-Boodle."

"What! of Boodle Hall--my husband's old friend; of Charles I.'s
creation? My dear sir, I beg you a thousand pardons, and am delighted
to welcome a person of whom I have heard Frank say so much. Frank!" (to
Berry, who soon entered in very glossy boots and a white waistcoat), "do
you know, darling, I mistook Mr. Fitz-Boodle for Mr. Fitz-Simons--that
horrid Irish horse-dealing person; and I never, never, never can pardon
myself for being so rude to him."

The big eyes here assumed an expression that was intended to kill me
outright with kindness: from being calm, still, reserved, Angelica
suddenly became gay, smiling, confidential, and folatre. She told me she
had heard I was a sad creature, and that she intended to reform me, and
that I must come and see Frank a great deal.

Now, although Mr. Fitz-Simons, for whom I was mistaken, is as low
a fellow as ever came out of Dublin, and having been a captain in
somebody's army, is now a blackleg and horse-dealer by profession; yet,
if I had brought him home to Mrs. Fitz-Boodle to dinner, I should have
liked far better that that imaginary lady should have received him with
decent civility, and not insulted the stranger within her husband's
gates. And, although it was delightful to be received so cordially
when the mistake was discovered, yet I found that ALL Berry's old
acquaintances were by no means so warmly welcomed; for another old
school-chum presently made his appearance, who was treated in a very
different manner.

This was no other than poor Jack Butts, who is a sort of small artist
and picture-dealer by profession, and was a dayboy at Slaughter House
when we were there, and very serviceable in bringing in sausages,
pots of pickles, and other articles of merchandise, which we could not
otherwise procure. The poor fellow has been employed, seemingly, in the
same office of fetcher and carrier ever since; and occupied that post
for Mrs. Berry. It was, "Mr. Butts, have you finished that drawing for
Lady Pash's album?" and Butts produced it; and, "Did you match the silk
for me at Delille's?" and there was the silk, bought, no doubt, with the
poor fellow's last five francs; and, "Did you go to the furniture-man in
the Rue St. Jacques; and bring the canary-seed, and call about my
shawl at that odious dawdling Madame Fichet's; and have you brought the
guitar-strings?"

Butts hadn't brought the guitar-strings; and thereupon Mrs. Berry's
countenance assumed the same terrible expression which I had formerly
remarked in it, and which made me tremble for Berry.

"My dear Angelica," though said he with some spirit, "Jack Butts isn't
a baggage-waggon, nor a Jack-of-all-trades; you make him paint pictures
for your women's albums, and look after your upholsterer, and your
canary-bird, and your milliners, and turn rusty because he forgets your
last message."

"I did not turn RUSTY, Frank, as you call it elegantly. I'm very much
obliged to Mr. Butts for performing my commissions--very much obliged.
And as for not paying for the pictures to which you so kindly allude,
Frank, _I_ should never have thought of offering payment for so paltry a
service; but I'm sure I shall be happy to pay if Mr. Butts will send me
in his bill."

"By Jove, Angelica, this is too much!" bounced out Berry; but the little
matrimonial squabble was abruptly ended, by Berry's French man flinging
open the door and announcing MILADI PASH and Doctor Dobus, which two
personages made their appearance.

The person of old Pash has been already parenthetically described. But
quite different from her dismal niece in temperament, she is as jolly an
old widow as ever wore weeds. She was attached somehow to the Court, and
has a multiplicity of stories about the princesses and the old King,
to which Mrs. Berry never fails to call your attention in her grave,
important way. Lady Pash has ridden many a time to the Windsor hounds;
she made her husband become a member of the Four-in-hand Club, and has
numberless stories about Sir Godfrey Webster, Sir John Lade, and the
old heroes of those times. She has lent a rouleau to Dick Sheridan,
and remembers Lord Byron when he was a sulky slim young lad. She says
Charles Fox was the pleasantest fellow she ever met with, and has not
the slightest objection to inform you that one of the princes was very
much in love with her. Yet somehow she is only fifty-two years old, and
I have never been able to understand her calculation. One day or other
before her eye went out, and before those pearly teeth of hers were
stuck to her gums by gold, she must have been a pretty-looking body
enough. Yet, in spite of the latter inconvenience, she eats and
drinks too much every day, and tosses off a glass of maraschino with a
trembling pudgy hand, every finger of which twinkles with a dozen, at
least, of old rings. She has a story about every one of those rings, and
a stupid one too. But there is always something pleasant, I think, in
stupid family stories: they are good-hearted people who tell them.

As for Mrs. Muchit, nothing need be said of her; she is Pash's
companion; she has lived with Lady Pash since the peace. Nor does my
Lady take any more notice of her than of the dust of the earth. She
calls her "poor Muchit," and considers her a half-witted creature. Mrs.
Berry hates her cordially, and thinks she is a designing toad-eater,
who has formed a conspiracy to rob her of her aunt's fortune. She never
spoke a word to poor Muchit during the whole of dinner, or offered to
help her to anything on the table.

In respect to Dobus, he is an old Peninsular man, as you are made to
know before you have been very long in his company; and, like most army
surgeons, is a great deal more military in his looks and conversation,
than the combatant part of the forces. He has adopted the
sham-Duke-of-Wellington air, which is by no means uncommon in veterans;
and, though one of the easiest and softest fellows in existence, speaks
slowly and briefly, and raps out an oath or two occasionally, as it is
said a certain great captain does. Besides the above, we sat down to
table with Captain Goff, late of the ---- Highlanders; the Reverend
Lemuel Whey, who preaches at St. Germains; little Cutler, and the
Frenchman, who always WILL be at English parties on the Continent, and
who, after making some frightful efforts to speak English, subsides and
is heard no more. Young married ladies and heads of families generally
have him for the purpose of waltzing, and in return he informs his
friends of the club or the cafe that he has made the conquest of a
charmante Anglaise. Listen to me, all family men who read this! and
never LET AN UNMARRIED FRENCHMAN INTO YOUR DOORS. This lecture alone is
worth the price of the book. It is not that they do any harm in one case
out of a thousand, Heaven forbid! but they mean harm. They look on our
Susannas with unholy dishonest eyes. Hearken to two of the grinning
rogues chattering together as they clink over the asphalte of
the Boulevard with lacquered boots, and plastered hair, and waxed
moustaches, and turned-down shirt-collars, and stays and goggling eyes,
and hear how they talk of a good simple giddy vain dull Baker
Street creature, and canvass her points, and show her letters, and
insinuate--never mind, but I tell you my soul grows angry when I think
of the same; and I can't hear of an Englishwoman marrying a Frenchman
without feeling a sort of shame and pity for her. [4]

To return to the guests. The Reverend Lemuel Whey is a tea-party man,
with a curl on his forehead and a scented pocket-handkerchief. He ties
his white neckcloth to a wonder, and I believe sleeps in it. He brings
his flute with him; and prefers Handel, of course; but has one or two
pet profane songs of the sentimental kind, and will occasionally lift
up his little pipe in a glee. He does not dance, but the honest fellow
would give the world to do it; and he leaves his clogs in the passage,
though it is a wonder he wears them, for in the muddiest weather he
never has a speck on his foot. He was at St. John's College, Cambridge,
and was rather gay for a term or two, he says. He is, in a word, full of
the milk-and-water of human kindness, and his family lives near Hackney.

As for Goff, he has a huge shining bald forehead, and immense bristling
Indian-red whiskers. He wears white wash-leather gloves, drinks fairly,
likes a rubber, and has a story for after dinner, beginning, "Doctor, ye
racklackt Sandy M'Lellan, who joined us in the West Indies. Wal, sir,"
etc. These and little Cutler made up the party.

Now it may not have struck all readers, but any sharp fellow conversant
with writing must have found out long ago, that if there had been
something exceedingly interesting to narrate with regard to this dinner
at Frank Berry's, I should have come out with it a couple of pages
since, nor have kept the public looking for so long a time at the
dish-covers and ornaments of the table.

But the simple fact must now be told, that there was nothing of the
slightest importance occurred at this repast, except that it gave me an
opportunity of studying Mrs. Berry in many different ways; and, in spite
of the extreme complaisance which she now showed me, of forming, I am
sorry to say, a most unfavourable opinion of that fair lady. Truth to
tell, I would much rather she should have been civil to Mrs. Muchit,
than outrageously complimentary to your humble servant; and as she
professed not to know what on earth there was for dinner, would it not
have been much more natural for her not to frown, and bob, and wink,
and point, and pinch her lips as often as Monsieur Anatole, her French
domestic, not knowing the ways of English dinner-tables, placed anything
out of its due order? The allusions to Boodle Hall were innumerable,
and I don't know any greater bore than to be obliged to talk of a place
which belongs to one's elder brother. Many questions were likewise asked
about the dowager and her Scotch relatives, the Plumduffs, about whom
Lady Pash knew a great deal, having seen them at Court and at Lord
Melville's. Of course she had seen them at Court and at Lord Melville's,
as she might have seen thousands of Scotchmen besides; but what mattered
it to me, who care not a jot for old Lady Fitz-Boodle? "When you write,
you'll say you met an old friend of her Ladyship's," says Mrs. Berry,
and I faithfully promised I would when I wrote; but if the New Post
Office paid us for writing letters (as very possibly it will soon), I
could not be bribed to send a line to old Lady Fitz.

In a word, I found that Berry, like many simple fellows before him, had
made choice of an imperious, ill-humoured, and underbred female for a
wife, and could see with half an eye that he was a great deal too much
her slave.

The struggle was not over yet, however. Witness that little encounter
before dinner; and once or twice the honest fellow replied rather
smartly during the repast, taking especial care to atone as much
as possible for his wife's inattention to Jack and Mrs. Muchit, by
particular attention to those personages, whom he helped to everything
round about and pressed perpetually to champagne; he drank but little
himself, for his amiable wife's eye was constantly fixed on him.

Just at the conclusion of the dessert, madame, who had bouded Berry
during dinner-time, became particularly gracious to her lord and master,
and tenderly asked me if I did not think the French custom was a good
one, of men leaving table with the ladies.

"Upon my word, ma'am," says I, "I think it's a most abominable
practice."

"And so do I," says Cutler.

"A most abominable practice! Do you hear THAT?" cries Berry, laughing,
and filling his glass.

"I'm sure, Frank, when we are alone you always come to the
drawing-room," replies the lady, sharply.

"Oh, yes! when we're alone, darling," says Berry, blushing; "but now
we're NOT alone--ha, ha! Anatole, du Bordeaux!"

"I'm sure they sat after the ladies at Carlton House; didn't they, Lady
Pash?" says Dobus, who likes his glass.

"THAT they did!" says my Lady, giving him a jolly nod.

"I racklackt," exclaims Captain Goff, "when I was in the Mauritius, that
Mestress MacWhirter, who commanded the Saxty-Sackond, used to say, 'Mac,
if ye want to get lively, ye'll not stop for more than two hours after
the leddies have laft ye: if ye want to get drunk, ye'll just dine at
the mass.' So ye see, Mestress Barry, what was Mac's allowance--haw,
haw! Mester Whey, I'll trouble ye for the o-lives."

But although we were in a clear majority, that indomitable woman, Mrs.
Berry, determined to make us all as uneasy as possible, and would take
the votes all round. Poor Jack, of course, sided with her, and Whey said
he loved a cup of tea and a little music better than all the wine of
Bordeaux. As for the Frenchman, when Mrs. Berry said, "And what do you
think, M. le Vicomte?"

"Vat you speak?" said M. de Blagueval, breaking silence for the first
time during two hours. "Yase--eh? to me you speak?"

"Apry deeny, aimy-voo ally avec les dam?"

"Comment avec les dames?"

"Ally avec les dam com a Parry, ou resty avec les Messew com on
Onglyterre?"

"Ah, madame! vous me le demandez?" cries the little wretch, starting up
in a theatrical way, and putting out his hand, which Mrs. Berry took,
and with this the ladies left the room. Old Lady Pash trotted after her
niece with her hand in Whey's, very much wondering at such practices,
which were not in the least in vogue in the reign of George III.

Mrs. Berry cast a glance of triumph at her husband, at the defection;
and Berry was evidently annoyed that three-eighths of his male forces
had left him.

But fancy our delight and astonishment, when in a minute they all three
came back again; the Frenchman looking entirely astonished, and the
parson and the painter both very queer. The fact is, old downright Lady
Pash, who had never been in Paris in her life before, and had no notion
of being deprived of her usual hour's respite and nap, said at once to
Mrs. Berry, "My dear Angelica, you're surely not going to keep these
three men here? Send them back to the dining-room, for I've a thousand
things to say to you." And Angelica, who expects to inherit her aunt's
property, of course did as she was bid; on which the old lady fell into
an easy chair, and fell asleep immediately,--so soon, that is, as
the shout caused by the reappearance of the three gentlemen in the
dining-room had subsided.

I had meanwhile had some private conversation with little Cutler
regarding the character of Mrs. Berry. "She's a regular screw,"
whispered he; "a regular Tartar. Berry shows fight, though, sometimes,
and I've known him have his own way for a week together. After dinner
he is his own master, and hers when he has had his share of wine; and
that's why she will never allow him to drink any."

Was it a wicked, or was it a noble and honourable thought which came
to us both at the same minute, to rescue Berry from his captivity? The
ladies, of course, will give their verdict according to their gentle
natures; but I know what men of courage will think, and by their jovial
judgment will abide.

We received, then, the three lost sheep back into our innocent fold
again with the most joyous shouting and cheering. We made Berry (who
was, in truth, nothing loth) order up I don't know how much more claret.
We obliged the Frenchman to drink malgre lui, and in the course of
a short time we had poor Whey in such a state of excitement, that he
actually volunteered to sing a song, which he said he had heard at some
very gay supper-party at Cambridge, and which begins:

     "A pye sat on a pear-tree,
      A pye sat on a pear-tree,
      A pye sat on a pear-tree,
        Heigh-ho, heigh-ho, heigh-ho!"

Fancy Mrs. Berry's face as she looked in, in the midst of that
Bacchanalian ditty, when she saw no less a person than the Reverend
Lemuel Whey carolling it!

"Is it you, my dear?" cries Berry, as brave now as any Petruchio. "Come
in, and sit down, and hear Whey's song."

"Lady Pash is asleep, Frank," said she.

"Well, darling! that's the very reason. Give Mrs. Berry a glass, Jack,
will you?"

"Would you wake your aunt, sir?" hissed out madame.

"NEVER MIND ME, LOVE! I'M AWAKE, AND LIKE IT!" cried the venerable Lady
Pash from the salon. "Sing away, gentlemen!"

At which we all set up an audacious cheer; and Mrs. Berry flounced back
to the drawing-room, but did not leave the door open, that her aunt
might hear our melodies.

Berry had by this time arrived at that confidential state to which a
third bottle always brings the well-regulated mind; and he made a clean
confession to Cutler and myself of his numerous matrimonial annoyances.
He was not allowed to dine out, he said, and but seldom to ask his
friends to meet him at home. He never dared smoke a cigar for the life
of him, not even in the stables. He spent the mornings dawdling in
eternal shops, the evenings at endless tea-parties, or in reading
poems or missionary tracts to his wife. He was compelled to take physic
whenever she thought he looked a little pale, to change his shoes and
stockings whenever he came in from a walk. "Look here," said he, opening
his chest, and shaking his fist at Dobus; "look what Angelica and that
infernal Dobus have brought me to."

I thought it might be a flannel waistcoat into which madame had
forced him; but it was worse: I give you my word of honour it was a
PITCH-PLASTER!

We all roared at this, and the doctor as loud as anyone; but he vowed
that he had no hand in the pitch-plaster. It was a favourite family
remedy of the late apothecary Sir George Catacomb, and had been put on
by Mrs. Berry's own fair hands.

When Anatole came in with coffee, Berry was in such high courage, that
he told him to go to the deuce with it; and we never caught sight of
Lady Pash more, except when, muffled up to the nose, she passed through
the salle-a-manger to go to her carriage, in which Dobus and the parson
were likewise to be transported to Paris. "Be a man, Frank," says she,
"and hold your own"--for the good old lady had taken her nephew's part
in the matrimonial business--"and you, Mr. Fitz-Boodle, come and see him
often. You're a good fellow, take old one-eyed Callipash's word for it.
Shall I take you to Paris?"

Dear kind Angelica, she had told her aunt all I said!

"Don't go, George," says Berry, squeezing me by the hand. So I said I
was going to sleep at Versailles that night; but if she would give a
convoy to Jack Butts, it would be conferring a great obligation on him;
with which favour the old lady accordingly complied, saying to him,
with great coolness, "Get up and sit with John in the rumble, Mr.
What-d'ye-call-'im." The fact is, the good old soul despises an artist
as much as she does a tailor.

Jack tripped to his place very meekly; and "Remember Saturday," cried
the Doctor; and "Don't forget Thursday!" exclaimed the divine,--"a
bachelor's party, you know." And so the cavalcade drove thundering down
the gloomy old Avenue de Paris.

The Frenchman, I forgot to say, had gone away exceedingly ill long
before; and the reminiscences of "Thursday" and "Saturday" evoked by
Dobus and Whey, were, to tell the truth, parts of our conspiracy; for in
the heat of Berry's courage, we had made him promise to dine with us all
round en garcon; with all except Captain Goff, who "racklacted" that he
was engaged every day for the next three weeks: as indeed he is, to
a thirty-sous ordinary which the gallant officer frequents, when not
invited elsewhere.

Cutler and I then were the last on the field; and though we were for
moving away, Berry, whose vigour had, if possible, been excited by the
bustle and colloquy in the night air, insisted upon dragging us back
again, and actually proposed a grill for supper!

We found in the salle-a-manger a strong smell of an extinguished lamp,
and Mrs. Berry was snuffing out the candles on the sideboard.

"Hullo, my dear!" shouts Berry: "easy, if you please; we've not done
yet!"

"Not done yet, Mr. Berry!" groans the lady, in a hollow sepulchral tone.

"No, Mrs. B., not done yet. We are going to have some supper, ain't we,
George?"

"I think it's quite time to go home," said Mr. Fitz-Boodle (who, to say
the truth, began to tremble himself).

"I think it is, sir; you are quite right, sir; you will pardon me,
gentlemen, I have a bad headache, and will retire."

"Good-night, my dear!" said that audacious Berry. "Anatole, tell the
cook to broil a fowl and bring some wine."

If the loving couple had been alone, or if Cutler had not been an
attache to the embassy, before whom she was afraid of making herself
ridiculous, I am confident that Mrs. Berry would have fainted away on
the spot; and that all Berry's courage would have tumbled down lifeless
by the side of her. So she only gave a martyrised look, and left the
room; and while we partook of the very unnecessary repast, was good
enough to sing some hymn-tunes to an exceedingly slow movement in the
next room, intimating that she was awake, and that, though suffering,
she found her consolations in religion.

These melodies did not in the least add to our friend's courage. The
devilled fowl had, somehow, no devil in it. The champagne in the glasses
looked exceedingly flat and blue. The fact is, that Cutler and I were
now both in a state of dire consternation, and soon made a move for
our hats, and lighting each a cigar in the hall, made across the little
green where the Cupids and nymphs were listening to the dribbling
fountain in the dark.

"I'm hanged if I don't have a cigar too!" says Berry, rushing after us;
and accordingly putting in his pocket a key about the size of a shovel,
which hung by the little handle of the outer grille, forth he sallied,
and joined us in our fumigation.

He stayed with us a couple of hours, and returned homewards in perfect
good spirits, having given me his word of honour he would dine with us
the next day. He put his immense key into the grille, and unlocked it;
but the gate would not open: IT WAS BOLTED WITHIN.

He began to make a furious jangling and ringing at the bell; and in
oaths, both French and English, called upon the recalcitrant Anatole.

After much tolling of the bell, a light came cutting across the crevices
of the inner door; it was thrown open, and a figure appeared with a
lamp,--a tall slim figure of a woman, clothed in white from head to
foot.

It was Mrs. Berry, and when Cutler and I saw her, we both ran away as
fast as our legs could carry us.

Berry, at this, shrieked with a wild laughter. "Remember to-morrow, old
boys," shouted he,--"six o'clock;" and we were a quarter of a mile off
when the gate closed, and the little mansion of the Avenue de Paris was
once more quiet and dark.

The next afternoon, as we were playing at billiards, Cutler saw Mrs.
Berry drive by in her carriage; and as soon as rather a long rubber was
over, I thought I would go and look for our poor friend, and so went
down to the Pavilion. Every door was open, as the wont is in France, and
I walked in unannounced, and saw this:

He was playing a duet with her on the flute. She had been out but for
half-an-hour, after not speaking all the morning; and having seen Cutler
at the billiard-room window, and suspecting we might take advantage
of her absence, she had suddenly returned home again, and had flung
herself, weeping, into her Frank's arms, and said she could not bear to
leave him in anger. And so, after sitting for a little while sobbing on
his knee, she had forgotten and forgiven every thing!

The dear angel! I met poor Frank in Bond Street only yesterday; but he
crossed over to the other side of the way. He had on goloshes, and is
grown very fat and pale. He has shaved off his moustaches, and, instead,
wears a respirator. He has taken his name off all his clubs, and lives
very grimly in Baker Street. Well, ladies, no doubt you say he is right:
and what are the odds, so long as YOU are happy?




DENNIS HAGGARTY'S WIFE.


There was an odious Irishwoman who with her daughter used to frequent
the "Royal Hotel" at Leamington some years ago, and who went by the name
of Mrs. Major Gam. Gam had been a distinguished officer in His Majesty's
service, whom nothing but death and his own amiable wife could overcome.
The widow mourned her husband in the most becoming bombazeen she could
muster, and had at least half an inch of lampblack round the immense
visiting tickets which she left at the houses of the nobility and gentry
her friends.

Some of us, I am sorry to say, used to call her Mrs. Major Gammon; for
if the worthy widow had a propensity, it was to talk largely of herself
and family (of her own family, for she held her husband's very cheap),
and of the wonders of her paternal mansion, Molloyville, county of Mayo.
She was of the Molloys of that county; and though I never heard of the
family before, I have little doubt, from what Mrs. Major Gam stated,
that they were the most ancient and illustrious family of that part of
Ireland. I remember there came down to see his aunt a young fellow
with huge red whiskers and tight nankeens, a green coat, and an awful
breastpin, who, after two days' stay at the Spa, proposed marriage to
Miss S----, or, in default, a duel with her father; and who drove a
flash curricle with a bay and a grey, and who was presented with much
pride by Mrs. Gam as Castlereagh Molloy of Molloyville. We all agreed
that he was the most insufferable snob of the whole season, and were
delighted when a bailiff came down in search of him.

Well, this is all I know personally of the Molloyville family; but at
the house if you met the widow Gam, and talked on any subject in life,
you were sure to hear of it. If you asked her to have peas at dinner,
she would say, "Oh, sir, after the peas at Molloyville, I really don't
care for any others,--do I, dearest Jemima? We always had a dish in the
month of June, when my father gave his head gardener a guinea (we had
three at Molloyville), and sent him with his compliments and a quart of
peas to our neighbour, dear Lord Marrowfat. What a sweet place Marrowfat
Park is! isn't it, Jemima?" If a carriage passed by the window, Mrs.
Major Gammon would be sure to tell you that there were three carriages
at Molloyville, "the barouche, the chawiot, and the covered cyar." In
the same manner she would favour you with the number and names of the
footmen of the establishment; and on a visit to Warwick Castle (for this
bustling woman made one in every party of pleasure that was formed from
the hotel), she gave us to understand that the great walk by the river
was altogether inferior to the principal avenue of Molloyville Park.
I should not have been able to tell so much about Mrs. Gam and her
daughter, but that, between ourselves, I was particularly sweet upon a
young lady at the time, whose papa lived at the "Royal," and was under
the care of Doctor Jephson.

The Jemima appealed to by Mrs. Gam in the above sentence was, of course,
her daughter, apostrophised by her mother, "Jemima, my soul's darling?"
or, "Jemima, my blessed child!" or, "Jemima, my own love!" The
sacrifices that Mrs. Gam had made for that daughter were, she said,
astonishing. The money she had spent in masters upon her, the illnesses
through which she had nursed her, the ineffable love the mother bore
her, were only known to Heaven, Mrs. Gam said. They used to come into
the room with their arms round each other's waists: at dinner between
the courses the mother would sit with one hand locked in her daughter's;
and if only two or three young men were present at the time, would be
pretty sure to kiss her Jemima more than once during the time whilst the
bohea was poured out.

As for Miss Gam, if she was not handsome, candour forbids me to say she
was ugly. She was neither one nor t'other. She was a person who wore
ringlets and a band round her forehead; she knew four songs, which
became rather tedious at the end of a couple of months' acquaintance;
she had excessively bare shoulders; she inclined to wear numbers of
cheap ornaments, rings, brooches, ferronnieres, smelling-bottles, and
was always, we thought, very smartly dressed: though old Mrs. Lynx
hinted that her gowns and her mother's were turned over and over again,
and that her eyes were almost put out by darning stockings.

These eyes Miss Gam had very large, though rather red and weak, and used
to roll them about at every eligible unmarried man in the place. But
though the widow subscribed to all the balls, though she hired a fly
to go to the meet of the hounds, though she was constant at church, and
Jemima sang louder than any person there except the clerk, and though,
probably, any person who made her a happy husband would be invited down
to enjoy the three footmen, gardeners, and carriages at Molloyville, yet
no English gentleman was found sufficiently audacious to propose.
Old Lynx used to say that the pair had been at Tunbridge, Harrogate,
Brighton, Ramsgate, Cheltenham, for this eight years past; where they
had met, it seemed, with no better fortune. Indeed, the widow looked
rather high for her blessed child: and as she looked with the contempt
which no small number of Irish people feel upon all persons who get
their bread by labour or commerce; and as she was a person whose
energetic manners, costume, and brogue were not much to the taste of
quiet English country gentlemen, Jemima--sweet, spotless flower--still
remained on her hands, a thought withered, perhaps, and seedy.

Now, at this time, the 120th Regiment was quartered at Weedon Barracks,
and with the corps was a certain Assistant-Surgeon Haggarty, a large,
lean, tough, raw-boned man, with big hands, knock-knees, and carroty
whiskers, and, withal, as honest a creature as ever handled a lancet.
Haggarty, as his name imports, was of the very same nation as Mrs. Gam,
and, what is more, the honest fellow had some of the peculiarities which
belonged to the widow, and bragged about his family almost as much as
she did. I do not know of what particular part of Ireland they were
kings; but monarchs they must have been, as have been the ancestors of
so many thousand Hibernian families; but they had been men of no small
consideration in Dublin, "where my father," Haggarty said, "is as well
known as King William's statue, and where he 'rowls his carriage, too,'
let me tell ye."

Hence, Haggarty was called by the wags "Rowl the carriage," and several
of them made inquiries of Mrs. Gam regarding him: "Mrs. Gam, when you
used to go up from Molloyville to the Lord Lieutenant's balls, and had
your townhouse in Fitzwilliam Square, used you to meet the famous Doctor
Haggarty in society?"

"Is it Surgeon Haggarty of Gloucester Street ye mean? The black Papist!
D'ye suppose that the Molloys would sit down to table with a creature of
that sort?"

"Why, isn't he the most famous physician in Dublin, and doesn't he rowl
his carriage there?"

"The horrid wretch! He keeps a shop, I tell ye, and sends his sons out
with the medicine. He's got four of them off into the army, Ulick and
Phil, and Terence and Denny, and now it's Charles that takes out the
physic. But how should I know about these odious creatures? Their mother
was a Burke, of Burke's Town, county Cavan, and brought Surgeon Haggarty
two thousand pounds. She was a Protestant; and I am surprised how she
could have taken up with a horrid odious Popish apothecary!"

From the extent of the widow's information, I am led to suppose that the
inhabitants of Dublin are not less anxious about their neighbours than
are the natives of English cities; and I think it is very probable that
Mrs. Gam's account of the young Haggartys who carried out the medicine
is perfectly correct, for a lad in the 120th made a caricature of
Haggarty coming out of a chemist's shop with an oilcloth basket under
his arm, which set the worthy surgeon in such a fury that there would
have been a duel between him and the ensign, could the fiery doctor have
had his way.

Now, Dionysius Haggarty was of an exceedingly inflammable temperament,
and it chanced that of all the invalids, the visitors, the young squires
of Warwickshire, the young manufacturers from Birmingham, the young
officers from the barracks--it chanced, unluckily for Miss Gam and
himself, that he was the only individual who was in the least smitten
by her personal charms. He was very tender and modest about his love,
however, for it must be owned that he respected Mrs. Gam hugely, and
fully admitted, like a good simple fellow as he was, the superiority of
that lady's birth and breeding to his own. How could he hope that he, a
humble assistant-surgeon, with a thousand pounds his Aunt Kitty left
him for all his fortune--how could he hope that one of the race of
Molloyville would ever condescend to marry him?

Inflamed, however, by love, and inspired by wine, one day at a picnic at
Kenilworth, Haggarty, whose love and raptures were the talk of the whole
regiment, was induced by his waggish comrades to make a proposal in
form.

"Are you aware, Mr. Haggarty, that you are speaking to a Molloy?"
was all the reply majestic Mrs. Gam made when, according to the usual
formula, the fluttering Jemima referred her suitor to "Mamma." She left
him with a look which was meant to crush the poor fellow to earth; she
gathered up her cloak and bonnet, and precipitately called for her fly.
She took care to tell every single soul in Leamington that the son of
the odious Papist apothecary had had the audacity to propose for her
daughter (indeed a proposal, coming from whatever quarter it may,
does no harm), and left Haggarty in a state of extreme depression and
despair.

His down-heartedness, indeed, surprised most of his acquaintances in and
out of the regiment, for the young lady was no beauty, and a doubtful
fortune, and Dennis was a man outwardly of an unromantic turn, who
seemed to have a great deal more liking for beefsteak and whisky-punch
than for women, however fascinating.

But there is no doubt this shy uncouth rough fellow had a warmer and
more faithful heart hid within him than many a dandy who is as handsome
as Apollo. I, for my part, never can understand why a man falls in love,
and heartily give him credit for so doing, never mind with what or
whom. THAT I take to be a point quite as much beyond an individual's own
control as the catching of the small-pox or the colour of his hair. To
the surprise of all, Assistant-Surgeon Dionysius Haggarty was deeply and
seriously in love; and I am told that one day he very nearly killed the
before-mentioned young ensign with a carving-knife, for venturing to
make a second caricature, representing Lady Gammon and Jemima in a
fantastical park, surrounded by three gardeners, three carriages, three
footmen, and the covered cyar. He would have no joking concerning them.
He became moody and quarrelsome of habit. He was for some time much more
in the surgery and hospital than in the mess. He gave up the eating, for
the most part, of those vast quantities of beef and pudding, for which
his stomach used to afford such ample and swift accommodation; and when
the cloth was drawn, instead of taking twelve tumblers, and singing
Irish melodies, as he used to do, in a horrible cracked yelling voice,
he would retire to his own apartment, or gloomily pace the barrack-yard,
or madly whip and spur a grey mare he had on the road to Leamington,
where his Jemima (although invisible for him) still dwelt.

The season at Leamington coming to a conclusion by the withdrawal of the
young fellows who frequented that watering-place, the widow Gam retired
to her usual quarters for the other months of the year. Where these
quarters were, I think we have no right to ask, for I believe she had
quarrelled with her brother at Molloyville, and besides, was a great
deal too proud to be a burden on anybody.

Not only did the widow quit Leamington, but very soon afterwards the
120th received its marching orders, and left Weedon and Warwickshire.
Haggarty's appetite was by this time partially restored, but his love
was not altered, and his humour was still morose and gloomy. I am
informed that at this period of his life he wrote some poems relative to
his unhappy passion; a wild set of verses of several lengths, and in
his handwriting, being discovered upon a sheet of paper in which a
pitch-plaster was wrapped up, which Lieutenant and Adjutant Wheezer was
compelled to put on for a cold.

Fancy then, three years afterwards, the surprise of all Haggarty's
acquaintances on reading in the public papers the following
announcement:

"Married, at Monkstown on the 12th instant, Dionysius Haggarty, Esq.,
of H.M. 120th Foot, to Jemima Amelia Wilhelmina Molloy, daughter of the
late Major Lancelot Gam, R.M., and granddaughter of the late, and niece
of the present Burke Bodkin Blake Molloy, Esq., Molloyville, county
Mayo."

"Has the course of true love at last begun to run smooth?" thought I, as
I laid down the paper; and the old times, and the old leering bragging
widow, and the high shoulders of her daughter, and the jolly days with
the 120th, and Doctor Jephson's one-horse chaise, and the Warwickshire
hunt, and--and Louisa S----, but never mind HER,--came back to my mind.
Has that good-natured simple fellow at last met with his reward? Well,
if he has not to marry the mother-in-law too, he may get on well enough.

Another year announced the retirement of Assistant-Surgeon Haggarty
from the 120th, where he was replaced by Assistant-Surgeon Angus
Rothsay Leech, a Scotchman, probably; with whom I have not the least
acquaintance, and who has nothing whatever to do with this little
history.

Still more years passed on, during which time I will not say that I kept
a constant watch upon the fortunes of Mr. Haggarty and his lady; for,
perhaps, if the truth were known, I never thought for a moment about
them; until one day, being at Kingstown, near Dublin, dawdling on
the beach, and staring at the Hill of Howth, as most people at that
watering-place do, I saw coming towards me a tall gaunt man, with a pair
of bushy red whiskers, of which I thought I had seen the like in former
years, and a face which could be no other than Haggarty's. It was
Haggarty, ten years older than when we last met, and greatly more grim
and thin. He had on one shoulder a young gentleman in a dirty tartan
costume, and a face exceedingly like his own peeping from under a
battered plume of black feathers, while with his other hand he was
dragging a light green go-cart, in which reposed a female infant of some
two years old. Both were roaring with great power of lungs.

As soon as Dennis saw me, his face lost the dull puzzled expression
which had seemed to characterise it; he dropped the pole of the go-cart
from one hand, and his son from the other, and came jumping forward to
greet me with all his might, leaving his progeny roaring in the road.

"Bless my sowl," says he, "sure it's Fitz-Boodle? Fitz, don't you
remember me? Dennis Haggarty of the 120th? Leamington, you know? Molloy,
my boy, hould your tongue, and stop your screeching, and Jemima's too;
d'ye hear? Well, it does good to sore eyes to see an old face. How fat
you're grown, Fitz; and were ye ever in Ireland before? and a'n't ye
delighted with it? Confess, now, isn't it beautiful?"

This question regarding the merits of their country, which I have
remarked is put by most Irish persons, being answered in a satisfactory
manner, and the shouts of the infants appeased from an apple-stall
hard by, Dennis and I talked of old times; I congratulated him on his
marriage with the lovely girl whom we all admired, and hoped he had a
fortune with her, and so forth. His appearance, however, did not bespeak
a great fortune: he had an old grey hat, short old trousers, an old
waistcoat with regimental buttons, and patched Blucher boots, such as
are not usually sported by persons in easy life.

"Ah!" says he, with a sigh, in reply to my queries, "times are changed
since them days, Fitz-Boodle. My wife's not what she was--the beautiful
creature you knew her. Molloy, my boy, run off in a hurry to your mamma,
and tell her an English gentleman is coming home to dine; for you'll
dine with me, Fitz, in course?" And I agreed to partake of that meal;
though Master Molloy altogether declined to obey his papa's orders with
respect to announcing the stranger.

"Well, I must announce you myself," said Haggarty, with a smile. "Come,
it's just dinner-time, and my little cottage is not a hundred yards
off." Accordingly, we all marched in procession to Dennis's little
cottage, which was one of a row and a half of one-storied houses, with
little courtyards before them, and mostly with very fine names on the
doorposts of each. "Surgeon Haggarty" was emblazoned on Dennis's gate,
on a stained green copper-plate; and, not content with this, on the
door-post above the bell was an oval with the inscription of "New
Molloyville." The bell was broken, of course; the court, or garden-path,
was mouldy, weedy, seedy; there were some dirty rocks, by way of
ornament, round a faded glass-plat in the centre, some clothes and
rags hanging out of most part of the windows of New Molloyville, the
immediate entrance to which was by a battered scraper, under a broken
trellis-work, up which a withered creeper declined any longer to climb.

"Small, but snug," says Haggarty: "I'll lead the way, Fitz; put your hat
on the flower-pot there, and turn to the left into the drawing-room."
A fog of onions and turf-smoke filled the whole of the house, and gave
signs that dinner was not far off. Far off? You could hear it frizzling
in the kitchen, where the maid was also endeavouring to hush the crying
of a third refractory child. But as we entered, all three of Haggarty's
darlings were in full roar.

"Is it you, Dennis?" cried a sharp raw voice, from a dark corner in
the drawing-room to which we were introduced, and in which a dirty
tablecloth was laid for dinner, some bottles of porter and a cold
mutton-bone being laid out on a rickety grand piano hard by. "Ye're
always late, Mr. Haggarty. Have you brought the whisky from Nowlan's?
I'll go bail ye've not, now."

"My dear, I've brought an old friend of yours and mine to take pot-luck
with us to-day," said Dennis.

"When is he to come?" said the lady. At which speech I was rather
surprised, for I stood before her.

"Here he is, Jemima my love," answered Dennis, looking at me. "Mr.
Fitz-Boodle: don't you remember him in Warwickshire, darling?"

"Mr. Fitz-Boodle! I am very glad to see him," said the lady, rising and
curtseying with much cordiality.

Mrs. Haggarty was blind.

Mrs. Haggarty was not only blind, but it was evident that smallpox
had been the cause of her loss of vision. Her eyes were bound with a
bandage, her features were entirely swollen, scarred and distorted by
the horrible effects of the malady. She had been knitting in a corner
when we entered, and was wrapped in a very dirty bedgown. Her voice to
me was quite different to that in which she addressed her husband. She
spoke to Haggarty in broad Irish: she addressed me in that most odious
of all languages--Irish-English, endeavouring to the utmost to disguise
her brogue, and to speak with the true dawdling distingue English air.

"Are you long in I-a-land?" said the poor creature in this accent. "You
must faind it a sad ba'ba'ous place, Mr Fitz-Boodle, I'm shu-ah! It was
vary kaind of you to come upon us en famille, and accept a dinner sans
ceremonie. Mr. Haggarty, I hope you'll put the waine into aice, Mr.
Fitz-Boodle must be melted with this hot weathah."

For some time she conducted the conversation in this polite strain, and
I was obliged to say, in reply to a query of hers, that I did not find
her the least altered, though I should never have recognised her but for
this rencontre. She told Haggarty with a significant air to get the wine
from the cellah, and whispered to me that he was his own butlah; and the
poor fellow, taking the hint, scudded away into the town for a pound of
beefsteak and a couple of bottles of wine from the tavern.

"Will the childhren get their potatoes and butther here?" said a
barefoot girl, with long black hair flowing over her face, which she
thrust in at the door.

"Let them sup in the nursery, Elizabeth, and send--ah! Edwards to me."

"Is it cook you mane, ma'am?" said the girl.

"Send her at once!" shrieked the unfortunate woman; and the noise of
frying presently ceasing, a hot woman made her appearance, wiping her
brows with her apron, and asking, with an accent decidedly Hibernian,
what the misthress wanted.

"Lead me up to my dressing-room, Edwards: I really am not fit to be seen
in this dishabille by Mr. Fitz-Boodle."

"Fait' I can't!" says Edwards; "sure the masther's at the butcher's, and
can't look to the kitchen-fire!"

"Nonsense, I must go!" cried Mrs. Haggarty; and Edwards, putting on a
resigned air, and giving her arm and face a further rub with her apron,
held out her arm to Mrs. Dennis, and the pair went upstairs.

She left me to indulge my reflections for half-an-hour, at the end of
which period she came downstairs dressed in an old yellow satin, with
the poor shoulders exposed just as much as ever. She had mounted a
tawdry cap, which Haggarty himself must have selected for her. She had
all sorts of necklaces, bracelets, and earrings in gold, in garnets,
in mother-of-pearl, in ormolu. She brought in a furious savour of musk,
which drove the odours of onions and turf-smoke before it; and she
waved across her wretched angular mean scarred features an old cambric
handkerchief with a yellow lace-border.

"And so you would have known me anywhere, Mr. Fitz-Boodle?" said she,
with a grin that was meant to be most fascinating. "I was sure you
would; for though my dreadful illness deprived me of my sight, it is a
mercy that it did not change my features or complexion at all!"

This mortification had been spared the unhappy woman; but I don't
know whether, with all her vanity, her infernal pride, folly, and
selfishness, it was charitable to leave her in her error.

Yet why correct her? There is a quality in certain people which is
above all advice, exposure, or correction. Only let a man or woman have
DULNESS sufficient, and they need bow to no extant authority. A dullard
recognises no betters; a dullard can't see that he is in the wrong;
a dullard has no scruples of conscience, no doubts of pleasing, or
succeeding, or doing right; no qualms for other people's feelings, no
respect but for the fool himself. How can you make a fool perceive he is
a fool? Such a personage can no more see his own folly than he can see
his own ears. And the great quality of Dulness is to be unalterably
contented with itself. What myriads of souls are there of this admirable
sort,--selfish, stingy, ignorant, passionate, brutal; bad sons, mothers,
fathers, never known to do kind actions!

To pause, however, in this disquisition, which was carrying us far off
Kingstown, New Molloyville, Ireland--nay, into the wide world wherever
Dulness inhabits--let it be stated that Mrs. Haggarty, from my brief
acquaintance with her and her mother, was of the order of persons just
mentioned. There was an air of conscious merit about her, very hard to
swallow along with the infamous dinner poor Dennis managed, after
much delay, to get on the table. She did not fail to invite me to
Molloyville, where she said her cousin would be charmed to see me; and
she told me almost as many anecdotes about that place as her mother used
to impart in former days. I observed, moreover, that Dennis cut her
the favourite pieces of the beefsteak, that she ate thereof with great
gusto, and that she drank with similar eagerness of the various strong
liquors at table. "We Irish ladies are all fond of a leetle glass of
punch," she said, with a playful air, and Dennis mixed her a powerful
tumbler of such violent grog as I myself could swallow only with some
difficulty. She talked of her suffering a great deal, of her sacrifices,
of the luxuries to which she had been accustomed before marriage,--in
a word, of a hundred of those themes on which some ladies are in the
custom of enlarging when they wish to plague some husbands.

But honest Dennis, far from being angry at this perpetual, wearisome,
impudent recurrence to her own superiority, rather encouraged the
conversation than otherwise. It pleased him to hear his wife discourse
about her merits and family splendours. He was so thoroughly beaten
down and henpecked, that he, as it were, gloried in his servitude, and
fancied that his wife's magnificence reflected credit on himself. He
looked towards me, who was half sick of the woman and her egotism, as
if expecting me to exhibit the deepest sympathy, and flung me glances
across the table as much as to say, "What a gifted creature my Jemima
is, and what a fine fellow I am to be in possession of her!" When the
children came down she scolded them, of course, and dismissed them
abruptly (for which circumstance, perhaps, the writer of these pages
was not in his heart very sorry), and, after having sat a preposterously
long time, left us, asking whether we would have coffee there or in her
boudoir.

"Oh! here, of course," said Dennis, with rather a troubled air, and
in about ten minutes the lovely creature was led back to us again by
"Edwards," and the coffee made its appearance. After coffee her husband
begged her to let Mr. Fitz-Boodle hear her voice: "He longs for some of
his old favourites."

"No! DO you?" said she; and was led in triumph to the jingling old
piano, and with a screechy wiry voice, sang those very abominable old
ditties which I had heard her sing at Leamington ten years back.

Haggarty, as she sang, flung himself back in the chair delighted.
Husbands always are, and with the same song, one that they have heard
when they were nineteen years old probably; most Englishmen's tunes have
that date, and it is rather affecting, I think, to hear an old gentleman
of sixty or seventy quavering the old ditty that was fresh when HE was
fresh and in his prime. If he has a musical wife, depend on it he thinks
her old songs of 1788 are better than any he has heard since: in fact
he has heard NONE since. When the old couple are in high good-humour the
old gentleman will take the old lady round the waist, and say, "My dear,
do sing me one of your own songs," and she sits down and sings with her
old voice, and, as she sings, the roses of her youth bloom again for a
moment. Ranelagh resuscitates, and she is dancing a minuet in powder and
a train.

This is another digression. It was occasioned by looking at poor
Dennis's face while his wife was screeching (and, believe me, the former
was the more pleasant occupation). Bottom tickled by the fairies could
not have been in greater ecstasies. He thought the music was divine;
and had further reason for exulting in it, which was, that his wife was
always in a good humour after singing, and never would sing but in that
happy frame of mind. Dennis had hinted so much in our little colloquy
during the ten minutes of his lady's absence in the "boudoir;" so, at
the conclusion of each piece, we shouted "Bravo!" and clapped our hands
like mad.

Such was my insight into the life of Surgeon Dionysius Haggarty and his
wife; and I must have come upon him at a favourable moment too, for poor
Dennis has spoken, subsequently, of our delightful evening at Kingstown,
and evidently thinks to this day that his friend was fascinated by
the entertainment there. His inward economy was as follows: he had his
half-pay, a thousand pounds, about a hundred a year that his father
left, and his wife had sixty pounds a year from the mother; which the
mother, of course, never paid. He had no practice, for he was absorbed
in attention to his Jemima and the children, whom he used to wash, to
dress, to carry out, to walk, or to ride, as we have seen, and who
could not have a servant, as their dear blind mother could never be left
alone. Mrs. Haggarty, a great invalid, used to lie in bed till one, and
have breakfast and hot luncheon there. A fifth part of his income was
spent in having her wheeled about in a chair, by which it was his duty
to walk daily for an allotted number of hours. Dinner would ensue, and
the amateur clergy, who abound in Ireland, and of whom Mrs. Haggarty
was a great admirer, lauded her everywhere as a model of resignation and
virtue, and praised beyond measure the admirable piety with which she
bore her sufferings.

Well, every man to his taste. It did not certainly appear to me that SHE
was the martyr of the family.

"The circumstances of my marriage with Jemima," Dennis said to me, in
some after conversations we had on this interesting subject, "were the
most romantic and touching you can conceive. You saw what an impression
the dear girl had made upon me when we were at Weedon; for from the
first day I set eyes on her, and heard her sing her delightful song of
'Dark-eyed Maiden of Araby,' I felt, and said to Turniquet of ours, that
very night, that SHE was the dark-eyed maid of Araby for ME--not that
she was, you know, for she was born in Shropshire. But I felt that I had
seen the woman who was to make me happy or miserable for life. You know
how I proposed for her at Kenilworth, and how I was rejected, and how I
almost shot myself in consequence--no, you don't know that, for I said
nothing about it to anyone, but I can tell you it was a very near thing;
and a very lucky thing for me I didn't do it: for,--would you believe
it?--the dear girl was in love with me all the time."

"Was she really?" said I, who recollected that Miss Gam's love of those
days showed itself in a very singular manner; but the fact is, when
women are most in love they most disguise it.

"Over head and ears in love with poor Dennis," resumed that worthy
fellow, "who'd ever have thought it? But I have it from the best
authority, from her own mother, with whom I'm not over and above good
friends now; but of this fact she assured me, and I'll tell you when and
how.

"We were quartered at Cork three years after we were at Weedon, and it
was our last year at home; and a great mercy that my dear girl spoke
in time, or where should we have been now? Well, one day, marching
home from parade, I saw a lady seated at an open window, by another who
seemed an invalid, and the lady at the window, who was dressed in the
profoundest mourning, cried out, with a scream, 'Gracious, heavens! it's
Mr. Haggarty of the 120th.'

"'Sure I know that voice,' says I to Whiskerton.

"'It's a great mercy you don't know it a deal too well,' says he: 'it's
Lady Gammon. She's on some husband-hunting scheme, depend on it, for
that daughter of hers. She was at Bath last year on the same errand, and
at Cheltenham the year before, where, Heaven bless you! she's as well
known as the "Hen and Chickens."'

"'I'll thank you not to speak disrespectfully of Miss Jemima Gam,' said
I to Whiskerton; 'she's of one of the first families in Ireland, and
whoever says a word against a woman I once proposed for, insults me,--do
you understand?'

"'Well, marry her, if you like,' says Whiskerton, quite peevish: 'marry
her, and be hanged!'

"Marry her! the very idea of it set my brain a-whirling, and made me a
thousand times more mad than I am by nature.

"You may be sure I walked up the hill to the parade-ground that
afternoon, and with a beating heart too. I came to the widow's house. It
was called 'New Molloyville,' as this is. Wherever she takes a house for
six months she calls it 'New Molloyville;' and has had one in Mallow,
in Bandon, in Sligo, in Castlebar, in Fermoy, in Drogheda, and the deuce
knows where besides: but the blinds were down, and though I thought I
saw somebody behind 'em, no notice was taken of poor Denny Haggarty,
and I paced up and down all mess-time in hopes of catching a glimpse of
Jemima, but in vain. The next day I was on the ground again; I was just
as much in love as ever, that's the fact. I'd never been in that way
before, look you; and when once caught, I knew it was for life.

"There's no use in telling you how long I beat about the bush, but when
I DID get admittance to the house (it was through the means of young
Castlereagh Molloy, whom you may remember at Leamington, and who was
at Cork for the regatta, and used to dine at our mess, and had taken a
mighty fancy to me)--when I DID get into the house, I say, I rushed in
medias res at once; I couldn't keep myself quiet, my heart was too full.

"Oh, Fitz! I shall never forget the day,--the moment I was inthrojuiced
into the dthrawing-room" (as he began to be agitated, Dennis's brogue
broke out with greater richness than ever; but though a stranger may
catch, and repeat from memory, a few words, it is next to impossible for
him to KEEP UP A CONVERSATION in Irish, so that we had best give up all
attempts to imitate Dennis). "When I saw old mother Gam," said he, "my
feelings overcame me all at once. I rowled down on the ground, sir, as
if I'd been hit by a musket-ball. 'Dearest madam,' says I, 'I'll die if
you don't give me Jemima.'

"'Heavens, Mr. Haggarty!' says she, 'how you seize me with surprise!
Castlereagh, my dear nephew, had you not better leave us?' and away he
went, lighting a cigar, and leaving me still on the floor.

"'Rise, Mr. Haggarty,' continued the widow. 'I will not attempt to deny
that this constancy towards my daughter is extremely affecting, however
sudden your present appeal may be. I will not attempt to deny that,
perhaps, Jemima may have a similar feeling; but, as I said, I never
could give my daughter to a Catholic.'

"'I'm as good a Protestant as yourself, ma'am,' says I; 'my mother was
an heiress, and we were all brought up her way.'

"'That makes the matter very different,' says she, turning up the whites
of her eyes. 'How could I ever have reconciled it to my conscience to
see my blessed child married to a Papist? How could I ever have taken
him to Molloyville? Well, this obstacle being removed, _I_ must put
myself no longer in the way between two young people. _I_ must sacrifice
myself; as I always have when my darling girl was in question. YOU shall
see her, the poor dear lovely gentle sufferer, and learn your fate from
her own lips.'

"'The sufferer, ma'am,' says I; 'has Miss Gam been ill?'

"'What! haven't you heard?' cried the widow. 'Haven't you heard of the
dreadful illness which so nearly carried her from me? For nine weeks,
Mr. Haggarty, I watched her day and night, without taking a wink of
sleep,--for nine weeks she lay trembling between death and life; and I
paid the doctor eighty-three guineas. She is restored now; but she is
the wreck of the beautiful creature she was. Suffering, and, perhaps,
ANOTHER DISAPPOINTMENT--but we won't mention that NOW--have so pulled
her down. But I will leave you, and prepare my sweet girl for this
strange, this entirely unexpected visit.'

"I won't tell you what took place between me and Jemima, to whom I was
introduced as she sat in the darkened room, poor sufferer! nor describe
to you with what a thrill of joy I seized (after groping about for it)
her poor emaciated hand. She did not withdraw it; I came out of that
room an engaged man, sir; and NOW I was enabled to show her that I had
always loved her sincerely, for there was my will, made three years
back, in her favour: that night she refused me, as I told ye. I would
have shot myself, but they'd have brought me in non compos; and my
brother Mick would have contested the will, and so I determined to live,
in order that she might benefit by my dying. I had but a thousand pounds
then: since that my father has left me two more. I willed every shilling
to her, as you may fancy, and settled it upon her when we married, as we
did soon after. It was not for some time that I was allowed to see
the poor girl's face, or, indeed, was aware of the horrid loss she had
sustained. Fancy my agony, my dear fellow, when I saw that beautiful
wreck!"

There was something not a little affecting to think, in the conduct of
this brave fellow, that he never once, as he told his story, seemed to
allude to the possibility of his declining to marry a woman who was not
the same as the woman he loved; but that he was quite as faithful to
her now, as he had been when captivated by the poor tawdry charms of the
silly Miss of Leamington. It was hard that such a noble heart as this
should be flung away upon yonder foul mass of greedy vanity. Was it
hard, or not, that he should remain deceived in his obstinate humility,
and continue to admire the selfish silly being whom he had chosen to
worship?

"I should have been appointed surgeon of the regiment," continued
Dennis, "soon after, when it was ordered abroad to Jamaica, where it now
is. But my wife would not hear of going, and said she would break her
heart if she left her mother. So I retired on half-pay, and took this
cottage; and in case any practice should fall in my way--why, there is
my name on the brass plate, and I'm ready for anything that comes. But
the only case that ever DID come was one day when I was driving my wife
in the chaise; and another, one night, of a beggar with a broken head.
My wife makes me a present of a baby every year, and we've no debts; and
between you and me and the post, as long as my mother-in-law is out of
the house, I'm as happy as I need be."

"What! you and the old lady don't get on well?" said I.

"I can't say we do; it's not in nature, you know," said Dennis, with a
faint grin. "She comes into the house, and turns it topsy-turvy. When
she's here I'm obliged to sleep in the scullery. She's never paid her
daughter's income since the first year, though she brags about her
sacrifices as if she had ruined herself for Jemima; and besides, when
she's here, there's a whole clan of the Molloys, horse, foot, and
dragoons, that are quartered upon us, and eat me out of house and home."

"And is Molloyville such a fine place as the widow described it?" asked
I, laughing, and not a little curious.

"Oh, a mighty fine place entirely!" said Dennis. "There's the oak park
of two hundred acres, the finest land ye ever saw, only they've cut all
the wood down. The garden in the old Molloys' time, they say, was the
finest ever seen in the West of Ireland; but they've taken all the glass
to mend the house windows: and small blame to them either. There's a
clear rent-roll of thirty-five hundred a year, only it's in the hand of
receivers; besides other debts, for which there is no land security."

"Your cousin-in-law, Castlereagh Molloy, won't come into a large
fortune?"

"Oh, he'll do very well," said Dennis. "As long as he can get credit,
he's not the fellow to stint himself. Faith, I was fool enough to put my
name to a bit of paper for him, and as they could not catch him in Mayo,
they laid hold of me at Kingstown here. And there was a pretty to do.
Didn't Mrs. Gam say I was ruining her family, that's all? I paid it by
instalments (for all my money is settled on Jemima); and Castlereagh,
who's an honourable fellow, offered me any satisfaction in life. Anyhow,
he couldn't do more than THAT."

"Of course not: and now you're friends?"

"Yes, and he and his aunt have had a tiff, too; and he abuses her
properly, I warrant ye. He says that she carried about Jemima from place
to place, and flung her at the head of every unmarried man in England
a'most--my poor Jemima, and she all the while dying in love with me!
As soon as she got over the small-pox--she took it at Fermoy--God bless
her, I wish I'd been by to be her nurse-tender--as soon as she was
rid of it, the old lady said to Castlereagh, 'Castlereagh, go to the
bar'cks, and find out in the Army List where the 120th is.' Off she came
to Cork hot foot. It appears that while she was ill, Jemima's love for
me showed itself in such a violent way that her mother was overcome, and
promised that, should the dear child recover, she would try and bring us
together. Castlereagh says she would have gone after us to Jamaica."

"I have no doubt she would," said I.

"Could you have a stronger proof of love than that?" cried Dennis. "My
dear girl's illness and frightful blindness have, of course, injured her
health and her temper. She cannot in her position look to the children,
you know, and so they come under my charge for the most part; and her
temper is unequal, certainly. But you see what a sensitive, refined,
elegant creature she is, and may fancy that she's often put out by a
rough fellow like me."

Here Dennis left me, saying it was time to go and walk out the children;
and I think his story has matter of some wholesome reflection in it for
bachelors who are about to change their condition, or may console some
who are mourning their celibacy. Marry, gentlemen, if you like; leave
your comfortable dinner at the club for cold-mutton and curl-papers at
your home; give up your books or pleasures, and take to yourselves wives
and children; but think well on what you do first, as I have no doubt
you will after this advice and example. Advice is always useful in
matters of love; men always take it; they always follow other people's
opinions, not their own: they always profit by example. When they see a
pretty woman, and feel the delicious madness of love coming over them,
they always stop to calculate her temper, her money, their own money,
or suitableness for the married life.... Ha, ha, ha! Let us fool in this
way no more. I have been in love forty-three times with all ranks and
conditions of women, and would have married every time if they would
have let me. How many wives had King Solomon, the wisest of men? And is
not that story a warning to us that Love is master of the wisest? It is
only fools who defy him.

I must come, however, to the last, and perhaps the saddest, part of poor
Denny Haggarty's history. I met him once more, and in such a condition
as made me determine to write this history.

In the month of June last I happened to be at Richmond, a delightful
little place of retreat; and there, sunning himself upon the terrace,
was my old friend of the 120th: he looked older, thinner, poorer,
and more wretched than I had ever seen him. "What! you have given up
Kingstown?" said I, shaking him by the hand.

"Yes," says he.

"And is my lady and your family here at Richmond?"

"No," says he, with a sad shake of the head; and the poor fellow's
hollow eyes filled with tears.

"Good heavens, Denny! what's the matter?" said I. He was squeezing my
hand like a vice as I spoke.

"They've LEFT me!" he burst out with a dreadful shout of passionate
grief--a horrible scream which seemed to be wrenched out of his heart.
"Left me!" said he, sinking down on a seat, and clenching his great
fists, and shaking his lean arms wildly. "I'm a wise man now, Mr.
Fitz-Boodle. Jemima has gone away from me, and yet you know how I loved
her, and how happy we were! I've got nobody now; but I'll die soon,
that's one comfort: and to think it's she that'll kill me after all!"

The story, which he told with a wild and furious lamentation such as is
not known among men of our cooler country, and such as I don't like now
to recall, was a very simple one. The mother-in-law had taken possession
of the house, and had driven him from it. His property at his marriage
was settled on his wife. She had never loved him, and told him this
secret at last, and drove him out of doors with her selfish scorn and
ill-temper. The boy had died; the girls were better, he said, brought up
among the Molloys than they could be with him; and so he was quite alone
in the world, and was living, or rather dying, on forty pounds a year.

His troubles are very likely over by this time. The two fools who caused
his misery will never read this history of him; THEY never read godless
stories in magazines: and I wish, honest reader, that you and I went to
church as much as they do. These people are not wicked BECAUSE of
their religious observances, but IN SPITE of them. They are too dull to
understand humility, too blind to see a tender and simple heart under
a rough ungainly bosom. They are sure that all their conduct towards my
poor friend here has been perfectly righteous, and that they have given
proofs of the most Christian virtue. Haggarty's wife is considered by
her friends as a martyr to a savage husband, and her mother is the angel
that has come to rescue her. All they did was to cheat him and desert
him. And safe in that wonderful self-complacency with which the fools
of this earth are endowed, they have not a single pang of conscience for
their villany towards him, consider their heartlessness as a proof and
consequence of their spotless piety and virtue.




FOOTNOTES

[Footnote 1: The words of this song are copyright, nor will the
copyright be sold for less than twopence-halfpenny.]

[Footnote 2: A French proverbe furnished the author with the notion of
the rivalry between the Barber and the Tailor.]

[Footnote 3: As it is very probable that many fair readers may not
approve of the extremely forcible language in which the combat is
depicted, I beg them to skip it and pass on to the next chapter, and to
remember that it has been modelled on the style of the very best writers
of the sporting papers.]

[Footnote 4: Every person who has lived abroad can, of course, point out
a score of honourable exceptions to the case above hinted at, and knows
many such unions in which it is the Frenchman who honours the English
lady by marrying her. But it must be remembered that marrying in France
means commonly fortune-hunting: and as for the respect in which marriage
is held in France, let all the French novels in M. Rolandi's library be
perused by those who wish to come to a decision upon the question.]

========================================
========================================

CATHERINE: A STORY


by William Makepeace Thackeray

[Catherine, A Story by Ikey Solomons, Esq., Junior.]



Contents

Advertisement

1. Introducing to the reader the chief personages of this narrative.

2. In which are depicted the pleasures of a sentimental attachment.

3. In which a narcotic is administered, and a great deal of genteel
society depicted.

4. In which Mrs. Catherine becomes an honest woman again.

5. Contains Mr. Brock's autobiography, and other matter.

6. The adventures of the ambassador, Mr. MacShane.

7. Which embraces a period of seven years.

8. Enumerates the accomplishments of Master Thomas Billings--introduces
Brock as Doctor Wood--and announces the execution of Ensign MacShane.

9. Interview between Count Galgenstein and Master Thomas Billings, when
he informs the Count of his parentage.

10. Showing how Galgenstein and Mrs. Cat recognise each other in
Marylebone Gardens--and how the Count drives her home in his carrige.

11. Of some domestic quarrels, and the consequence thereof.

12. Treats of love, and prepares for death.

13. Being a preparation for the end.

Chapter the Last.

Another Last Chapter.




ADVERTISEMENT


The story of "Catherine," which appeared in Fraser's Magazine in
1839-40, was written by Mr. Thackeray, under the name of Ikey Solomons,
Jun., to counteract the injurious influence of some popular fictions of
that day, which made heroes of highwaymen and burglars, and created a
false sympathy for the vicious and criminal.

With this purpose, the author chose for the subject of his story a
woman named Catherine Hayes, who was burned at Tyburn, in 1726, for the
deliberate murder of her husband, under very revolting circumstances.
Mr. Thackeray's aim obviously was to describe the career of this
wretched woman and her associates with such fidelity to truth as to
exhibit the danger and folly of investing such persons with heroic and
romantic qualities.




CHAPTER I. Introducing to the reader the chief personages of this
narrative.


At that famous period of history, when the seventeenth century (after
a deal of quarrelling, king-killing, reforming, republicanising,
restoring, re-restoring, play-writing, sermon-writing,
Oliver-Cromwellising, Stuartising, and Orangising, to be sure) had sunk
into its grave, giving place to the lusty eighteenth; when Mr. Isaac
Newton was a tutor of Trinity, and Mr. Joseph Addison Commissioner of
Appeals; when the presiding genius that watched over the destinies of
the French nation had played out all the best cards in his hand, and his
adversaries began to pour in their trumps; when there were two kings in
Spain employed perpetually in running away from one another; when there
was a queen in England, with such rogues for Ministers as have never
been seen, no, not in our own day; and a General, of whom it may be
severely argued, whether he was the meanest miser or the greatest hero
in the world; when Mrs. Masham had not yet put Madam Marlborough's nose
out of joint; when people had their ears cut off for writing very
meek political pamphlets; and very large full-bottomed wigs were just
beginning to be worn with powder; and the face of Louis the Great, as
his was handed in to him behind the bed-curtains, was, when issuing
thence, observed to look longer, older, and more dismal daily....

About the year One thousand seven hundred and five, that is, in the
glorious reign of Queen Anne, there existed certain characters, and
befell a series of adventures, which, since they are strictly in
accordance with the present fashionable style and taste; since they have
been already partly described in the "Newgate Calendar;" since they are
(as shall be seen anon) agreeably low, delightfully disgusting, and at
the same time eminently pleasing and pathetic, may properly be set down
here.

And though it may be said, with some considerable show of reason, that
agreeably low and delightfully disgusting characters have already been
treated, both copiously and ably, by some eminent writers of the present
(and, indeed, of future) ages; though to tread in the footsteps of
the immortal FAGIN requires a genius of inordinate stride, and to go
a-robbing after the late though deathless TURPIN, the renowned
JACK SHEPPARD, or the embryo DUVAL, may be impossible, and not an
infringement, but a wasteful indication of ill-will towards the eighth
commandment; though it may, on the one hand, be asserted that only vain
coxcombs would dare to write on subjects already described by men really
and deservedly eminent; on the other hand, that these subjects have been
described so fully, that nothing more can be said about them; on the
third hand (allowing, for the sake of argument, three hands to one
figure of speech), that the public has heard so much of them, as to
be quite tired of rogues, thieves, cutthroats, and Newgate
altogether;--though all these objections may be urged, and each is
excellent, yet we intend to take a few more pages from the "Old Bailey
Calendar," to bless the public with one more draught from the Stone
Jug:[*]--yet awhile to listen, hurdle-mounted, and riding down the
Oxford Road, to the bland conversation of Jack Ketch, and to hang with
him round the neck of his patient, at the end of our and his history.
We give the reader fair notice, that we shall tickle him with a few such
scenes of villainy, throat-cutting, and bodily suffering in general, as
are not to be found, no, not in--; never mind comparisons, for such are
odious.

     * This, as your Ladyship is aware, is the polite name for
     Her Majesty's Prison of Newgate.

In the year 1705, then, whether it was that the Queen of England did
feel seriously alarmed at the notion that a French prince should occupy
the Spanish throne; or whether she was tenderly attached to the Emperor
of Germany; or whether she was obliged to fight out the quarrel of
William of Orange, who made us pay and fight for his Dutch provinces;
or whether poor old Louis Quatorze did really frighten her; or whether
Sarah Jennings and her husband wanted to make a fight, knowing how much
they should gain by it;--whatever the reason was, it was evident that
the war was to continue, and there was almost as much soldiering
and recruiting, parading, pike and gun-exercising, flag-flying,
drum-beating, powder-blazing, and military enthusiasm, as we can all
remember in the year 1801, what time the Corsican upstart menaced our
shores. A recruiting-party and captain of Cutts's regiment (which had
been so mangled at Blenheim the year before) were now in Warwickshire;
and having their depot at Warwick, the captain and his attendant, the
corporal, were used to travel through the country, seeking for heroes to
fill up the gaps in Cutts's corps,--and for adventures to pass away the
weary time of a country life.

Our Captain Plume and Sergeant Kite (it was at this time, by the way,
that those famous recruiting-officers were playing their pranks in
Shrewsbury) were occupied very much in the same manner with Farquhar's
heroes. They roamed from Warwick to Stratford, and from Stratford to
Birmingham, persuading the swains of Warwickshire to leave the plough
for the Pike, and despatching, from time to time, small detachments
of recruits to extend Marlborough's lines, and to act as food for the
hungry cannon at Ramillies and Malplaquet.

Of those two gentlemen who are about to act a very important part in our
history, one only was probably a native of Britain,--we say probably,
because the individual in question was himself quite uncertain, and, it
must be added, entirely indifferent about his birthplace; but speaking
the English language, and having been during the course of his life
pretty generally engaged in the British service, he had a tolerably
fair claim to the majestic title of Briton. His name was Peter Brock,
otherwise Corporal Brock, of Lord Cutts's regiment of dragoons; he was
of age about fifty-seven (even that point has never been ascertained);
in height about five feet six inches; in weight, nearly thirteen stone;
with a chest that the celebrated Leitch himself might envy; an arm
that was like an opera-dancer's leg; a stomach so elastic that it would
accommodate itself to any given or stolen quantity of food; a great
aptitude for strong liquors; a considerable skill in singing chansons de
table of not the most delicate kind; he was a lover of jokes, of which
he made many, and passably bad; when pleased, simply coarse, boisterous,
and jovial; when angry, a perfect demon: bullying, cursing, storming,
fighting, as is sometimes the wont with gentlemen of his cloth and
education.

Mr. Brock was strictly, what the Marquis of Rodil styled himself in a
proclamation to his soldiers after running away, a hijo de la guerra--a
child of war. Not seven cities, but one or two regiments, might contend
for the honour of giving him birth; for his mother, whose name he took,
had acted as camp-follower to a Royalist regiment; had then obeyed the
Parliamentarians; died in Scotland when Monk was commanding in that
country; and the first appearance of Mr. Brock in a public capacity
displayed him as a fifer in the General's own regiment of Coldstreamers,
when they marched from Scotland to London, and from a republic at once
into a monarchy. Since that period, Brock had been always with the army,
he had had, too, some promotion, for he spake of having a command at the
battle of the Boyne; though probably (as he never mentioned the fact)
upon the losing side. The very year before this narrative commences,
he had been one of Mordaunt's forlorn hope at Schellenberg, for which
service he was promised a pair of colours; he lost them, however, and
was almost shot (but fate did not ordain that his career should close
in that way) for drunkenness and insubordination immediately after the
battle; but having in some measure reinstated himself by a display
of much gallantry at Blenheim, it was found advisable to send him to
England for the purposes of recruiting, and remove him altogether from
the regiment where his gallantry only rendered the example of his riot
more dangerous.

Mr. Brock's commander was a slim young gentleman of twenty-six, about
whom there was likewise a history, if one would take the trouble to
inquire. He was a Bavarian by birth (his mother being an English lady),
and enjoyed along with a dozen other brothers the title of count: eleven
of these, of course, were penniless; one or two were priests, one a
monk, six or seven in various military services, and the elder at home
at Schloss Galgenstein breeding horses, hunting wild boars, swindling
tenants, living in a great house with small means; obliged to be sordid
at home all the year, to be splendid for a month at the capital, as
is the way with many other noblemen. Our young count, Count Gustavus
Adolphus Maximilian von Galgenstein, had been in the service of the
French as page to a nobleman; then of His Majesty's gardes du corps;
then a lieutenant and captain in the Bavarian service; and when, after
the battle of Blenheim, two regiments of Germans came over to the
winning side, Gustavus Adolphus Maximilian found himself among them; and
at the epoch when this story commences, had enjoyed English pay for a
year or more. It is unnecessary to say how he exchanged into his present
regiment; how it appeared that, before her marriage, handsome John
Churchill had known the young gentleman's mother, when they were both
penniless hangers-on at Charles the Second's court;--it is, we say,
quite useless to repeat all the scandal of which we are perfectly
masters, and to trace step by step the events of his history. Here,
however, was Gustavus Adolphus, in a small inn, in a small village of
Warwickshire, on an autumn evening in the year 1705; and at the very
moment when this history begins, he and Mr. Brock, his corporal and
friend, were seated at a round table before the kitchen-fire while a
small groom of the establishment was leading up and down on the
village green, before the inn door, two black, glossy, long-tailed,
barrel-bellied, thick-flanked, arch-necked, Roman-nosed Flanders horses,
which were the property of the two gentlemen now taking their ease at
the "Bugle Inn." The two gentlemen were seated at their ease at the inn
table, drinking mountain-wine; and if the reader fancies from the sketch
which we have given of their lives, or from his own blindness and belief
in the perfectibility of human nature, that the sun of that autumn
evening shone upon any two men in county or city, at desk or harvest, at
Court or at Newgate, drunk or sober, who were greater rascals than
Count Gustavus Galgenstein and Corporal Peter Brock, he is egregiously
mistaken, and his knowledge of human nature is not worth a fig. If they
had not been two prominent scoundrels, what earthly business should we
have in detailing their histories? What would the public care for
them? Who would meddle with dull virtue, humdrum sentiment, or stupid
innocence, when vice, agreeable vice, is the only thing which the
readers of romances care to hear?

The little horse-boy, who was leading the two black Flanders horses up
and down the green, might have put them in the stable for any good that
the horses got by the gentle exercise which they were now taking in the
cool evening air, as their owners had not ridden very far or very hard,
and there was not a hair turned of their sleek shining coats; but the
lad had been especially ordered so to walk the horses about until he
received further commands from the gentlemen reposing in the "Bugle"
kitchen; and the idlers of the village seemed so pleased with the
beasts, and their smart saddles and shining bridles, that it would have
been a pity to deprive them of the pleasure of contemplating such an
innocent spectacle. Over the Count's horse was thrown a fine red cloth,
richly embroidered in yellow worsted, a very large count's coronet and a
cipher at the four corners of the covering; and under this might be
seen a pair of gorgeous silver stirrups, and above it, a couple of
silver-mounted pistols reposing in bearskin holsters; the bit was silver
too, and the horse's head was decorated with many smart ribbons. Of the
Corporal's steed, suffice it to say, that the ornaments were in brass,
as bright, though not perhaps so valuable, as those which decorated the
Captain's animal. The boys, who had been at play on the green, first
paused and entered into conversation with the horse-boy; then the
village matrons followed; and afterwards, sauntering by ones and twos,
came the village maidens, who love soldiers as flies love treacle;
presently the males began to arrive, and lo! the parson of the parish,
taking his evening walk with Mrs. Dobbs, and the four children his
offspring, at length joined himself to his flock.

To this audience the little ostler explained that the animals belonged
to two gentlemen now reposing at the "Bugle:" one young with gold
hair, the other old with grizzled locks; both in red coats; both in
jack-boots; putting the house into a bustle, and calling for the best.
He then discoursed to some of his own companions regarding the merits of
the horses; and the parson, a learned man, explained to the villagers,
that one of the travellers must be a count, or at least had a count's
horsecloth; pronounced that the stirrups were of real silver, and
checked the impetuosity of his son, William Nassau Dobbs, who was for
mounting the animals, and who expressed a longing to fire off one of the
pistols in the holsters.

As this family discussion was taking place, the gentlemen whose
appearance had created so much attention came to the door of the inn,
and the elder and stouter was seen to smile at his companion; after
which he strolled leisurely over the green, and seemed to examine
with much benevolent satisfaction the assemblage of villagers who were
staring at him and the quadrupeds.

Mr. Brock, when he saw the parson's band and cassock, took off his
beaver reverently, and saluted the divine: "I hope your reverence won't
baulk the little fellow," said he; "I think I heard him calling out for
a ride, and whether he should like my horse, or his Lordship's horse, I
am sure it is all one. Don't be afraid, sir! the horses are not tired;
we have only come seventy mile to-day, and Prince Eugene once rode a
matter of fifty-two leagues (a hundred and fifty miles), sir, upon that
horse, between sunrise and sunset."

"Gracious powers! on which horse?" said Doctor Dobbs, very solemnly.

"On THIS, sir,--on mine, Corporal Brock of Cutts's black gelding,
'William of Nassau.' The Prince, sir, gave it me after Blenheim fight,
for I had my own legs carried away by a cannon-ball, just as I cut down
two of Sauerkrauter's regiment, who had made the Prince prisoner."

"Your own legs, sir!" said the Doctor. "Gracious goodness! this is more
and more astonishing!"

"No, no, not my own legs, my horse's I mean, sir; and the Prince gave me
'William of Nassau' that very day."

To this no direct reply was made; but the Doctor looked at Mrs. Dobbs,
and Mrs. Dobbs and the rest of the children at her eldest son, who
grinned and said, "Isn't it wonderful?" The Corporal to this answered
nothing, but, resuming his account, pointed to the other horse and said,
"THAT horse, sir--good as mine is--that horse, with the silver stirrups,
is his Excellency's horse, Captain Count Maximilian Gustavus Adolphus
von Galgenstein, captain of horse and of the Holy Roman Empire" (he
lifted here his hat with much gravity, and all the crowd, even to
the parson, did likewise). "We call him 'George of Denmark,' sir, in
compliment to Her Majesty's husband: he is Blenheim too, sir; Marshal
Tallard rode him on that day, and you know how HE was taken prisoner by
the Count."

"George of Denmark, Marshal Tallard, William of Nassau! this is strange
indeed, most wonderful! Why, sir, little are you aware that there are
before you, AT THIS MOMENT, two other living beings who bear these
venerated names! My boys, stand forward! Look here, sir: these children
have been respectively named after our late sovereign and the husband of
our present Queen."

"And very good names too, sir; ay, and very noble little fellows too;
and I propose that, with your reverence and your ladyship's leave,
William Nassau here shall ride on George of Denmark, and George of
Denmark shall ride on William of Nassau."

When this speech of the Corporal's was made, the whole crowd set up a
loyal hurrah; and, with much gravity, the two little boys were lifted up
into the saddles; and the Corporal leading one, entrusted the other to
the horse-boy, and so together marched stately up and down the green.

The popularity which Mr. Brock gained by this manoeuvre was very great;
but with regard to the names of the horses and children, which coincided
so extraordinarily, it is but fair to state, that the christening of the
quadrupeds had only taken place about two minutes before the dragoon's
appearance on the green. For if the fact must be confessed, he, while
seated near the inn window, had kept a pretty wistful eye upon all going
on without; and the horses marching thus to and fro for the wonderment
of the village, were only placards or advertisements for the riders.

There was, besides the boy now occupied with the horses, and the
landlord and landlady of the "Bugle Inn," another person connected with
that establishment--a very smart, handsome, vain, giggling servant-girl,
about the age of sixteen, who went by the familiar name of Cat, and
attended upon the gentlemen in the parlour, while the landlady was
employed in cooking their supper in the kitchen. This young person had
been educated in the village poor-house, and having been pronounced
by Doctor Dobbs and the schoolmaster the idlest, dirtiest, and most
passionate little minx with whom either had ever had to do, she was,
after receiving a very small portion of literary instruction (indeed
it must be stated that the young lady did not know her letters), bound
apprentice at the age of nine years to Mrs. Score, her relative, and
landlady of the "Bugle Inn."

If Miss Cat, or Catherine Hall, was a slattern and a minx, Mrs. Score
was a far superior shrew; and for the seven years of her apprenticeship
the girl was completely at her mistress's mercy. Yet though wondrously
stingy, jealous, and violent, while her maid was idle and extravagant,
and her husband seemed to abet the girl, Mrs. Score put up with the
wench's airs, idleness, and caprices, without ever wishing to dismiss
her from the "Bugle." The fact is, that Miss Catherine was a great
beauty, and for about two years, since her fame had begun to spread,
the custom of the inn had also increased vastly. When there was a debate
whether the farmers, on their way from market, would take t'other pot,
Catherine, by appearing with it, would straightway cause the liquor to
be swallowed and paid for; and when the traveller who proposed riding
that night and sleeping at Coventry or Birmingham, was asked by Miss
Catherine whether he would like a fire in his bedroom, he generally was
induced to occupy it, although he might before have vowed to Mrs. Score
that he would not for a thousand guineas be absent from home that night.
The girl had, too, half-a-dozen lovers in the village; and these were
bound in honour to spend their pence at the alehouse she inhabited. O
woman, lovely woman! what strong resolves canst thou twist round thy
little finger! what gunpowder passions canst thou kindle with a single
sparkle of thine eye! what lies and fribble nonsense canst thou make us
listen to, as they were gospel truth or splendid wit! above all what bad
liquor canst thou make us swallow when thou puttest a kiss within the
cup--and we are content to call the poison wine!

The mountain-wine at the "Bugle" was, in fact, execrable; but Mrs. Cat,
who served it to the two soldiers, made it so agreeable to them, that
they found it a passable, even a pleasant task, to swallow the contents
of a second bottle. The miracle had been wrought instantaneously on her
appearance: for whereas at that very moment the Count was employed in
cursing the wine, the landlady, the wine-grower, and the English nation
generally, when the young woman entered and (choosing so to
interpret the oaths) said, "Coming, your honour; I think your honour
called"--Gustavus Adolphus whistled, stared at her very hard, and
seeming quite dumb-stricken by her appearance, contented himself by
swallowing a whole glass of mountain by way of reply.

Mr. Brock was, however, by no means so confounded as his captain: he was
thirty years older than the latter, and in the course of fifty years of
military life had learned to look on the most dangerous enemy, or the
most beautiful woman, with the like daring, devil-may-care determination
to conquer.

"My dear Mary," then said that gentleman, "his honour is a lord; as good
as a lord, that is; for all he allows such humble fellows as I am to
drink with him."

Catherine dropped a low curtsey, and said, "Well, I don't know if you
are joking a poor country girl, as all you soldier gentlemen do; but his
honour LOOKS like a lord: though I never see one, to be sure."

"Then," said the Captain, gathering courage, "how do you know I look
like one, pretty Mary?"

"Pretty Catherine: I mean Catherine, if you please, sir."

Here Mr. Brock burst into a roar of laughter, and shouting with many
oaths that she was right at first, invited her to give him what he
called a buss.

Pretty Catherine turned away from him at this request, and muttered
something about "Keep your distance, low fellow! buss indeed; poor
country girl," etc. etc., placing herself, as if for protection, on the
side of the Captain. That gentleman looked also very angry; but whether
at the sight of innocence so outraged, or the insolence of the Corporal
for daring to help himself first, we cannot say. "Hark ye, Mr. Brock,"
he cried very fiercely, "I will suffer no such liberties in my presence:
remember, it is only my condescension which permits you to share my
bottle in this way; take care I don't give you instead a taste of my
cane." So saying, he, in a protecting manner, placed one hand round
Mrs. Catherine's waist, holding the other clenched very near to the
Corporal's nose.

Mrs. Catherine, for HER share of this action of the Count's, dropped
another curtsey and said, "Thank you, my Lord." But Galgenstein's threat
did not appear to make any impression on Mr. Brock, as indeed there was
no reason that it should; for the Corporal, at a combat of fisticuffs,
could have pounded his commander into a jelly in ten minutes; so he
contented himself by saying, "Well, noble Captain, there's no harm done;
it IS an honour for poor old Peter Brock to be at table with you, and I
AM sorry, sure enough."

"In truth, Peter, I believe thou art; thou hast good reason, eh, Peter?
But never fear, man; had I struck thee, I never would have hurt thee."

"I KNOW you would not," replied Brock, laying his hand on his heart
with much gravity; and so peace was made, and healths were drunk. Miss
Catherine condescended to put her lips to the Captain's glass; who swore
that the wine was thus converted into nectar; and although the girl had
not previously heard of that liquor, she received the compliment as a
compliment, and smiled and simpered in return.

The poor thing had never before seen anybody so handsome, or so finely
dressed as the Count; and, in the simplicity of her coquetry, allowed
her satisfaction to be quite visible. Nothing could be more clumsy than
the gentleman's mode of complimenting her; but for this, perhaps, his
speeches were more effective than others more delicate would have been;
and though she said to each, "Oh, now, my Lord," and "La, Captain, how
can you flatter one so?" and "Your honour's laughing at me," and made
such polite speeches as are used on these occasions, it was manifest
from the flutter and blush, and the grin of satisfaction which lighted
up the buxom features of the little country beauty, that the Count's
first operations had been highly successful. When following up his
attack, he produced from his neck a small locket (which had been given
him by a Dutch lady at the Brill), and begged Miss Catherine to wear it
for his sake, and chucked her under the chin and called her his little
rosebud, it was pretty clear how things would go: anybody who could see
the expression of Mr. Brock's countenance at this event might judge of
the progress of the irresistible High-Dutch conqueror.

Being of a very vain communicative turn, our fair barmaid gave her two
companions, not only a pretty long account of herself, but of many other
persons in the village, whom she could perceive from the window opposite
to which she stood. "Yes, your honour," said she--"my Lord, I mean;
sixteen last March, though there's a many girl in the village that at
my age is quite chits. There's Polly Randall now, that red-haired girl
along with Thomas Curtis: she's seventeen if she's a day, though he is
the very first sweetheart she has had. Well, as I am saying, I was bred
up here in the village--father and mother died very young, and I was
left a poor orphan--well, bless us! if Thomas haven't kissed her!--to
the care of Mrs. Score, my aunt, who has been a mother to me--a
stepmother, you know;--and I've been to Stratford fair, and to Warwick
many a time; and there's two people who have offered to marry me, and
ever so many who want to, and I won't have none--only a gentleman,
as I've always said; not a poor clodpole, like Tom there with the red
waistcoat (he was one that asked me), nor a drunken fellow like Sam
Blacksmith yonder, him whose wife has got the black eye, but a real
gentleman, like--"

"Like whom, my dear?" said the Captain, encouraged.

"La, sir, how can you? Why, like our squire, Sir John, who rides in
such a mortal fine gold coach; or, at least, like the parson, Doctor
Dobbs--that's he, in the black gown, walking with Madam Dobbs in red."

"And are those his children?"

"Yes: two girls and two boys; and only think, he calls one William
Nassau, and one George Denmark--isn't it odd?" And from the parson, Mrs.
Catherine went on to speak of several humble personages of the village
community, who, as they are not necessary to our story, need not be
described at full length. It was when, from the window, Corporal Brock
saw the altercation between the worthy divine and his son, respecting
the latter's ride, that he judged it a fitting time to step out on the
green, and to bestow on the two horses those famous historical names
which we have just heard applied to them.

Mr. Brock's diplomacy was, as we have stated, quite successful; for,
when the parson's boys had ridden and retired along with their mamma and
papa, other young gentlemen of humbler rank in the village were placed
upon "George of Denmark" and "William of Nassau;" the Corporal joking
and laughing with all the grown-up people. The women, in spite of Mr.
Brock's age, his red nose, and a certain squint of his eye, vowed the
Corporal was a jewel of a man; and among the men his popularity was
equally great.

"How much dost thee get, Thomas Clodpole?" said Mr. Brock to a
countryman (he was the man whom Mrs. Catherine had described as her
suitor), who had laughed loudest at some of his jokes: "how much dost
thee get for a week's work, now?"

Mr. Clodpole, whose name was really Bullock, stated that his wages
amounted to "three shillings and a puddn."

"Three shillings and a puddn!--monstrous!--and for this you toil like a
galley-slave, as I have seen them in Turkey and America,--ay, gentlemen,
and in the country of Prester John! You shiver out of bed on icy winter
mornings, to break the ice for Ball and Dapple to drink."

"Yes, indeed," said the person addressed, who seemed astounded at the
extent of the Corporal's information.

"Or you clean pigsty, and take dung down to meadow; or you act watchdog
and tend sheep; or you sweep a scythe over a great field of grass; and
when the sun has scorched the eyes out of your head, and sweated the
flesh off your bones, and well-nigh fried the soul out of your body,
you go home, to what?--three shillings a week and a puddn! Do you get
pudding every day?"

"No; only Sundays."

"Do you get money enough?"

"No, sure."

"Do you get beer enough?"

"Oh no, NEVER!" said Mr. Bullock quite resolutely.

"Worthy Clodpole, give us thy hand: it shall have beer enough this day,
or my name's not Corporal Brock. Here's the money, boy! there are twenty
pieces in this purse: and how do you think I got 'em? and how do you
think I shall get others when these are gone?--by serving Her Sacred
Majesty, to be sure: long life to her, and down with the French King!"

Bullock, a few of the men, and two or three of the boys, piped out
an hurrah, in compliment to this speech of the Corporal's: but it
was remarked that the greater part of the crowd drew back--the women
whispering ominously to them and looking at the Corporal.

"I see, ladies, what it is," said he. "You are frightened, and think I
am a crimp come to steal your sweethearts away. What! call Peter Brock a
double-dealer? I tell you what, boys, Jack Churchill himself has shaken
this hand, and drunk a pot with me: do you think he'd shake hands with
a rogue? Here's Tummas Clodpole has never had beer enough, and here am
I will stand treat to him and any other gentleman: am I good enough
company for him? I have money, look you, and like to spend it: what
should _I_ be doing dirty actions for--hay, Tummas?"

A satisfactory reply to this query was not, of course, expected by the
Corporal nor uttered by Mr. Bullock; and the end of the dispute was,
that he and three or four of the rustic bystanders were quite convinced
of the good intentions of their new friend, and accompanied him back
to the "Bugle," to regale upon the promised beer. Among the Corporal's
guests was one young fellow whose dress would show that he was somewhat
better to do in the world than Clodpole and the rest of the sunburnt
ragged troop, who were marching towards the alehouse. This man was the
only one of his hearers who, perhaps, was sceptical as to the truth of
his stories; but as soon as Bullock accepted the invitation to drink,
John Hayes, the carpenter (for such was his name and profession), said,
"Well, Thomas, if thou goest, I will go too."

"I know thee wilt," said Thomas: "thou'lt goo anywhere Catty Hall is,
provided thou canst goo for nothing."

"Nay, I have a penny to spend as good as the Corporal here."

"A penny to KEEP, you mean: for all your love for the lass at the
'Bugle,' did thee ever spend a shilling in the house? Thee wouldn't go
now, but that I am going too, and the Captain here stands treat."

"Come, come, gentlemen, no quarrelling," said Mr. Brock. "If this pretty
fellow will join us, amen say I: there's lots of liquor, and plenty
of money to pay the score. Comrade Tummas, give us thy arm. Mr. Hayes,
you're a hearty cock, I make no doubt, and all such are welcome. Come
along, my gentleman farmers, Mr. Brock shall have the honour to pay for
you all." And with this, Corporal Brock, accompanied by Messrs. Hayes,
Bullock, Blacksmith, Baker's-boy, Butcher, and one or two others,
adjourned to the inn; the horses being, at the same time, conducted to
the stable.

Although we have, in this quiet way, and without any flourishing of
trumpets, or beginning of chapters, introduced Mr. Hayes to the public;
and although, at first sight, a sneaking carpenter's boy may seem hardly
worthy of the notice of an intelligent reader, who looks for a good
cut-throat or highwayman for a hero, or a pickpocket at the very least:
this gentleman's words and actions should be carefully studied by the
public, as he is destined to appear before them under very polite and
curious circumstances during the course of this history. The speech of
the rustic Juvenal, Mr. Clodpole, had seemed to infer that Hayes was at
once careful of his money and a warm admirer of Mrs. Catherine of the
"Bugle:" and both the charges were perfectly true. Hayes's father
was reported to be a man of some substance; and young John, who was
performing his apprenticeship in the village, did not fail to talk very
big of his pretensions to fortune--of his entering, at the close of his
indentures, into partnership with his father--and of the comfortable
farm and house over which Mrs. John Hayes, whoever she might be, would
one day preside. Thus, next to the barber and butcher, and above even
his own master, Mr. Hayes took rank in the village: and it must not be
concealed that his representation of wealth had made some impression
upon Mrs. Hall toward whom the young gentleman had cast the eyes of
affection. If he had been tolerably well-looking, and not pale, rickety,
and feeble as he was; if even he had been ugly, but withal a man of
spirit, it is probable the girl's kindness for him would have been
much more decided. But he was a poor weak creature, not to compare
with honest Thomas Bullock, by at least nine inches; and so notoriously
timid, selfish, and stingy, that there was a kind of shame in receiving
his addresses openly; and what encouragement Mrs. Catherine gave him
could only be in secret.

But no mortal is wise at all times: and the fact was, that Hayes, who
cared for himself intensely, had set his heart upon winning Catherine;
and loved her with a desperate greedy eagerness and desire of
possession, which makes passions for women often so fierce and
unreasonable among very cold and selfish men. His parents (whose
frugality he had inherited) had tried in vain to wean him from this
passion, and had made many fruitless attempts to engage him with women
who possessed money and desired husbands; but Hayes was, for a wonder,
quite proof against their attractions; and, though quite ready
to acknowledge the absurdity of his love for a penniless alehouse
servant-girl, nevertheless persisted in it doggedly. "I know I'm a
fool," said he; "and what's more, the girl does not care for me; but
marry her I must, or I think I shall just die: and marry her I will."
For very much to the credit of Miss Catherine's modesty, she had
declared that marriage was with her a sine qua non, and had dismissed,
with the loudest scorn and indignation, all propositions of a less
proper nature.

Poor Thomas Bullock was another of her admirers, and had offered to
marry her; but three shillings a week and a puddn was not to the girl's
taste, and Thomas had been scornfully rejected. Hayes had also made her
a direct proposal. Catherine did not say no: she was too prudent: but
she was young and could wait; she did not care for Mr. Hayes yet enough
to marry him--(it did not seem, indeed, in the young woman's nature to
care for anybody)--and she gave her adorer flatteringly to understand
that, if nobody better appeared in the course of a few years, she might
be induced to become Mrs. Hayes. It was a dismal prospect for the
poor fellow to live upon the hope of being one day Mrs. Catherine's
pis-aller.

In the meantime she considered herself free as the wind, and permitted
herself all the innocent gaieties which that "chartered libertine," a
coquette, can take. She flirted with all the bachelors, widowers, and
married men, in a manner which did extraordinary credit to her years:
and let not the reader fancy such pastimes unnatural at her early age.
The ladies--Heaven bless them!--are, as a general rule, coquettes from
babyhood upwards. Little SHE'S of three years old play little airs and
graces upon small heroes of five; simpering misses of nine make attacks
upon young gentlemen of twelve; and at sixteen, a well-grown girl, under
encouraging circumstances--say, she is pretty, in a family of ugly elder
sisters, or an only child and heiress, or a humble wench at a country
inn, like our fair Catherine--is at the very pink and prime of her
coquetry: they will jilt you at that age with an ease and arch infantine
simplicity that never can be surpassed in maturer years.

Miss Catherine, then, was a franche coquette, and Mr. John Hayes was
miserable. His life was passed in a storm of mean passions and bitter
jealousies, and desperate attacks upon the indifference-rock of Mrs.
Catherine's heart, which not all his tempest of love could beat down. O
cruel cruel pangs of love unrequited! Mean rogues feel them as well as
great heroes. Lives there the man in Europe who has not felt them many
times?--who has not knelt, and fawned, and supplicated, and wept, and
cursed, and raved, all in vain; and passed long wakeful nights with
ghosts of dead hopes for company; shadows of buried remembrances that
glide out of their graves of nights, and whisper, "We are dead now,
but we WERE once; and we made you happy, and we come now to mock
you:--despair, O lover, despair, and die"?--O cruel pangs!--dismal
nights!--Now a sly demon creeps under your nightcap, and drops into
your ear those soft hope-breathing sweet words, uttered on the
well-remembered evening: there, in the drawer of your dressing-table
(along with the razors, and Macassar oil), lies the dead flower that
Lady Amelia Wilhelmina wore in her bosom on the night of a certain
ball--the corpse of a glorious hope that seemed once as if it would live
for ever, so strong was it, so full of joy and sunshine: there, in
your writing-desk, among a crowd of unpaid bills, is the dirty scrap of
paper, thimble-sealed, which came in company with a pair of muffetees of
her knitting (she was a butcher's daughter, and did all she could, poor
thing!), begging "you would ware them at collidge, and think of her
who"--married a public-house three weeks afterwards, and cares for you
no more now than she does for the pot-boy. But why multiply instances,
or seek to depict the agony of poor mean-spirited John Hayes? No mistake
can be greater than that of fancying such great emotions of love are
only felt by virtuous or exalted men: depend upon it, Love, like Death,
plays havoc among the pauperum tabernas, and sports with rich and poor,
wicked and virtuous, alike. I have often fancied, for instance, on
seeing the haggard pale young old-clothesman, who wakes the echoes of
our street with his nasal cry of "Clo'!"--I have often, I said, fancied
that, besides the load of exuvial coats and breeches under which
he staggers, there is another weight on him--an atrior cura at his
tail--and while his unshorn lips and nose together are performing that
mocking, boisterous, Jack-indifferent cry of "Clo', clo'!" who knows
what woeful utterances are crying from the heart within? There he is,
chaffering with the footman at No. 7 about an old dressing-gown: you
think his whole soul is bent only on the contest about the garment.
Psha! there is, perhaps, some faithless girl in Holywell Street who
fills up his heart; and that desultory Jew-boy is a peripatetic hell!
Take another instance:--take the man in the beef-shop in Saint Martin's
Court. There he is, to all appearances quite calm: before the same round
of beef--from morning till sundown--for hundreds of years very likely.
Perhaps when the shutters are closed, and all the world tired and
silent, there is HE silent, but untired--cutting, cutting, cutting. You
enter, you get your meat to your liking, you depart; and, quite unmoved,
on, on he goes, reaping ceaselessly the Great Harvest of Beef. You would
fancy that if Passion ever failed to conquer, it had in vain assailed
the calm bosom of THAT MAN. I doubt it, and would give much to know his
history.

Who knows what furious Aetna-flames are raging underneath the surface of
that calm flesh-mountain--who can tell me that that calmness itself is
not DESPAIR?

                    *****

The reader, if he does not now understand why it was that Mr. Hayes
agreed to drink the Corporal's proffered beer, had better just read the
foregoing remarks over again, and if he does not understand THEN, why,
small praise to his brains. Hayes could not bear that Mr. Bullock should
have a chance of seeing, and perhaps making love to Mrs. Catherine in
his absence; and though the young woman never diminished her coquetries,
but, on the contrary, rather increased them in his presence, it was
still a kind of dismal satisfaction to be miserable in her company.

On this occasion, the disconsolate lover could be wretched to his
heart's content; for Catherine had not a word or a look for him, but
bestowed all her smiles upon the handsome stranger who owned the black
horse. As for poor Tummas Bullock, his passion was never violent; and
he was content in the present instance to sigh and drink beer. He sighed
and drank, sighed and drank, and drank again, until he had swallowed so
much of the Corporal's liquor, as to be induced to accept a guinea from
his purse also; and found himself, on returning to reason and sobriety,
a soldier of Queen Anne's.

But oh! fancy the agonies of Mr. Hayes when, seated with the Corporal's
friends at one end of the kitchen, he saw the Captain at the place of
honour, and the smiles which the fair maid bestowed upon him; when, as
she lightly whisked past him with the Captain's supper, she, pointing
to the locket that once reposed on the breast of the Dutch lady at the
Brill, looked archly on Hayes and said, "See, John, what his Lordship
has given me;" and when John's face became green and purple with
rage and jealousy, Mrs. Catherine laughed ten times louder, and cried
"Coming, my Lord," in a voice of shrill triumph, that bored through the
soul of Mr. John Hayes and left him gasping for breath.

On Catherine's other lover, Mr. Thomas, this coquetry had no effect: he,
and two comrades of his, had by this time quite fallen under the spell
of the Corporal; and hope, glory, strong beer, Prince Eugene, pair of
colours, more strong beer, her blessed Majesty, plenty more strong beer,
and such subjects, martial and bacchic, whirled through their dizzy
brains at a railroad pace.

And now, if there had been a couple of experienced reporters present at
the "Bugle Inn," they might have taken down a conversation on love
and war--the two themes discussed by the two parties occupying the
kitchen--which, as the parts were sung together, duetwise, formed
together some very curious harmonies. Thus, while the Captain was
whispering the softest nothings, the Corporal was shouting the fiercest
combats of the war; and, like the gentleman at Penelope's table, on it
exiguo pinxit praelia tota bero. For example:

CAPTAIN. What do you say to a silver trimming, pretty Catherine? Don't
you think a scarlet riding-cloak, handsomely laced, would become you
wonderfully well?--and a grey hat with a blue feather--and a pretty nag
to ride on--and all the soldiers to present arms as you pass, and say,
"There goes the Captain's lady"? What do you think of a side-box at
Lincoln's Inn playhouse, or of standing up to a minuet with my Lord
Marquis at--?

CORPORAL. The ball, sir, ran right up his elbow, and was found the next
day by Surgeon Splinter of ours,--where do you think, sir?--upon my
honour as a gentleman it came out of the nape of his--

CAPTAIN. Necklace--and a sweet pair of diamond earrings, mayhap--and a
little shower of patches, which ornament a lady's face wondrously--and
a leetle rouge--though, egad! such peach-cheeks as yours don't want
it;--fie! Mrs. Catherine, I should think the birds must come and peck at
them as if they were fruit--

CORPORAL. Over the wall; and three-and-twenty of our fellows jumped
after me. By the Pope of Rome, friend Tummas, that was a day!--Had you
seen how the Mounseers looked when four-and-twenty rampaging he-devils,
sword and pistol, cut and thrust, pell-mell came tumbling into the
redoubt! Why, sir, we left in three minutes as many artillerymen's heads
as there were cannon-balls. It was, "Ah sacre!" "D----- you, take that!"
"O mon Dieu!" "Run him through!" "Ventrebleu!" and it WAS ventrebleu
with him, I warrant you; for bleu, in the French language, means
"through;" and ventre--why, you see, ventre means--

CAPTAIN. Waists, which are worn now excessive long; and for the hoops,
if you COULD but see them--stap my vitals, my dear, but there was a lady
at Warwick's Assembly (she came in one of my Lord's coaches) who had a
hoop as big as a tent: you might have dined under it comfortably;--ha!
ha! 'pon my faith, now--

CORPORAL. And there we found the Duke of Marlborough seated along with
Marshal Tallard, who was endeavouring to drown his sorrow over a cup of
Johannisberger wine; and a good drink too, my lads, only not to compare
to Warwick beer. "Who was the man who has done this?" said our noble
General. I stepped up. "How many heads was it," says he, "that you cut
off?" "Nineteen," says I, "besides wounding several." When he heard it
(Mr. Hayes, you don't drink) I'm blest if he didn't burst into tears!
"Noble noble fellow," says he. "Marshal, you must excuse me if I am
pleased to hear of the destruction of your countrymen. Noble noble
fellow!--here's a hundred guineas for you." Which sum he placed in my
hand. "Nay," says the Marshal "the man has done his duty:" and, pulling
out a magnificent gold diamond-hilted snuff-box, he gave me--

MR. BULLOCK. What, a goold snuff-box? Wauns, but thee WAST in luck,
Corporal!

CORPORAL. No, not the snuff-box, but--A PINCH OF SNUFF,--ha! ha!--run me
through the body if he didn't. Could you but have seen the smile on
Jack Churchill's grave face at this piece of generosity! So, beckoning
Colonel Cadogan up to him, he pinched his Ear and whispered--

CAPTAIN. "May I have the honour to dance a minuet with your Ladyship?"
The whole room was in titters at Jack's blunder; for, as you know very
well, poor Lady Susan HAS A WOODEN LEG. Ha! ha! fancy a minuet and a
wooden leg, hey, my dear?--

MRS. CATHERINE. Giggle--giggle--giggle: he! he! he! Oh, Captain, you
rogue, you--

SECOND TABLE. Haw! haw! haw! Well you be a foony mon, Sergeant, zure
enoff.

                    *****

This little specimen of the conversation must be sufficient. It will
show pretty clearly that EACH of the two military commanders was
conducting his operations with perfect success. Three of the detachment
of five attacked by the Corporal surrendered to him: Mr. Bullock,
namely, who gave in at a very early stage of the evening, and
ignominiously laid down his arms under the table, after standing not
more than a dozen volleys of beer; Mr. Blacksmith's boy, and a labourer
whose name we have not been able to learn. Mr. Butcher himself was on
the point of yielding, when he was rescued by the furious charge of a
detachment that marched to his relief: his wife namely, who, with two
squalling children, rushed into the "Bugle," boxed Butcher's ears, and
kept up such a tremendous fire of oaths and screams upon the Corporal,
that he was obliged to retreat. Fixing then her claws into Mr. Butcher's
hair, she proceeded to drag him out of the premises; and thus Mr. Brock
was overcome. His attack upon John Hayes was a still greater failure;
for that young man seemed to be invincible by drink, if not by love:
and at the end of the drinking-bout was a great deal more cool than
the Corporal himself; to whom he wished a very polite good-evening, as
calmly he took his hat to depart. He turned to look at Catherine, to be
sure, and then he was not quite so calm: but Catherine did not give any
reply to his good-night. She was seated at the Captain's table playing
at cribbage with him; and though Count Gustavus Maximilian lost every
game, he won more than he lost,--sly fellow!--and Mrs. Catherine was no
match for him.

It is to be presumed that Hayes gave some information to Mrs. Score,
the landlady: for, on leaving the kitchen, he was seen to linger for a
moment in the bar; and very soon after Mrs. Catherine was called away
from her attendance on the Count, who, when he asked for a sack and
toast, was furnished with those articles by the landlady herself: and,
during the half-hour in which he was employed in consuming this drink,
Monsieur de Galgenstein looked very much disturbed and out of humour,
and cast his eyes to the door perpetually; but no Catherine came. At
last, very sulkily, he desired to be shown to bed, and walked as well as
he could (for, to say truth, the noble Count was by this time somewhat
unsteady on his legs) to his chamber. It was Mrs. Score who showed
him to it, and closed the curtains, and pointed triumphantly to the
whiteness of the sheets.

"It's a very comfortable room," said she, "though not the best in the
house; which belong of right to your Lordship's worship; but our
best room has two beds, and Mr. Corporal is in that, locked and
double-locked, with his three tipsy recruits. But your honour will find
this here bed comfortable and well-aired; I've slept in it myself this
eighteen years."

"What, my good woman, you are going to sit up, eh? It's cruel hard on
you, madam."

"Sit up, my Lord? bless you, no! I shall have half of our Cat's bed; as
I always do when there's company." And with this Mrs. Score curtseyed
and retired.

Very early the next morning the active landlady and her bustling
attendant had prepared the ale and bacon for the Corporal and his three
converts, and had set a nice white cloth for the Captain's breakfast.
The young blacksmith did not eat with much satisfaction; but Mr. Bullock
and his friend betrayed no sign of discontent, except such as may be
consequent upon an evening's carouse. They walked very contentedly to be
registered before Doctor Dobbs, who was also justice of the peace, and
went in search of their slender bundles, and took leave of their few
acquaintances without much regret: for the gentlemen had been bred in
the workhouse, and had not, therefore, a large circle of friends.

It wanted only an hour of noon, and the noble Count had not descended.
The men were waiting for him, and spent much of the Queen's money
(earned by the sale of their bodies overnight) while thus expecting him.
Perhaps Mrs. Catherine expected him too, for she had offered many times
to run up--with my Lord's boots--with the hot water--to show Mr. Brock
the way; who sometimes condescended to officiate as barber. But on all
these occasions Mrs. Score had prevented her; not scolding, but with
much gentleness and smiling. At last, more gentle and smiling than ever,
she came downstairs and said, "Catherine darling, his honour the Count
is mighty hungry this morning, and vows he could pick the wing of a
fowl. Run down, child, to Farmer Brigg's and get one: pluck it
before you bring it, you know, and we will make his Lordship a pretty
breakfast."

Catherine took up her basket, and away she went by the back-yard,
through the stables. There she heard the little horse-boy whistling and
hissing after the manner of horseboys; and there she learned that Mrs.
Score had been inventing an ingenious story to have her out of the way.
The ostler said he was just going to lead the two horses round to the
door. The Corporal had been, and they were about to start on the instant
for Stratford.

The fact was that Count Gustavus Adolphus, far from wishing to pick the
wing of a fowl, had risen with a horror and loathing for everything in
the shape of food, and for any liquor stronger than small beer. Of this
he had drunk a cup, and said he should ride immediately to Stratford;
and when, on ordering his horses, he had asked politely of the landlady
"why the d---- SHE always came up, and why she did not send the girl,"
Mrs. Score informed the Count that her Catherine was gone out for a walk
along with the young man to whom she was to be married, and would not
be visible that day. On hearing this the Captain ordered his horses
that moment, and abused the wine, the bed, the house, the landlady, and
everything connected with the "Bugle Inn."

Out the horses came: the little boys of the village gathered round; the
recruits, with bunches of ribands in their beavers, appeared presently;
Corporal Brock came swaggering out, and, slapping the pleased blacksmith
on the back, bade him mount his horse; while the boys hurrah'd. Then the
Captain came out, gloomy and majestic; to him Mr. Brock made a military
salute, which clumsily, and with much grinning, the recruits imitated.
"I shall walk on with these brave fellows, your honour, and meet you at
Stratford," said the Corporal. "Good," said the Captain, as he
mounted. The landlady curtseyed; the children hurrah'd more; the little
horse-boy, who held the bridle with one hand and the stirrup with the
other, and expected a crown-piece from such a noble gentleman, got only
a kick and a curse, as Count von Galgenstein shouted, "D----- you all,
get out of the way!" and galloped off; and John Hayes, who had been
sneaking about the inn all the morning, felt a weight off his heart when
he saw the Captain ride off alone.

O foolish Mrs. Score! O dolt of a John Hayes! If the landlady had
allowed the Captain and the maid to have their way, and meet but for a
minute before recruits, sergeant, and all, it is probable that no
harm would have been done, and that this history would never have been
written.

When Count von Galgenstein had ridden half a mile on the Stratford road,
looking as black and dismal as Napoleon galloping from the romantic
village of Waterloo, he espied, a few score yards onwards, at the
turn of the road, a certain object which caused him to check his horse
suddenly, brought a tingling red into his cheeks, and made his heart to
go thump--thump! against his side. A young lass was sauntering slowly
along the footpath, with a basket swinging from one hand, and a bunch of
hedge-flowers in the other. She stopped once or twice to add a fresh one
to her nosegay, and might have seen him, the Captain thought; but
no, she never looked directly towards him, and still walked on. Sweet
innocent! she was singing as if none were near; her voice went soaring
up to the clear sky, and the Captain put his horse on the grass, that
the sound of the hoofs might not disturb the music.

     "When the kine had given a pailful,
        And the sheep came bleating home,
      Poll, who knew it would be healthful,
        Went a-walking out with Tom.
      Hand in hand, sir, on the land, sir,
        As they walked to and fro,
      Tom made jolly love to Polly,
        But was answered no, no, no."

The Captain had put his horse on the grass, that the sound of his hoofs
might not disturb the music; and now he pushed its head on to the bank,
where straightway "George of Denmark" began chewing of such a salad
as grew there. And now the Captain slid off stealthily; and smiling
comically, and hitching up his great jack-boots, and moving forward with
a jerking tiptoe step, he, just as she was trilling the last o-o-o
of the last no in the above poem of Tom D'Urfey, came up to her, and
touching her lightly on the waist, said,

"My dear, your very humble servant."

Mrs. Catherine (you know you have found her out long ago!) gave a scream
and a start, and would have turned pale if she could. As it was, she
only shook all over, and said,

"Oh, sir, how you DID frighten me!"

"Frighten you, my rosebud! why, run me through, I'd die rather than
frighten you. Gad, child, tell me now, am I so VERY frightful?"

"Oh no, your honour, I didn't mean that; only I wasn't thinking to meet
you here, or that you would ride so early at all: for, if you please,
sir, I was going to fetch a chicken for your Lordship's breakfast, as
my mistress said you would like one; and I thought, instead of going to
Farmer Brigg's, down Birmingham way, as she told me, I'd go to Farmer
Bird's, where the chickens is better, sir,--my Lord, I mean."

"Said I'd like a chicken for breakfast, the old cat! why, I told her
I would not eat a morsel to save me--I was so dru--I mean I ate such a
good supper last night--and I bade her to send me a pot of small beer,
and to tell you to bring it; and the wretch said you were gone out with
your sweetheart--"

"What! John Hayes, the creature? Oh, what a naughty story-telling
woman!"

"--You had walked out with your sweetheart, and I was not to see you
any more; and I was mad with rage, and ready to kill myself; I was, my
dear."

"Oh, sir! pray, PRAY don't."

"For your sake, my sweet angel?"

"Yes, for my sake, if such a poor girl as me can persuade noble
gentlemen."

"Well, then, for YOUR sake, I won't; no, I'll live; but why live? Hell
and fury, if I do live I'm miserable without you; I am,--you know I
am,--you adorable, beautiful, cruel, wicked Catherine!"

Catherine's reply to this was "La, bless me! I do believe your horse is
running away." And so he was! for having finished his meal in the hedge,
he first looked towards his master and paused, as it were, irresolutely;
then, by a sudden impulse, flinging up his tail and his hind legs, he
scampered down the road.

Mrs. Hall ran lightly after the horse, and the Captain after Mrs. Hall;
and the horse ran quicker and quicker every moment, and might have led
them a long chase,--when lo! debouching from a twist in the road, came
the detachment of cavalry and infantry under Mr. Brock. The moment
he was out of sight of the village, that gentleman had desired the
blacksmith to dismount, and had himself jumped into the saddle,
maintaining the subordination of his army by drawing a pistol and
swearing that he would blow out the brains of any person who attempted
to run. When the Captain's horse came near the detachment he paused, and
suffered himself to be caught by Tummas Bullock, who held him until the
owner and Mrs. Catherine came up.

Mr. Bullock looked comically grave when he saw the pair; but the
Corporal graciously saluted Mrs. Catherine, and said it was a fine day
for walking.

"La, sir, and so it is," said she, panting in a very pretty and
distressing way, "but not for RUNNING. I do protest--ha!--and vow that
I really can scarcely stand. I'm so tired of running after that naughty
naughty horse!"

"How do, Cattern?" said Thomas. "Zee, I be going a zouldiering because
thee wouldn't have me." And here Mr. Bullock grinned. Mrs. Catherine
made no sort of reply, but protested once more she should die of
running. If the truth were told, she was somewhat vexed at the arrival
of the Corporal's detachment, and had had very serious thoughts of
finding herself quite tired just as he came in sight.

A sudden thought brought a smile of bright satisfaction in the Captain's
eyes. He mounted the horse which Tummas still held. "TIRED, Mrs
Catherine," said he, "and for my sake? By heavens! you shan't walk a
step farther. No, you shall ride back with a guard of honour! Back to
the village, gentlemen!--rightabout face! Show those fellows, Corporal,
how to rightabout face. Now, my dear, mount behind me on Snowball; he's
easy as a sedan. Put your dear little foot on the toe of my boot. There
now,--up!--jump! hurrah!"

"THAT'S not the way, Captain," shouted out Thomas, still holding on to
the rein as the horse began to move. "Thee woan't goo with him, will
thee, Catty?"

But Mrs. Catherine, though she turned away her head, never let go her
hold round the Captain's waist; and he, swearing a dreadful oath at
Thomas, struck him across the face and hands with his riding whip. The
poor fellow, who at the first cut still held on to the rein, dropped it
at the second, and as the pair galloped off, sat down on the roadside
and fairly began to weep.

"MARCH, you dog!" shouted out the Corporal a minute after. And so he
did: and when next he saw Mrs. Catherine she WAS the Captain's lady sure
enough, and wore a grey hat, with a blue feather, and red riding-coat
trimmed with silverlace. But Thomas was then on a bare-backed horse,
which Corporal Brock was flanking round a ring, and he was so occupied
looking between his horse's ears that he had no time to cry then, and at
length got the better of his attachment.

                    *****

This being a good opportunity for closing Chapter I, we ought, perhaps,
to make some apologies to the public for introducing them to characters
that are so utterly worthless; as we confess all our heroes, with the
exception of Mr. Bullock, to be. In this we have consulted nature and
history, rather than the prevailing taste and the general manner of
authors. The amusing novel of "Ernest Maltravers," for instance, opens
with a seduction; but then it is performed by people of the strictest
virtue on both sides: and there is so much religion and philosophy in
the heart of the seducer, so much tender innocence in the soul of the
seduced, that--bless the little dears!--their very peccadilloes make
one interested in them; and their naughtiness becomes quite sacred, so
deliciously is it described. Now, if we ARE to be interested by rascally
actions, let us have them with plain faces, and let them be performed,
not by virtuous philosophers, but by rascals. Another clever class of
novelists adopt the contrary system, and create interest by making their
rascals perform virtuous actions. Against these popular plans we here
solemnly appeal. We say, let your rogues in novels act like rogues,
and your honest men like honest men; don't let us have any juggling
and thimble-rigging with virtue and vice, so that, at the end of three
volumes, the bewildered reader shall not know which is which; don't let
us find ourselves kindling at the generous qualities of thieves, and
sympathising with the rascalities of noble hearts. For our own part, we
know what the public likes, and have chosen rogues for our characters,
and have taken a story from the "Newgate Calendar," which we hope to
follow out to edification. Among the rogues, at least, we will have
nothing that shall be mistaken for virtues. And if the British public
(after calling for three or four editions) shall give up, not only our
rascals, but the rascals of all other authors, we shall be content:--we
shall apply to Government for a pension, and think that our duty is
done.



CHAPTER II. IN WHICH ARE DEPICTED THE PLEASURES OF A SENTIMENTAL
ATTACHMENT.


It will not be necessary, for the purpose of this history, to follow out
very closely all the adventures which occurred to Mrs. Catherine from
the period when she quitted the "Bugle" and became the Captain's lady;
for although it would be just as easy to show as not, that the young
woman, by following the man of her heart, had only yielded to an
innocent impulse, and by remaining with him for a certain period, had
proved the depth and strength of her affection for him,--although we
might make very tender and eloquent apologies for the error of both
parties, the reader might possibly be disgusted at such descriptions
and such arguments: which, besides, are already done to his hand in the
novel of "Ernest Maltravers" before mentioned.

From the gentleman's manner towards Mrs. Catherine, and from his
brilliant and immediate success, the reader will doubtless have
concluded, in the first place, that Gustavus Adolphus had not a very
violent affection for Mrs. Cat; in the second place, that he was a
professional lady-killer, and therefore likely at some period to resume
his profession; thirdly, and to conclude, that a connection so begun,
must, in the nature of things, be likely to end speedily.

And so, to do the Count justice, it would, if he had been allowed to
follow his own inclination entirely; for (as many young gentlemen will,
and yet no praise to them) in about a week he began to be indifferent,
in a month to be weary, in two months to be angry, in three to proceed
to blows and curses; and, in short, to repent most bitterly the hour
when he had ever been induced to present Mrs. Catherine the toe of his
boot, for the purpose of lifting her on to his horse.

"Egad!" said he to the Corporal one day, when confiding his griefs to
Mr. Brock, "I wish my toe had been cut off before ever it served as a
ladder to this little vixen."

"Or perhaps your honour would wish to kick her downstairs with it?"
delicately suggested Mr. Brock.

"Kick her! why, the wench would hold so fast by the banisters that I
COULD not kick her down, Mr. Brock. To tell you a bit of a secret, I
HAVE tried as much--not to kick her--no, no, not kick her, certainly:
that's ungentlemanly--but to INDUCE her to go back to that cursed
pot-house where we fell in with her. I have given her many hints--"

"Oh, yes, I saw your honour give her one yesterday--with a mug of beer.
By the laws, as the ale run all down her face, and she clutched a knife
to run at you, I don't think I ever saw such a she-devil! That woman
will do for your honour some day, if you provoke her."

"Do for ME? No, hang it, Mr. Brock, never! She loves every hair of my
head, sir: she worships me, Corporal. Egad, yes! she worships me; and
would much sooner apply a knife to her own weasand than scratch my
little finger!"

"I think she does," said Mr. Brock.

"I'm sure of it," said the Captain. "Women, look you, are like dogs,
they like to be ill-treated: they like it, sir; I know they do. I never
had anything to do with a woman in my life but I ill-treated her, and
she liked me the better."

"Mrs. Hall ought to be VERY fond of you then, sure enough!" said Mr.
Corporal.

"Very fond;--ha, ha! Corporal, you wag you--and so she IS very fond.
Yesterday, after the knife-and-beer scene--no wonder I threw the liquor
in her face: it was so dev'lish flat that no gentleman could drink it:
and I told her never to draw it till dinner-time--"

"Oh, it was enough to put an angel in a fury!" said Brock.

"Well, yesterday, after the knife business, when you had got the carver
out of her hand, off she flings to her bedroom, will not eat a bit of
dinner forsooth, and remains locked up for a couple of hours. At
two o'clock afternoon (I was over a tankard), out comes the little
she-devil, her face pale, her eyes bleared, and the tip of her nose as
red as fire with sniffling and weeping. Making for my hand, 'Max,' says
she, 'will you forgive me?' 'What!' says I. 'Forgive a murderess?'
says I. 'No, curse me, never!' 'Your cruelty will kill me,' sobbed she.
'Cruelty be hanged!' says I; 'didn't you draw that beer an hour before
dinner?' She could say nothing to THIS, you know, and I swore that every
time she did so, I would fling it into her face again. Whereupon
back she flounced to her chamber, where she wept and stormed until
night-time."

"When you forgave her?"

"I DID forgive her, that's positive. You see I had supped at the 'Rose'
along with Tom Trippet and half-a-dozen pretty fellows; and I had eased
a great fat-headed Warwickshire landjunker--what d'ye call him?--squire,
of forty pieces; and I'm dev'lish good-humoured when I've won, and so
Cat and I made it up: but I've taught her never to bring me stale beer
again--ha, ha!"

This conversation will explain, a great deal better than any description
of ours, however eloquent, the state of things as between Count
Maximilian and Mrs. Catherine, and the feelings which they entertained
for each other. The woman loved him, that was the fact. And, as we have
shown in the previous chapter how John Hayes, a mean-spirited fellow
as ever breathed, in respect of all other passions a pigmy, was in the
passion of love a giant, and followed Mrs. Catherine with a furious
longing which might seem at the first to be foreign to his nature; in
the like manner, and playing at cross-purposes, Mrs. Hall had become
smitten of the Captain; and, as he said truly, only liked him the better
for the brutality which she received at his hands. For it is my opinion,
madam, that love is a bodily infirmity, from which humankind can no more
escape than from small-pox; and which attacks every one of us, from the
first duke in the Peerage down to Jack Ketch inclusive: which has no
respect for rank, virtue, or roguery in man, but sets each in his turn
in a fever; which breaks out the deuce knows how or why, and, raging its
appointed time, fills each individual of the one sex with a blind
fury and longing for some one of the other (who may be pure, gentle,
blue-eyed, beautiful, and good; or vile, shrewish, squinting,
hunchbacked, and hideous, according to circumstances and luck); which
dies away, perhaps, in the natural course, if left to have its way,
but which contradiction causes to rage more furiously than ever. Is not
history, from the Trojan war upwards and downwards, full of instances of
such strange inexplicable passions? Was not Helen, by the most moderate
calculation, ninety years of age when she went off with His Royal
Highness Prince Paris of Troy? Was not Madame La Valliere ill-made,
blear-eyed, tallow-complexioned, scraggy, and with hair like tow? Was
not Wilkes the ugliest, charmingest, most successful man in the world?
Such instances might be carried out so as to fill a volume; but cui
bono? Love is fate, and not will; its origin not to be explained, its
progress irresistible: and the best proof of this may be had at Bow
Street any day, where if you ask any officer of the establishment how
they take most thieves, he will tell you at the houses of the women.
They must see the dear creatures though they hang for it; they will
love, though they have their necks in the halter. And with regard to the
other position, that ill-usage on the part of the man does not destroy
the affection of the woman, have we not numberless police-reports,
showing how, when a bystander would beat a husband for beating his wife,
man and wife fall together on the interloper and punish him for his
meddling?

These points, then, being settled to the satisfaction of all parties,
the reader will not be disposed to question the assertion that Mrs. Hall
had a real affection for the gallant Count, and grew, as Mr. Brock was
pleased to say, like a beefsteak, more tender as she was thumped. Poor
thing, poor thing! his flashy airs and smart looks had overcome her in
a single hour; and no more is wanted to plunge into love over head and
ears; no more is wanted to make a first love with--and a woman's first
love lasts FOR EVER (a man's twenty-fourth or twenty-fifth is perhaps
the best): you can't kill it, do what you will; it takes root, and lives
and even grows, never mind what the soil may be in which it is planted,
or the bitter weather it must bear--often as one has seen a wallflower
grow--out of a stone.

In the first weeks of their union, the Count had at least been liberal
to her: she had a horse and fine clothes, and received abroad some of
those flattering attentions which she held at such high price. He had,
however, some ill-luck at play, or had been forced to pay some bills, or
had some other satisfactory reason for being poor, and his establishment
was very speedily diminished. He argued that, as Mrs. Catherine had
been accustomed to wait on others all her life, she might now wait upon
herself and him; and when the incident of the beer arose, she had
been for some time employed as the Count's housekeeper, with unlimited
superintendence over his comfort, his cellar, his linen, and such
matters as bachelors are delighted to make over to active female hands.
To do the poor wretch justice, she actually kept the man's menage in the
best order; nor was there any point of extravagance with which she could
be charged, except a little extravagance of dress displayed on the
very few occasions when he condescended to walk abroad with her, and
extravagance of language and passion in the frequent quarrels they
had together. Perhaps in such a connection as subsisted between this
precious couple, these faults are inevitable on the part of the woman.
She must be silly and vain, and will pretty surely therefore be fond of
dress; and she must, disguise it as she will, be perpetually miserable
and brooding over her fall, which will cause her to be violent and
quarrelsome.

Such, at least, was Mrs. Hall; and very early did the poor vain
misguided wretch begin to reap what she had sown.

For a man, remorse under these circumstances is perhaps uncommon.
No stigma affixes on HIM for betraying a woman; no bitter pangs of
mortified vanity; no insulting looks of superiority from his neighbour,
and no sentence of contemptuous banishment is read against him; these
all fall on the tempted, and not on the tempter, who is permitted to
go free. The chief thing that a man learns after having successfully
practised on a woman is to despise the poor wretch whom he has won.
The game, in fact, and the glory, such as it is, is all his, and the
punishment alone falls upon her. Consider this, ladies, when charming
young gentlemen come to woo you with soft speeches. You have nothing to
win, except wretchedness, and scorn, and desertion. Consider this, and
be thankful to your Solomons for telling it.

It came to pass, then, that the Count had come to have a perfect
contempt and indifference for Mrs. Hall;--how should he not for a young
person who had given herself up to him so easily?--and would have been
quite glad of any opportunity of parting with her. But there was a
certain lingering shame about the man, which prevented him from saying
at once and abruptly, "Go!" and the poor thing did not choose to take
such hints as fell out in the course of their conversation and quarrels.
And so they kept on together, he treating her with simple insult, and
she hanging on desperately, by whatever feeble twig she could find, to
the rock beyond which all was naught, or death, to her.

Well, after the night with Tom Trippet and the pretty fellows at the
"Rose," to which we have heard the Count allude in the conversation
just recorded, Fortune smiled on him a good deal; for the Warwickshire
squire, who had lost forty pieces on that occasion, insisted on having
his revenge the night after; when, strange to say, a hundred and fifty
more found their way into the pouch of his Excellency the Count. Such a
sum as this quite set the young nobleman afloat again, and brought back
a pleasing equanimity to his mind, which had been a good deal disturbed
in the former difficult circumstances; and in this, for a little and to
a certain extent, poor Cat had the happiness to share. He did not alter
the style of his establishment, which consisted, as before, of herself
and a small person who acted as scourer, kitchen-wench, and scullion;
Mrs. Catherine always putting her hand to the principal pieces of the
dinner; but he treated his mistress with tolerable good-humour; or, to
speak more correctly, with such bearable brutality as might be expected
from a man like him to a woman in her condition. Besides, a certain
event was about to take place, which not unusually occurs in
circumstances of this nature, and Mrs. Catherine was expecting soon to
lie in.

The Captain, distrusting naturally the strength of his own paternal
feelings, had kindly endeavoured to provide a parent for the coming
infant; and to this end had opened a negotiation with our friend Mr.
Thomas Bullock, declaring that Mrs. Cat should have a fortune of twenty
guineas, and reminding Tummas of his ancient flame for her: but Mr.
Tummas, when this proposition was made to him, declined it, with many
oaths, and vowed that he was perfectly satisfied with his present
bachelor condition. In this dilemma, Mr. Brock stepped forward, who
declared himself very ready to accept Mrs. Catherine and her fortune:
and might possibly have become the possessor of both, had not Mrs. Cat,
the moment she heard of the proposed arrangement, with fire in her eyes,
and rage--oh, how bitter!--in her heart, prevented the success of the
measure by proceeding incontinently to the first justice of the peace,
and there swearing before his worship who was the father of the coming
child.

This proceeding, which she had expected would cause not a little
indignation on the part of her lord and master, was received by him,
strangely enough, with considerable good-humour: he swore that the wench
had served him a good trick, and was rather amused at the anger, the
outbreak of fierce rage and contumely, and the wretched wretched tears
of heartsick desperation, which followed her announcement of this step
to him. For Mr. Brock, she repelled his offer with scorn and loathing,
and treated the notion of a union with Mr. Bullock with yet fiercer
contempt. Marry him indeed! a workhouse pauper carrying a brown-bess!
She would have died sooner, she said, or robbed on the highway. And so,
to do her justice, she would: for the little minx was one of the vainest
creatures in existence, and vanity (as I presume everybody knows)
becomes THE principle in certain women's hearts--their moral spectacles,
their conscience, their meat and drink, their only rule of right and
wrong.

As for Mr. Tummas, he, as we have seen, was quite unfriendly to the
proposition as she could be; and the Corporal, with a good deal of
comical gravity, vowed that, as he could not be satisfied in his
dearest wishes, he would take to drinking for a consolation: which he
straightway did.

"Come, Tummas," said he to Mr. Bullock "since we CAN'T have the girl
of our hearts, why, hang it, Tummas, let's drink her health!" To which
Bullock had no objection. And so strongly did the disappointment weigh
upon honest Corporal Brock, that even when, after unheard-of quantities
of beer, he could scarcely utter a word, he was seen absolutely to weep,
and, in accents almost unintelligible, to curse his confounded ill-luck
at being deprived, not of a wife, but of a child: he wanted one so, he
said, to comfort him in his old age.

The time of Mrs. Catherine's couche drew near, arrived, and was gone
through safely. She presented to the world a chopping boy, who might
use, if he liked, the Galgenstein arms with a bar-sinister; and in
her new cares and duties had not so many opportunities as usual of
quarrelling with the Count: who, perhaps, respected her situation, or,
at least, was so properly aware of the necessity of quiet to her, that
he absented himself from home morning, noon, and night.

The Captain had, it must be confessed, turned these continued absences
to a considerable worldly profit, for he played incessantly; and, since
his first victory over the Warwickshire Squire, Fortune had been so
favourable to him, that he had at various intervals amassed a sum of
nearly a thousand pounds, which he used to bring home as he won; and
which he deposited in a strong iron chest, cunningly screwed down by
himself under his own bed. This Mrs. Catherine regularly made, and the
treasure underneath it could be no secret to her. However, the noble
Count kept the key, and bound her by many solemn oaths (that he
discharged at her himself) not to reveal to any other person the
existence of the chest and its contents.

But it is not in a woman's nature to keep such secrets; and the Captain,
who left her for days and days, did not reflect that she would seek for
confidants elsewhere. For want of a female companion, she was compelled
to bestow her sympathies upon Mr. Brock; who, as the Count's
corporal, was much in his lodgings, and who did manage to survive the
disappointment which he had experienced by Mrs. Catherine's refusal of
him.

About two months after the infant's birth, the Captain, who was annoyed
by its squalling, put it abroad to nurse, and dismissed its attendant.
Mrs. Catherine now resumed her household duties, and was, as before,
at once mistress and servant of the establishment. As such, she had the
keys of the beer, and was pretty sure of the attentions of the Corporal;
who became, as we have said, in the Count's absence, his lady's chief
friend and companion. After the manner of ladies, she very speedily
confided to him all her domestic secrets; the causes of her former
discontent; the Count's ill-treatment of her; the wicked names he called
her; the prices that all her gowns had cost her; how he beat her; how
much money he won and lost at play; how she had once pawned a coat for
him; how he had four new ones, laced, and paid for; what was the best
way of cleaning and keeping gold-lace, of making cherry-brandy, pickling
salmon, etc., etc. Her confidences upon all these subjects used to
follow each other in rapid succession; and Mr. Brock became, ere long,
quite as well acquainted with the Captain's history for the last year as
the Count himself:--for he was careless, and forgot things; women
never do. They chronicle all the lover's small actions, his words, his
headaches, the dresses he has worn, the things he has liked for dinner
on certain days;--all which circumstances commonly are expunged from the
male brain immediately after they have occurred, but remain fixed with
the female.

To Brock, then, and to Brock only (for she knew no other soul), Mrs. Cat
breathed, in strictest confidence, the history of the Count's winnings,
and his way of disposing of them; how he kept his money screwed down in
an iron chest in their room; and a very lucky fellow did Brock consider
his officer for having such a large sum. He and Cat looked at the chest:
it was small, but mighty strong, sure enough, and would defy picklocks
and thieves. Well, if any man deserved money, the Captain did ("though
he might buy me a few yards of that lace I love so," interrupted
Cat),--if any man deserved money, he did, for he spent it like a prince,
and his hand was always in his pocket.

It must now be stated that Monsieur de Galgenstein had, during Cat's
seclusion, cast his eyes upon a young lady of good fortune, who
frequented the Assembly at Birmingham, and who was not a little smitten
by his title and person. The "four new coats, laced, and paid for," as
Cat said, had been purchased, most probably, by his Excellency for the
purpose of dazzling the heiress; and he and the coats had succeeded so
far as to win from the young woman an actual profession of love, and a
promise of marriage provided Pa would consent. This was obtained,--for
Pa was a tradesman; and I suppose every one of my readers has remarked
how great an effect a title has on the lower classes. Yes, thank Heaven!
there is about a freeborn Briton a cringing baseness, and lickspittle
awe of rank, which does not exist under any tyranny in Europe, and is
only to be found here and in America.

All these negotiations had been going on quite unknown to Cat; and, as
the Captain had determined, before two months were out, to fling that
young woman on the pave, he was kind to her in the meanwhile: people
always are when they are swindling you, or meditating an injury against
you.

The poor girl had much too high an opinion of her own charms to suspect
that the Count could be unfaithful to them, and had no notion of the
plot that was formed against her. But Mr. Brock had: for he had seen
many times a gilt coach with a pair of fat white horses ambling in
the neighbourhood of the town, and the Captain on his black steed
caracolling majestically by its side; and he had remarked a fat, pudgy,
pale-haired woman treading heavily down the stairs of the Assembly,
leaning on the Captain's arm: all these Mr. Brock had seen, not without
reflection. Indeed, the Count one day, in great good-humour, had slapped
him on the shoulder and told him that he was about speedily to purchase
a regiment; when, by his great gods, Mr. Brock should have a pair of
colours. Perhaps this promise occasioned his silence to Mrs. Catherine
hitherto; perhaps he never would have peached at all; and perhaps,
therefore, this history would never have been written, but for a small
circumstance which occurred at this period.

"What can you want with that drunken old Corporal always about your
quarters?" said Mr. Trippet to the Count one day, as they sat over their
wine, in the midst of a merry company, at the Captain's rooms.

"What!" said he. "Old Brock? The old thief has been more useful to me
than many a better man. He is as brave in a row as a lion, as cunning in
intrigue as a fox; he can nose a dun at an inconceivable distance, and
scent out a pretty woman be she behind ever so many stone walls. If a
gentleman wants a good rascal now, I can recommend him. I am going to
reform, you know, and must turn him out of my service."

"And pretty Mrs. Cat?"

"Oh, curse pretty Mrs. Cat! she may go too."

"And the brat?"

"Why, you have parishes, and what not, here in England. Egad! if a
gentleman were called upon to keep all his children, there would be no
living: no, stap my vitals! Croesus couldn't stand it."

"No, indeed," said Mr. Trippet: "you are right; and when a gentleman
marries, he is bound in honour to give up such low connections as are
useful when he is a bachelor."

"Of course; and give them up I will, when the sweet Mrs. Dripping is
mine. As for the girl, you can have her, Tom Trippet, if you take a
fancy to her; and as for the Corporal, he may be handed over to my
successor in Cutts's:--for I will have a regiment to myself, that's poz;
and to take with me such a swindling, pimping, thieving, brandy-faced
rascal as this Brock will never do. Egad! he's a disgrace to the
service. As it is, I've often a mind to have the superannuated vagabond
drummed out of the corps."

Although this resume of Mr. Brock's character and accomplishments
was very just, it came perhaps with an ill grace from Count Gustavus
Adolphus Maximilian, who had profited by all his qualities, and who
certainly would never have given this opinion of them had he known that
the door of his dining-parlour was open, and that the gallant Corporal,
who was in the passage, could hear every syllable that fell from the
lips of his commanding officer. We shall not say, after the fashion
of the story-books, that Mr. Brock listened with a flashing eye and a
distended nostril; that his chest heaved tumultuously, and that his
hand fell down mechanically to his side, where it played with the brass
handle of his sword. Mr. Kean would have gone through most of these
bodily exercises had he been acting the part of a villain enraged and
disappointed like Corporal Brock; but that gentleman walked away without
any gestures of any kind, and as gently as possible. "He'll turn me out
of the regiment, will he?" says he, quite piano; and then added (con
molta espressione), "I'll do for him."

And it is to be remarked how generally, in cases of this nature,
gentlemen stick to their word.



CHAPTER III. IN WHICH A NARCOTIC IS ADMINISTERED, AND A GREAT DEAL OF
GENTEEL SOCIETY DEPICTED.


When the Corporal, who had retreated to the street-door immediately on
hearing the above conversation, returned to the Captain's lodgings
and paid his respects to Mrs. Catherine, he found that lady in high
good-humour. The Count had been with her, she said, along with a friend
of his, Mr. Trippet; had promised her twelve yards of the lace she
coveted so much; had vowed that the child should have as much more for
a cloak; and had not left her until he had sat with her for an hour,
or more, over a bowl of punch, which he made on purpose for her. Mr.
Trippet stayed too. "A mighty pleasant man," said she; "only not very
wise, and seemingly a good deal in liquor."

"A good deal indeed!" said the Corporal. "He was so tipsy just now that
he could hardly stand. He and his honour were talking to Nan Fantail in
the market-place; and she pulled Trippet's wig off, for wanting to kiss
her."

"The nasty fellow!" said Mrs. Cat, "to demean himself with such low
people as Nan Fantail, indeed! Why, upon my conscience now, Corporal, it
was but an hour ago that Mr. Trippet swore he never saw such a pair of
eyes as mine, and would like to cut the Captain's throat for the love of
me. Nan Fantail, indeed!"

"Nan's an honest girl, Madam Catherine, and was a great favourite of
the Captain's before someone else came in his way. No one can say a word
against her--not a word."

"And pray, Corporal, who ever did?" said Mrs. Cat, rather offended. "A
nasty, ugly slut! I wonder what the men can see in her?"

"She has got a smart way with her, sure enough; it's what amuses the
men, and--"

"And what? You don't mean to say that my Max is fond of her NOW?" said
Mrs. Catherine, looking very fierce.

"Oh, no; not at all: not of HER;--that is--"

"Not of HER!" screamed she. "Of whom, then?"

"Oh, psha! nonsense! Of you, my dear, to be sure; who else should he
care for? And, besides, what business is it of mine?" And herewith
the Corporal began whistling, as if he would have no more of the
conversation. But Mrs. Cat was not to be satisfied,--not she,--and
carried on her cross-questions.

"Why, look you," said the Corporal, after parrying many of these,--"Why,
look you, I'm an old fool, Catherine, and I must blab. That man has been
the best friend I ever had, and so I was quiet; but I can't keep it in
any longer,--no, hang me if I can! It's my belief he's acting like a
rascal by you: he deceives you, Catherine; he's a scoundrel, Mrs. Hall,
that's the truth on't."

Catherine prayed him to tell all he knew; and he resumed.

"He wants you off his hands; he's sick of you, and so brought here that
fool Tom Trippet, who has taken a fancy to you. He has not the courage
to turn you out of doors like a man; though indoors he can treat you
like a beast. But I'll tell you what he'll do. In a month he will go to
Coventry, or pretend to go there, on recruiting business. No such thing,
Mrs. Hall; he's going on MARRIAGE business; and he'll leave you without
a farthing, to starve or to rot, for him. It's all arranged, I tell you:
in a month, you are to be starved into becoming Tom Trippet's
mistress; and his honour is to marry rich Miss Dripping, the
twenty-thousand-pounder from London; and to purchase a regiment;--and to
get old Brock drummed out of Cutts's too," said the Corporal, under his
breath. But he might have spoken out, if he chose; for the poor young
woman had sunk on the ground in a real honest fit.

"I thought I should give it her," said Mr. Brock as he procured a glass
of water; and, lifting her on to a sofa, sprinkled the same over her.
"Hang it! how pretty she is."

                    *****

When Mrs. Catherine came to herself again, Brock's tone with her was
kind, and almost feeling. Nor did the poor wench herself indulge in
any subsequent shiverings and hysterics, such as usually follow the
fainting-fits of persons of higher degree. She pressed him for further
explanations, which he gave, and to which she listened with a great deal
of calmness; nor did many tears, sobs, sighs, or exclamations of sorrow
or anger escape from her: only when the Corporal was taking his leave,
and said to her point-blank,--"Well, Mrs. Catherine, and what do you
intend to do?" she did not reply a word; but gave a look which made him
exclaim, on leaving the room,--

"By heavens! the woman means murder! I would not be the Holofernes to
lie by the side of such a Judith as that--not I!" And he went his way,
immersed in deep thought. When the Captain returned at night, she did
not speak to him; and when he swore at her for being sulky, she only
said she had a headache, and was dreadfully ill; with which excuse
Gustavus Adolphus seemed satisfied, and left her to herself.

He saw her the next morning for a moment: he was going a-shooting.

Catherine had no friend, as is usual in tragedies and romances,--no
mysterious sorceress of her acquaintance to whom she could apply for
poison,--so she went simply to the apothecaries, pretending at each that
she had a dreadful toothache, and procuring from them as much laudanum
as she thought would suit her purpose.

When she went home again she seemed almost gay. Mr. Brock complimented
her upon the alteration in her appearance; and she was enabled to
receive the Captain at his return from shooting in such a manner as made
him remark that she had got rid of her sulks of the morning, and might
sup with them, if she chose to keep her good-humour. The supper was
got ready, and the gentlemen had the punch-bowl when the cloth was
cleared,--Mrs. Catherine, with her delicate hands, preparing the liquor.

It is useless to describe the conversation that took place, or to reckon
the number of bowls that were emptied; or to tell how Mr. Trippet, who
was one of the guests, and declined to play at cards when some of the
others began, chose to remain by Mrs. Catherine's side, and make violent
love to her. All this might be told, and the account, however faithful,
would not be very pleasing. No, indeed! And here, though we are only in
the third chapter of this history, we feel almost sick of the characters
that appear in it, and the adventures which they are called upon to go
through. But how can we help ourselves? The public will hear of nothing
but rogues; and the only way in which poor authors, who must live, can
act honestly by the public and themselves, is to paint such thieves as
they are: not, dandy, poetical, rose-water thieves; but real downright
scoundrels, leading scoundrelly lives, drunken, profligate, dissolute,
low; as scoundrels will be. They don't quote Plato, like Eugene Aram; or
live like gentlemen, and sing the pleasantest ballads in the world, like
jolly Dick Turpin; or prate eternally about "to kalon,"[*] like that
precious canting Maltravers, whom we all of us have read about and
pitied; or die whitewashed saints, like poor "Biss Dadsy" in "Oliver
Twist." No, my dear madam, you and your daughters have no right to
admire and sympathise with any such persons, fictitious or real:
you ought to be made cordially to detest, scorn, loathe, abhor, and
abominate all people of this kidney. Men of genius like those whose
works we have above alluded to, have no business to make these
characters interesting or agreeable; to be feeding your morbid fancies,
or indulging their own, with such monstrous food. For our parts, young
ladies, we beg you to bottle up your tears, and not waste a single drop
of them on any one of the heroes or heroines in this history: they
are all rascals, every soul of them, and behave "as sich." Keep your
sympathy for those who deserve it: don't carry it, for preference, to
the Old Bailey, and grow maudlin over the company assembled there.

     * Anglicised version of the author's original Greek text.

Just, then, have the kindness to fancy that the conversation which took
place over the bowls of punch which Mrs. Catherine prepared, was such
as might be expected to take place where the host was a dissolute,
dare-devil, libertine captain of dragoons, the guests for the most
part of the same class, and the hostess a young woman originally from a
country alehouse, and for the present mistress to the entertainer of
the society. They talked, and they drank, and they grew tipsy; and very
little worth hearing occurred during the course of the whole evening.
Mr. Brock officiated, half as the servant, half as the companion of the
society. Mr. Thomas Trippet made violent love to Mrs. Catherine, while
her lord and master was playing at dice with the other gentlemen: and on
this night, strange to say, the Captain's fortune seemed to desert him.
The Warwickshire Squire, from whom he had won so much, had an amazing
run of good luck. The Captain called perpetually for more drink, and
higher stakes, and lost almost every throw. Three hundred, four hundred,
six hundred--all his winnings of the previous months were swallowed up
in the course of a few hours. The Corporal looked on; and, to do him
justice, seemed very grave as, sum by sum, the Squire scored down the
Count's losses on the paper before him.

Most of the company had taken their hats and staggered off. The Squire
and Mr. Trippet were the only two that remained, the latter still
lingering by Mrs. Catherine's sofa and table; and as she, as we have
stated, had been employed all the evening in mixing the liquor for
the gamesters, he was at the headquarters of love and drink, and had
swallowed so much of each as hardly to be able to speak.

The dice went rattling on; the candles were burning dim, with great long
wicks. Mr. Trippet could hardly see the Captain, and thought, as far as
his muzzy reason would let him, that the Captain could not see him:
so he rose from his chair as well as he could, and fell down on Mrs.
Catherine's sofa. His eyes were fixed, his face was pale, his jaw hung
down; and he flung out his arms and said, in a maudlin voice, "Oh, you
byoo-oo-oo-tifile Cathrine, I must have a kick-kick-iss."

"Beast!" said Mrs. Catherine, and pushed him away. The drunken wretch
fell off the sofa, and on to the floor, where he stayed; and, after
snorting out some unintelligible sounds, went to sleep.

The dice went rattling on; the candles were burning dim, with great long
wicks.

"Seven's the main," cried the Count. "Four. Three to two against the
caster."

"Ponies," said the Warwickshire Squire.

Rattle, rattle, rattle, rattle, clatter, NINE. Clap, clap, clap, clap,
ELEVEN. Clutter, clutter, clutter, clutter: "Seven it is," says the
Warwickshire Squire. "That makes eight hundred, Count."

"One throw for two hundred," said the Count. "But stop! Cat, give us
some more punch."

Mrs. Cat came forward; she looked a little pale, and her hand trembled
somewhat. "Here is the punch, Max," said she. It was steaming hot, in a
large glass. "Don't drink it all," said she; "leave me some."

"How dark it is!" said the Count, eyeing it.

"It's the brandy," said Cat.

"Well, here goes! Squire, curse you! here's your health, and bad luck
to you!" and he gulped off more than half the liquor at a draught. But
presently he put down the glass and cried, "What infernal poison is
this, Cat?"

"Poison!" said she. "It's no poison. Give me the glass." And she pledged
Max, and drank a little of it. "'Tis good punch, Max, and of my brewing;
I don't think you will ever get any better." And she went back to the
sofa again, and sat down, and looked at the players.

Mr. Brock looked at her white face and fixed eyes with a grim kind of
curiosity. The Count sputtered, and cursed the horrid taste of the punch
still; but he presently took the box, and made his threatened throw.

As before, the Squire beat him; and having booked his winnings, rose
from table as well as he might and besought to lead him downstairs;
which Mr. Brock did.

Liquor had evidently stupefied the Count: he sat with his head between
his hands, muttering wildly about ill-luck, seven's the main, bad punch,
and so on. The street-door banged to; and the steps of Brock and the
Squire were heard, until they could be heard no more.

"Max," said she; but he did not answer. "Max," said she again, laying
her hand on his shoulder.

"Curse you," said that gentleman, "keep off, and don't be laying your
paws upon me. Go to bed, you jade, or to ----, for what I care; and give me
first some more punch--a gallon more punch, do you hear?"

The gentleman, by the curses at the commencement of this little speech,
and the request contained at the end of it, showed that his losses vexed
him, and that he was anxious to forget them temporarily.

"Oh, Max!" whimpered Mrs. Cat, "you--don't--want any more punch?"

"Don't! Shan't I be drunk in my own house, you cursed whimpering jade,
you? Get out!" and with this the Captain proceeded to administer a blow
upon Mrs. Catherine's cheek.

Contrary to her custom, she did not avenge it, or seek to do so, as
on the many former occasions when disputes of this nature had arisen
between the Count and her; but now Mrs. Catherine fell on her knees and,
clasping her hands and looking pitifully in the Count's face, cried,
"Oh, Count, forgive me, forgive me!"

"Forgive you! What for? Because I slapped your face? Ha, ha! I'll
forgive you again, if you don't mind."

"Oh, no, no, no!" said she, wringing her hands. "It isn't that. Max,
dear Max, will you forgive me? It isn't the blow--I don't mind that;
it's--"

"It's what, you--maudlin fool?"

"IT'S THE PUNCH!"

The Count, who was more than half seas over, here assumed an air of much
tipsy gravity. "The punch! No, I never will forgive you that last glass
of punch. Of all the foul, beastly drinks I ever tasted, that was the
worst. No, I never will forgive you that punch."

"Oh, it isn't that, it isn't that!" said she.

"I tell you it is that,--you! That punch, I say that punch was no better
than paw--aw-oison." And here the Count's head sank back, and he fell to
snore.

"IT WAS POISON!" said she.

"WHAT!" screamed he, waking up at once, and spurning her away from him.
"What, you infernal murderess, have you killed me?"

"Oh, Max!--don't kill me, Max! It was laudanum--indeed it was. You were
going to be married, and I was furious, and I went and got--"

"Hold your tongue, you fiend," roared out the Count; and with more
presence of mind than politeness, he flung the remainder of the liquor
(and, indeed, the glass with it) at the head of Mrs. Catherine. But the
poisoned chalice missed its mark, and fell right on the nose of Mr. Tom
Trippet, who was left asleep and unobserved under the table.

Bleeding, staggering, swearing, indeed a ghastly sight, up sprang Mr.
Trippet, and drew his rapier. "Come on," says he; "never say die! What's
the row? I'm ready for a dozen of you." And he made many blind and
furious passes about the room.

"Curse you, we'll die together!" shouted the Count, as he too pulled out
his toledo, and sprang at Mrs. Catherine.

"Help! murder! thieves!" shrieked she. "Save me, Mr. Trippet, save me!"
and she placed that gentleman between herself and the Count, and then
made for the door of the bedroom, and gained it, and bolted it.

"Out of the way, Trippet," roared the Count--"out of the way, you
drunken beast! I'll murder her, I will--I'll have the devil's life." And
here he gave a swinging cut at Mr. Trippet's sword: it sent the weapon
whirling clean out of his hand, and through a window into the street.

"Take my life, then," said Mr. Trippet: "I'm drunk, but I'm a man, and,
damme! will never say die."

"I don't want your life, you stupid fool. Hark you, Trippet, wake and
be sober, if you can. That woman has heard of my marriage with Miss
Dripping."

"Twenty thousand pound," ejaculated Trippet.

"She has been jealous, I tell you, and POISONED us. She has put laudanum
into the punch."

"What, in MY punch?" said Trippet, growing quite sober and losing his
courage. "O Lord! O Lord!"

"Don't stand howling there, but run for a doctor; 'tis our only chance."
And away ran Mr. Trippet, as if the deuce were at his heels.

The Count had forgotten his murderous intentions regarding his mistress,
or had deferred them at least, under the consciousness of his own
pressing danger. And it must be said, in the praise of a man who had
fought for and against Marlborough and Tallard, that his courage in this
trying and novel predicament never for a moment deserted him, but that
he showed the greatest daring, as well as ingenuity, in meeting and
averting the danger. He flew to the sideboard, where were the relics of
a supper, and seizing the mustard and salt pots, and a bottle of oil,
he emptied them all into a jug, into which he further poured a vast
quantity of hot water. This pleasing mixture he then, without a moment's
hesitation, placed to his lips, and swallowed as much of it as nature
would allow him. But when he had imbibed about a quart, the anticipated
effect was produced, and he was enabled, by the power of this ingenious
extemporaneous emetic, to get rid of much of the poison which Mrs.
Catherine had administered to him.

He was employed in these efforts when the doctor entered, along with
Mr. Brock and Mr. Trippet; who was not a little pleased to hear that
the poisoned punch had not in all probability been given to him. He
was recommended to take some of the Count's mixture, as a precautionary
measure; but this he refused, and retired home, leaving the Count under
charge of the physician and his faithful corporal.

It is not necessary to say what further remedies were employed by
them to restore the Captain to health; but after some time the doctor,
pronouncing that the danger was, he hoped, averted, recommended that his
patient should be put to bed, and that somebody should sit by him; which
Brock promised to do.

"That she-devil will murder me, if you don't," gasped the poor Count.
"You must turn her out of the bedroom; or break open the door, if she
refuses to let you in."

And this step was found to be necessary; for, after shouting many
times, and in vain, Mr. Brock found a small iron bar (indeed, he had the
instrument for many days in his pocket), and forced the lock. The room
was empty, the window was open: the pretty barmaid of the "Bugle" had
fled.

"The chest," said the Count--"is the chest safe?"

The Corporal flew to the bed, under which it was screwed, and looked,
and said, "It IS safe, thank Heaven!" The window was closed. The
Captain, who was too weak to stand without help, was undressed and put
to bed. The Corporal sat down by his side; slumber stole over the eyes
of the patient; and his wakeful nurse marked with satisfaction the
progress of the beneficent restorer of health.

When the Captain awoke, as he did some time afterwards, he found, very
much to his surprise, that a gag had been placed in his mouth, and that
the Corporal was in the act of wheeling his bed to another part of the
room. He attempted to move, and gave utterance to such unintelligible
sounds as could issue through a silk handkerchief.

"If your honour stirs or cries out in the least, I will cut your
honour's throat," said the Corporal.

And then, having recourse to his iron bar (the reader will now see why
he was provided with such an implement, for he had been meditating this
coup for some days), he proceeded first to attempt to burst the lock of
the little iron chest in which the Count kept his treasure, and, failing
in this, to unscrew it from the ground; which operation he performed
satisfactorily.

"You see, Count," said he, calmly, "when rogues fall out there's the
deuce to pay. You'll have me drummed out of the regiment, will you?
I'm going to leave it of my own accord, look you, and to live like a
gentleman for the rest of my days. Schlafen Sie wohl, noble Captain: bon
repos. The Squire will be with you pretty early in the morning, to ask
for the money you owe him."

With these sarcastic observations Mr. Brock departed; not by the window,
as Mrs. Catherine had done, but by the door, quietly, and so into
the street. And when, the next morning, the doctor came to visit his
patient, he brought with him a story how, at the dead of night, Mr.
Brock had roused the ostler at the stables where the Captain's horses
were kept--had told him that Mrs. Catherine had poisoned the Count, and
had run off with a thousand pounds; and how he and all lovers of justice
ought to scour the country in pursuit of the criminal. For this end Mr.
Brock mounted the Count's best horse--that very animal on which he
had carried away Mrs. Catherine: and thus, on a single night, Count
Maximilian had lost his mistress, his money, his horse, his corporal,
and was very near losing his life.



CHAPTER IV. IN WHICH MRS. CATHERINE BECOMES AN HONEST WOMAN AGAIN.


In this woeful plight, moneyless, wifeless, horseless, corporalless,
with a gag in his mouth and a rope round his body, are we compelled to
leave the gallant Galgenstein, until his friends and the progress of
this history shall deliver him from his durance. Mr. Brock's adventures
on the Captain's horse must likewise be pretermitted; for it is our
business to follow Mrs. Catherine through the window by which she made
her escape, and among the various chances that befell her.

She had one cause to congratulate herself,--that she had not her baby at
her back; for the infant was safely housed under the care of a nurse,
to whom the Captain was answerable. Beyond this her prospects were but
dismal: no home to fly to, but a few shillings in her pocket, and a
whole heap of injuries and dark revengeful thoughts in her bosom: it was
a sad task to her to look either backwards or forwards. Whither was she
to fly? How to live? What good chance was to befriend her? There was an
angel watching over the steps of Mrs. Cat--not a good one, I think, but
one of those from that unnameable place, who have their many subjects
here on earth, and often are pleased to extricate them from worse
perplexities.

Mrs. Cat, now, had not committed murder, but as bad as murder; and as
she felt not the smallest repentance in her heart--as she had, in
the course of her life and connection with the Captain, performed and
gloried in a number of wicked coquetries, idlenesses, vanities, lies,
fits of anger, slanders, foul abuses, and what not--she was fairly bound
over to this dark angel whom we have alluded to; and he dealt with her,
and aided her, as one of his own children.

I do not mean to say that, in this strait, he appeared to her in the
likeness of a gentleman in black, and made her sign her name in blood
to a document conveying over to him her soul, in exchange for certain
conditions to be performed by him. Such diabolical bargains have always
appeared to me unworthy of the astute personage who is supposed to be
one of the parties to them; and who would scarcely be fool enough to pay
dearly for that which he can have in a few years for nothing. It is not,
then, to be supposed that a demon of darkness appeared to Mrs. Cat,
and led her into a flaming chariot harnessed by dragons, and careering
through air at the rate of a thousand leagues a minute. No such thing;
the vehicle that was sent to aid her was one of a much more vulgar
description.

The "Liverpool carryvan," then, which in the year 1706 used to perform
the journey between London and that place in ten days, left Birmingham
about an hour after Mrs. Catherine had quitted that town; and as she sat
weeping on a hillside, and plunged in bitter meditation, the lumbering,
jingling vehicle overtook her. The coachman was marching by the side of
his horses, and encouraging them to maintain their pace of two miles an
hour; the passengers had some of them left the vehicle, in order to
walk up the hill; and the carriage had arrived at the top of it, and,
meditating a brisk trot down the declivity, waited there until the
lagging passengers should arrive: when Jehu, casting a good-natured
glance upon Mrs. Catherine, asked the pretty maid whence she was come,
and whether she would like a ride in his carriage. To the latter of
which questions Mrs. Catherine replied truly yes; to the former, her
answer was that she had come from Stratford; whereas, as we very well
know, she had lately quitted Birmingham.

"Hast thee seen a woman pass this way, on a black horse, with a large
bag of goold over the saddle?" said Jehu, preparing to mount upon the
roof of his coach.

"No, indeed," said Mrs. Cat.

"Nor a trooper on another horse after her--no? Well, there be a mortal
row down Birmingham way about sich a one. She have killed, they say,
nine gentlemen at supper, and have strangled a German prince in bed.
She have robbed him of twenty thousand guineas, and have rode away on a
black horse."

"That can't be I," said Mrs. Cat, naively, "for I have but three
shillings and a groat."

"No, it can't be thee, truly, for where's your bag of goold? and,
besides, thee hast got too pretty a face to do such wicked things as to
kill nine gentlemen and strangle a German prince."

"Law, coachman," said Mrs. Cat, blushing archly-- "Law, coachman, DO you
think so?" The girl would have been pleased with a compliment even on
her way to be hanged; and the parley ended by Mrs. Catherine stepping
into the carriage, where there was room for eight people at least, and
where two or three individuals had already taken their places. For these
Mrs. Catherine had in the first place to make a story, which she did;
and a very glib one for a person of her years and education. Being asked
whither she was bound, and how she came to be alone of a morning sitting
by a road-side, she invented a neat history suitable to the occasion,
which elicited much interest from her fellow-passengers: one in
particular, a young man, who had caught a glimpse of her face under her
hood, was very tender in his attentions to her.

But whether it was that she had been too much fatigued by the
occurrences of the past day and sleepless night, or whether the little
laudanum which she had drunk a few hours previously now began to act
upon her, certain it is that Mrs. Cat now suddenly grew sick, feverish,
and extraordinarily sleepy; and in this state she continued for
many hours, to the pity of all her fellow-travellers. At length the
"carryvan" reached the inn, where horses and passengers were accustomed
to rest for a few hours, and to dine; and Mrs. Catherine was somewhat
awakened by the stir of the passengers, and the friendly voice of the
inn-servant welcoming them to dinner. The gentleman who had been smitten
by her beauty now urged her very politely to descend; which, taking the
protection of his arm, she accordingly did.

He made some very gallant speeches to her as she stepped out; and
she must have been very much occupied by them, or wrapt up in her own
thoughts, or stupefied by sleep, fever, and opium, for she did not take
any heed of the place into which she was going: which, had she done,
she would probably have preferred remaining in the coach, dinnerless and
ill. Indeed, the inn into which she was about to make her entrance was
no other than the "Bugle," from which she set forth at the commencement
of this history; and which then, as now, was kept by her relative, the
thrifty Mrs. Score. That good landlady, seeing a lady, in a smart hood
and cloak, leaning, as if faint, upon the arm of a gentleman of good
appearance, concluded them to be man and wife, and folks of quality too;
and with much discrimination, as well as sympathy, led them through the
public kitchen to her own private parlour, or bar, where she handed the
lady an armchair, and asked what she would like to drink. By this time,
and indeed at the very moment she heard her aunt's voice, Mrs. Catherine
was aware of her situation; and when her companion retired, and the
landlady, with much officiousness, insisted on removing her hood, she
was quite prepared for the screech of surprise which Mrs. Score gave on
dropping it, exclaiming, "Why, law bless us, it's our Catherine!"

"I'm very ill, and tired, aunt," said Cat; "and would give the world for
a few hours' sleep."

"A few hours and welcome, my love, and a sack-posset too. You do look
sadly tired and poorly, sure enough. Ah, Cat, Cat! you great ladies
are sad rakes, I do believe. I wager now, that with all your balls, and
carriages, and fine clothes, you are neither so happy nor so well as
when you lived with your poor old aunt, who used to love you so." And
with these gentle words, and an embrace or two, which Mrs. Catherine
wondered at, and permitted, she was conducted to that very bed which the
Count had occupied a year previously, and undressed, and laid in it, and
affectionately tucked up by her aunt, who marvelled at the fineness of
her clothes, as she removed them piece by piece; and when she saw
that in Mrs. Catherine's pocket there was only the sum of three and
fourpence, said, archly, "There was no need of money, for the Captain
took care of that."

Mrs. Cat did not undeceive her; and deceived Mrs. Score certainly
was,--for she imagined the well-dressed gentleman who led Cat from the
carriage was no other than the Count; and, as she had heard, from time
to time, exaggerated reports of the splendour of the establishment which
he kept up, she was induced to look upon her niece with the very highest
respect, and to treat her as if she were a fine lady. "And so she IS
a fine lady," Mrs. Score had said months ago, when some of these
flattering stories reached her, and she had overcome her first fury at
Catherine's elopement. "The girl was very cruel to leave me; but we must
recollect that she is as good as married to a nobleman, and must all
forget and forgive, you know."

This speech had been made to Doctor Dobbs, who was in the habit of
taking a pipe and a tankard at the "Bugle," and it had been roundly
reprobated by the worthy divine; who told Mrs. Score, that the crime
of Catherine was only the more heinous, if it had been committed from
interested motives; and protested that, were she a princess, he would
never speak to her again. Mrs. Score thought and pronounced the Doctor's
opinion to be very bigoted; indeed, she was one of those persons who
have a marvellous respect for prosperity, and a corresponding scorn for
ill-fortune. When, therefore, she returned to the public room, she
went graciously to the gentleman who had led Mrs. Catherine from the
carriage, and with a knowing curtsey welcomed him to the "Bugle;" told
him that his lady would not come to dinner, but bade her say, with her
best love to his Lordship, that the ride had fatigued her, and that she
would lie in bed for an hour or two.

This speech was received with much wonder by his Lordship; who was,
indeed, no other than a Liverpool tailor going to London to learn
fashions; but he only smiled, and did not undeceive the landlady, who
herself went off, smilingly, to bustle about dinner.

The two or three hours allotted to that meal by the liberal coachmasters
of those days passed away, and Mr. Coachman, declaring that his horses
were now rested enough, and that they had twelve miles to ride, put the
steeds to, and summoned the passengers. Mrs. Score, who had seen with
much satisfaction that her niece was really ill, and her fever more
violent, and hoped to have her for many days an inmate in her house, now
came forward, and casting upon the Liverpool tailor a look of profound
but respectful melancholy, said, "My Lord (for I recollect your Lordship
quite well), the lady upstairs is so ill, that it would be a sin to move
her: had I not better tell coachman to take down your Lordship's trunks,
and the lady's, and make you a bed in the next room?"

Very much to her surprise, this proposition was received with a roar
of laughter. "Madam," said the person addressed, "I'm not a lord, but
a tailor and draper; and as for that young woman, before to-day I never
set eyes on her."

"WHAT!" screamed out Mrs. Score. "Are not you the Count? Do you mean to
say that you a'n't Cat's--? DO you mean to say that you didn't order her
bed, and that you won't pay this here little bill?" And with this she
produced a document, by which the Count's lady was made her debtor in a
sum of half-a-guinea.

These passionate words excited more and more laughter. "Pay it, my
Lord," said the coachman; "and then come along, for time presses." "Our
respects to her Ladyship," said one passenger. "Tell her my Lord can't
wait," said another; and with much merriment one and all quitted the
hotel, entered the coach, and rattled off.

Dumb--pale with terror and rage--bill in hand, Mrs. Score had followed
the company; but when the coach disappeared, her senses returned. Back
she flew into the inn, overturning the ostler, not deigning to answer
Doctor Dobbs (who, from behind soft tobacco-fumes, mildly asked the
reason of her disturbance), and, bounding upstairs like a fury, she
rushed into the room where Catherine lay.

"Well, madam!" said she, in her highest key, "do you mean that you have
come into this here house to swindle me? Do you dare for to come with
your airs here, and call yourself a nobleman's lady, and sleep in the
best bed, when you're no better nor a common tramper? I'll thank you,
ma'am, to get out, ma'am. I'll have no sick paupers in this house,
ma'am. You know your way to the workhouse, ma'am, and there I'll trouble
you for to go." And here Mrs. Score proceeded quickly to pull off the
bedclothes; and poor Cat arose, shivering with fright and fever.

She had no spirit to answer, as she would have done the day before, when
an oath from any human being would have brought half-a-dozen from her in
return; or a knife, or a plate, or a leg of mutton, if such had been to
her hand. She had no spirit left for such repartees; but in reply to the
above words of Mrs. Score, and a great many more of the same kind--which
are not necessary for our history, but which that lady uttered with
inconceivable shrillness and volubility, the poor wench could say
little,--only sob and shiver, and gather up the clothes again, crying,
"Oh, aunt, don't speak unkind to me! I'm very unhappy, and very ill!"

"Ill, you strumpet! ill, be hanged! Ill is as ill does; and if you are
ill, it's only what you merit. Get out! dress yourself--tramp! Get to
the workhouse, and don't come to cheat me any more! Dress yourself--do
you hear? Satin petticoat forsooth, and lace to her smock!"

Poor, wretched, chattering, burning, shivering Catherine huddled on her
clothes as well she might: she seemed hardly to know or see what she was
doing, and did not reply a single word to the many that the landlady let
fall. Cat tottered down the narrow stairs, and through the kitchen, and
to the door; which she caught hold of, and paused awhile, and looked
into Mrs. Score's face, as for one more chance. "Get out, you nasty
trull!" said that lady, sternly, with arms akimbo; and poor Catherine,
with a most piteous scream and outgush of tears, let go of the door-post
and staggered away into the road.

                    *****

"Why, no--yes--no--it is poor Catherine Hall, as I live!" said somebody,
starting up, shoving aside Mrs. Score very rudely, and running into
the road, wig off and pipe in hand. It was honest Doctor Dobbs; and
the result of his interview with Mrs. Cat was, that he gave up for ever
smoking his pipe at the "Bugle;" and that she lay sick of a fever for
some weeks in his house.

                    *****

Over this part of Mrs. Cat's history we shall be as brief as possible;
for, to tell the truth, nothing immoral occurred during her whole stay
at the good Doctor's house; and we are not going to insult the reader
by offering him silly pictures of piety, cheerfulness, good sense, and
simplicity; which are milk-and-water virtues after all, and have no
relish with them like a good strong vice, highly peppered. Well, to be
short: Doctor Dobbs, though a profound theologian, was a very simple
gentleman; and before Mrs. Cat had been a month in the house, he had
learned to look upon her as one of the most injured and repentant
characters in the world; and had, with Mrs. Dobbs, resolved many plans
for the future welfare of the young Magdalen. "She was but sixteen, my
love, recollect," said the Doctor; "she was carried off, not by her own
wish either. The Count swore he would marry her; and, though she did not
leave him until that monster tried to poison her, yet think what a
fine Christian spirit the poor girl has shown! she forgives him as
heartily--more heartily, I am sure, than I do Mrs. Score for turning her
adrift in that wicked way." The reader will perceive some difference in
the Doctor's statement and ours, which we assure him is the true one;
but the fact is, the honest rector had had his tale from Mrs. Cat, and
it was not in his nature to doubt, if she had told him a history ten
times more wonderful.

The reverend gentleman and his wife then laid their heads together; and,
recollecting something of John Hayes's former attachment to Mrs. Cat,
thought that it might be advantageously renewed, should Hayes be still
constant. Having very adroitly sounded Catherine (so adroitly, indeed,
as to ask her "whether she would like to marry John Hayes?"), that young
woman had replied, "No. She had loved John Hayes--he had been her early,
only love; but she was fallen now, and not good enough for him." And
this made the Dobbs family admire her more and more, and cast about for
means to bring the marriage to pass.

Hayes was away from the village when Mrs. Cat had arrived there; but he
did not fail to hear of her illness, and how her aunt had deserted her,
and the good Doctor taken her in. The worthy Doctor himself met Mr.
Hayes on the green; and, telling him that some repairs were wanting in
his kitchen begged him to step in and examine them. Hayes first said no,
plump, and then no, gently; and then pished, and then psha'd; and then,
trembling very much, went in: and there sat Mrs. Catherine, trembling
very much too.

What passed between them? If your Ladyship is anxious to know, think of
that morning when Sir John himself popped the question. Could there be
anything more stupid than the conversation which took place? Such stuff
is not worth repeating: no, not when uttered by people in the very
genteelest of company; as for the amorous dialogue of a carpenter and
an ex-barmaid, it is worse still. Suffice it to say, that Mr. Hayes, who
had had a year to recover from his passion, and had, to all appearances,
quelled it, was over head and ears again the very moment he saw Mrs.
Cat, and had all his work to do again.

Whether the Doctor knew what was going on, I can't say; but this matter
is certain, that every evening Hayes was now in the rectory kitchen, or
else walking abroad with Mrs. Catherine: and whether she ran away with
him, or he with her, I shall not make it my business to inquire; but
certainly at the end of three months (which must be crowded up into this
one little sentence), another elopement took place in the village. "I
should have prevented it, certainly," said Doctor Dobbs--whereat his
wife smiled; "but the young people kept the matter a secret from me."
And so he would, had he known it; but though Mrs. Dobbs had made
several attempts to acquaint him with the precise hour and method of the
intended elopement, he peremptorily ordered her to hold her tongue. The
fact is, that the matter had been discussed by the rector's lady many
times. "Young Hayes," would she say "has a pretty little fortune and
trade of his own; he is an only son, and may marry as he likes; and,
though not specially handsome, generous, or amiable, has an undeniable
love for Cat (who, you know, must not be particular), and the sooner she
marries him, I think, the better. They can't be married at our
church you know, and--" "Well," said the Doctor, "if they are married
elsewhere, I can't help it, and know nothing about it, look you." And
upon this hint the elopement took place: which, indeed, was peaceably
performed early one Sunday morning about a month after; Mrs. Hall
getting behind Mr. Hayes on a pillion, and all the children of the
parsonage giggling behind the window-blinds to see the pair go off.

During this month Mr. Hayes had caused the banns to be published at the
town of Worcester; judging rightly that in a great town they would cause
no such remark as in a solitary village, and thither he conducted his
lady. O ill-starred John Hayes! whither do the dark Fates lead you? O
foolish Doctor Dobbs, to forget that young people ought to honour their
parents, and to yield to silly Mrs. Dobbs's ardent propensity for making
matches!

                    *****

The London Gazette of the 1st April, 1706, contains a proclamation
by the Queen for putting into execution an Act of Parliament for the
encouragement and increase of seamen, and for the better and speedier
manning of Her Majesty's fleet, which authorises all justices to issue
warrants to constables, petty constables, headboroughs, and tything-men,
to enter and, if need be, to break open the doors of any houses where
they shall believe deserting seamen to be; and for the further increase
and encouragement of the navy, to take able-bodied landsmen when seamen
fail. This Act, which occupies four columns of the Gazette, and another
of similar length and meaning for pressing men into the army, need
not be quoted at length here; but caused a mighty stir throughout the
kingdom at the time when it was in force.

As one has seen or heard, after the march of a great army, a number of
rogues and loose characters bring up the rear; in like manner, at
the tail of a great measure of State, follow many roguish personal
interests, which are protected by the main body. The great measure of
Reform, for instance, carried along with it much private jobbing and
swindling--as could be shown were we not inclined to deal mildly with
the Whigs; and this Enlistment Act, which, in order to maintain the
British glories in Flanders, dealt most cruelly with the British people
in England (it is not the first time that a man has been pinched at home
to make a fine appearance abroad), created a great company of rascals
and informers throughout the land, who lived upon it; or upon extortion
from those who were subject to it, or not being subject to it were
frightened into the belief that they were.

When Mr. Hayes and his lady had gone through the marriage ceremony at
Worcester, the former, concluding that at such a place lodging and food
might be procured at a cheaper rate, looked about carefully for the
meanest public-house in the town, where he might deposit his bride.

In the kitchen of this inn, a party of men were drinking; and, as
Mrs. Hayes declined, with a proper sense of her superiority, to eat in
company with such low fellows, the landlady showed her and her husband
to an inner apartment, where they might be served in private.

The kitchen party seemed, indeed, not such as a lady would choose to
join. There was one huge lanky fellow, that looked like a soldier,
and had a halberd; another was habited in a sailor's costume, with a
fascinating patch over one eye; and a third, who seemed the leader
of the gang, was a stout man in a sailor's frock and a horseman's
jack-boots, whom one might fancy, if he were anything, to be a
horse-marine.

Of one of these worthies, Mrs. Hayes thought she knew the figure and
voice; and she found her conjectures were true, when, all of sudden,
three people, without "With your leave," or "By your leave," burst into
the room, into which she and her spouse had retired. At their head was
no other than her old friend, Mr. Peter Brock; he had his sword drawn,
and his finger to his lips, enjoining silence, as it were, to Mrs.
Catherine. He with the patch on his eye seized incontinently on Mr.
Hayes; the tall man with the halberd kept the door; two or three heroes
supported the one-eyed man; who, with a loud voice, exclaimed, "Down
with your arms--no resistance! you are my prisoner, in the Queen's
name!"

And here, at this lock, we shall leave the whole company until the next
chapter; which may possibly explain what they were.



CHAPTER V. CONTAINS MR. BROCK'S AUTOBIOGRAPHY, AND OTHER MATTERS.


"You don't sure believe these men?" said Mrs. Hayes, as soon as the
first alarm caused by the irruption of Mr. Brock and his companions had
subsided. "These are no magistrate's men: it is but a trick to rob you
of your money, John."

"I will never give up a farthing of it!" screamed Hayes.

"Yonder fellow," continued Mrs. Catherine, "I know, for all his drawn
sword and fierce looks; his name is---"

"Wood, madam, at your service!" said Mr. Brock. "I am follower to Mr.
Justice Gobble, of this town: a'n't I, Tim?" said Mr. Brock to the tall
halberdman who was keeping the door.

"Yes indeed," said Tim, archly; "we're all followers of his honour
Justice Gobble."

"Certainly!" said the one-eyed man.

"Of course!" cried the man in the nightcap.

"I suppose, madam, you're satisfied NOW?" continued Mr. Brock, alias
Wood. "You can't deny the testimony of gentlemen like these; and our
commission is to apprehend all able-bodied male persons who can give
no good account of themselves, and enrol them in the service of Her
Majesty. Look at this Mr. Hayes" (who stood trembling in his shoes).
"Can there be a bolder, properer, straighter gentleman? We'll have him
for a grenadier before the day's over!"

"Take heart, John--don't be frightened. Psha! I tell you I know the man"
cried out Mrs. Hayes: "he is only here to extort money."

"Oh, for that matter, I DO think I recollect the lady. Let me see; where
was it? At Birmingham, I think,--ay, at Birmingham,--about the time when
they tried to murder Count Gal--"

"Oh, sir!" here cried Madam Hayes, dropping her voice at once from a
tone of scorn to one of gentlest entreaty, "what is it you want with my
husband? I know not, indeed, if ever I saw you before. For what do you
seize him? How much will you take to release him, and let us go? Name
the sum; he is rich, and--"

"RICH, Catherine!" cried Hayes. "Rich!--O heavens! Sir, I have nothing
but my hands to support me: I am a poor carpenter, sir, working under my
father!"

"He can give twenty guineas to be free; I know he can!" said Mrs. Cat.

"I have but a guinea to carry me home," sighed out Hayes.

"But you have twenty at home, John," said his wife. "Give these brave
gentlemen a writing to your mother, and she will pay; and you will let
us free then, gentlemen--won't you?"

"When the money's paid, yes," said the leader, Mr. Brock.

"Oh, in course," echoed the tall man with the halberd. "What's a
thrifling detintion, my dear?" continued he, addressing Hayes. "We'll
amuse you in your absence, and drink to the health of your pretty wife
here."

This promise, to do the halberdier justice, he fulfilled. He called upon
the landlady to produce the desired liquor; and when Mr. Hayes flung
himself at that lady's feet, demanding succour from her, and asking
whether there was no law in the land--

"There's no law at the 'Three Rooks' except THIS!" said Mr. Brock
in reply, holding up a horse-pistol. To which the hostess, grinning,
assented, and silently went her way.

After some further solicitations, John Hayes drew out the necessary
letter to his father, stating that he was pressed, and would not be set
free under a sum of twenty guineas; and that it would be of no use
to detain the bearer of the letter, inasmuch as the gentlemen who had
possession of him vowed that they would murder him should any harm
befall their comrade. As a further proof of the authenticity of the
letter, a token was added: a ring that Hayes wore, and that his mother
had given him.

The missives were, after some consultation, entrusted to the care of the
tall halberdier, who seemed to rank as second in command of the
forces that marched under Corporal Brock. This gentleman was called
indifferently Ensign, Mr., or even Captain Macshane; his intimates
occasionally in sport called him Nosey, from the prominence of that
feature in his countenance; or Spindleshins, for the very reason which
brought on the first Edward a similar nickname. Mr. Macshane then
quitted Worcester, mounted on Hayes's horse; leaving all parties at the
"Three Rooks" not a little anxious for his return.

This was not to be expected until the next morning; and a weary nuit de
noces did Mr. Hayes pass. Dinner was served, and, according to promise,
Mr. Brock and his two friends enjoyed the meal along with the bride and
bridegroom. Punch followed, and this was taken in company; then came
supper. Mr. Brock alone partook of this, the other two gentlemen
preferring the society of their pipes and the landlady in the kitchen.

"It is a sorry entertainment, I confess," said the ex-corporal, "and a
dismal way for a gentleman to spend his bridal night; but somebody must
stay with you, my dears: for who knows but you might take a fancy to
scream out of window, and then there would be murder, and the deuce and
all to pay. One of us must stay, and my friends love a pipe, so you must
put up with my company until they can relieve guard."

The reader will not, of course, expect that three people who were to
pass the night, however unwillingly, together in an inn-room, should
sit there dumb and moody, and without any personal communication; on the
contrary, Mr. Brock, as an old soldier, entertained his prisoners with
the utmost courtesy, and did all that lay in his power, by the help
of liquor and conversation, to render their durance tolerable. On
the bridegroom his attentions were a good deal thrown away: Mr. Hayes
consented to drink copiously, but could not be made to talk much; and,
in fact, the fright of the seizure, the fate hanging over him should his
parents refuse a ransom, and the tremendous outlay of money which would
take place should they accede to it, weighed altogether on his mind so
much as utterly to unman it.

As for Mrs. Cat, I don't think she was at all sorry in her heart to see
the old Corporal: for he had been a friend of old times--dear times to
her; she had had from him, too, and felt for him, not a little kindness;
and there was really a very tender, innocent friendship subsisting
between this pair of rascals, who relished much a night's conversation
together.

The Corporal, after treating his prisoners to punch in great quantities,
proposed the amusement of cards: over which Mr. Hayes had not been
occupied more than an hour, when he found himself so excessively sleepy
as to be persuaded to fling himself down on the bed dressed as he was,
and there to snore away until morning.

Mrs. Catherine had no inclination for sleep; and the Corporal, equally
wakeful, plied incessantly the bottle, and held with her a great deal
of conversation. The sleep, which was equivalent to the absence, of John
Hayes took all restraint from their talk. She explained to Brock the
circumstances of her marriage, which we have already described; they
wondered at the chance which had brought them together at the "Three
Rooks;" nor did Brock at all hesitate to tell her at once that his
calling was quite illegal, and that his intention was simply to extort
money. The worthy Corporal had not the slightest shame regarding his
own profession, and cut many jokes with Mrs. Cat about her late one; her
attempt to murder the Count, and her future prospects as a wife.

And here, having brought him upon the scene again, we may as well
shortly narrate some of the principal circumstances which befell him
after his sudden departure from Birmingham; and which he narrated with
much candour to Mrs. Catherine.

He rode the Captain's horse to Oxford (having exchanged his military
dress for a civil costume on the road), and at Oxford he disposed of
"George of Denmark," a great bargain, to one of the heads of colleges.
As soon as Mr. Brock, who took on himself the style and title of Captain
Wood, had sufficiently examined the curiosities of the University, he
proceeded at once to the capital: the only place for a gentleman of his
fortune and figure.

Here he read, with a great deal of philosophical indifference, in the
Daily Post, the Courant, the Observator, the Gazette, and the chief
journals of those days, which he made a point of examining at "Button's"
and "Will's," an accurate description of his person, his clothes, and
the horse he rode, and a promise of fifty guineas' reward to any person
who would give an account of him (so that he might be captured) to
Captain Count Galgenstein at Birmingham, to Mr. Murfey at the "Golden
Ball" in the Savoy, or Mr. Bates at the "Blew Anchor in Pickadilly." But
Captain Wood, in an enormous full-bottomed periwig that cost him sixty
pounds,[*] with high red heels to his shoes, a silver sword, and a
gold snuff-box, and a large wound (obtained, he said, at the siege of
Barcelona), which disfigured much of his countenance, and caused him to
cover one eye, was in small danger, he thought, of being mistaken for
Corporal Brock, the deserter of Cutts's; and strutted along the Mall
with as grave an air as the very best nobleman who appeared there.
He was generally, indeed, voted to be very good company; and as his
expenses were unlimited ("A few convent candlesticks," my dear, he used
to whisper, "melt into a vast number of doubloons"), he commanded as
good society as he chose to ask for: and it was speedily known as a fact
throughout town, that Captain Wood, who had served under His Majesty
Charles III. of Spain, had carried off the diamond petticoat of Our Lady
of Compostella, and lived upon the proceeds of the fraud. People were
good Protestants in those days, and many a one longed to have been his
partner in the pious plunder.

     * In the ingenious contemporary history of Moll Flanders, a
     periwig is mentioned as costing that sum.

All surmises concerning his wealth, Captain Wood, with much discretion,
encouraged. He contradicted no report, but was quite ready to confirm
all; and when two different rumours were positively put to him, he used
only to laugh, and say, "My dear sir, _I_ don't make the stories; but
I'm not called upon to deny them; and I give you fair warning, that I
shall assent to every one of them; so you may believe them or not, as
you please." And so he had the reputation of being a gentleman, not only
wealthy, but discreet. In truth, it was almost a pity that worthy Brock
had not been a gentleman born; in which case, doubtless, he would have
lived and died as became his station; for he spent his money like
a gentleman, he loved women like a gentleman, he would fight like a
gentleman, he gambled and got drunk like a gentleman. What did he want
else? Only a matter of six descents, a little money, and an estate, to
render him the equal of St. John or Harley. "Ah, those were merry days!"
would Mr. Brock say,--for he loved, in a good old age, to recount the
story of his London fashionable campaign;--"and when I think how near
I was to become a great man, and to die perhaps a general, I can't but
marvel at the wicked obstinacy of my ill-luck."

"I will tell you what I did, my dear: I had lodgings in Piccadilly, as
if I were a lord; I had two large periwigs, and three suits of laced
clothes; I kept a little black dressed out like a Turk; I walked daily
in the Mall; I dined at the politest ordinary in Covent Garden; I
frequented the best of coffee-houses, and knew all the pretty fellows of
the town; I cracked a bottle with Mr. Addison, and lent many a piece to
Dick Steele (a sad debauched rogue, my dear); and, above all, I'll tell
you what I did--the noblest stroke that sure ever a gentleman performed
in my situation.

"One day, going into 'Will's,' I saw a crowd of gentlemen gathered
together, and heard one of them say, 'Captain Wood! I don't know the
man; but there was a Captain Wood in Southwell's regiment.' Egad, it was
my Lord Peterborough himself who was talking about me. So, putting off
my hat, I made a most gracious conge to my Lord, and said I knew HIM,
and rode behind him at Barcelona on our entry into that town.

"'No doubt you did, Captain Wood,' says my Lord, taking my hand; 'and
no doubt you know me: for many more know Tom Fool, than Tom Fool knows.'
And with this, at which all of us laughed, my Lord called for a bottle,
and he and I sat down and drank it together.

"Well, he was in disgrace, as you know, but he grew mighty fond of me,
and--would you believe it?--nothing would satisfy him but presenting me
at Court! Yes, to Her Sacred Majesty the Queen, and my Lady Marlborough,
who was in high feather. Ay, truly, the sentinels on duty used to
salute me as if I were Corporal John himself! I was on the high road to
fortune. Charley Mordaunt used to call me Jack, and drink canary at my
chambers; I used to make one at my Lord Treasurer's levee; I had
even got Mr. Army-Secretary Walpole to take a hundred guineas as a
compliment: and he had promised me a majority: when bad luck turned, and
all my fine hopes were overthrown in a twinkling.

"You see, my dear, that after we had left that gaby, Galgenstein,--ha,
ha--with a gag in his mouth, and twopence-halfpenny in his pocket, the
honest Count was in the sorriest plight in the world; owing money here
and there to tradesmen, a cool thousand to the Warwickshire Squire: and
all this on eighty pounds a year! Well, for a little time the tradesmen
held their hands; while the jolly Count moved heaven and earth to
catch hold of his dear Corporal and his dear money-bags over again, and
placarded every town from London to Liverpool with descriptions of my
pretty person. The bird was flown, however,--the money clean gone,--and
when there was no hope of regaining it, what did the creditors do but
clap my gay gentleman into Shrewsbury gaol: where I wish he had rotted,
for my part.

"But no such luck for honest Peter Brock, or Captain Wood, as he was in
those days. One blessed Monday I went to wait on Mr. Secretary, and
he squeezed my hand and whispered to me that I was to be Major of a
regiment in Virginia--the very thing: for you see, my dear, I didn't
care about joining my Lord Duke in Flanders; being pretty well known
to the army there. The Secretary squeezed my hand (it had a fifty-pound
bill in it) and wished me joy, and called me Major, and bowed me out of
his closet into the ante-room; and, as gay as may be, I went off to
the 'Tilt-yard Coffee-house' in Whitehall, which is much frequented by
gentlemen of our profession, where I bragged not a little of my good
luck.

"Amongst the company were several of my acquaintance, and amongst them
a gentleman I did not much care to see, look you! I saw a uniform that
I knew--red and yellow facings--Cutts's, my dear; and the wearer of this
was no other than his Excellency Gustavus Adolphus Maximilian, whom we
all know of!

"He stared me full in the face, right into my eye (t'other one was
patched, you know), and after standing stock-still with his mouth open,
gave a step back, and then a step forward, and then screeched out, 'It's
Brock!'

"'I beg your pardon, sir,' says I; 'did you speak to me?'

"'I'll SWEAR it's Brock,' cries Gal, as soon as he hears my voice, and
laid hold of my cuff (a pretty bit of Mechlin as ever you saw, by the
way).

"'Sirrah!' says I, drawing it back, and giving my Lord a little touch
of the fist (just at the last button of the waistcoat, my dear,--a rare
place if you wish to prevent a man from speaking too much: it sent him
reeling to the other end of the room). 'Ruffian!' says I. 'Dog!' says
I. 'Insolent puppy and coxcomb! what do you mean by laying your hand on
me?'

"'Faith, Major, you giv him his BILLYFUL,' roared out a long Irish
unattached ensign, that I had treated with many a glass of Nantz at the
tavern. And so, indeed, I had; for the wretch could not speak for some
minutes, and all the officers stood laughing at him, as he writhed and
wriggled hideously.

"'Gentlemen, this is a monstrous scandal,' says one officer. 'Men of
rank and honour at fists like a parcel of carters!'

"'Men of honour!' says the Count, who had fetched up his breath by this
time. (I made for the door, but Macshane held me and said, 'Major, you
are not going to shirk him, sure?' Whereupon I gripped his hand and
vowed I would have the dog's life.)

"'Men of honour!' says the Count. 'I tell you the man is a deserter, a
thief, and a swindler! He was my corporal, and ran away with a thou--'

"'Dog, you lie!' I roared out, and made another cut at him with my cane;
but the gentlemen rushed between us.

"'O bluthanowns!' says honest Macshane, 'the lying scounthrel this
fellow is! Gentlemen, I swear be me honour that Captain Wood was wounded
at Barcelona; and that I saw him there; and that he and I ran away
together at the battle of Almanza, and bad luck to us.'

"You see, my dear, that these Irish have the strongest imaginations in
the world; and that I had actually persuaded poor Mac that he and I were
friends in Spain. Everybody knew Mac, who was a character in his way,
and believed him.

"'Strike a gentleman,' says I. 'I'll have your blood, I will.'

"'This instant,' says the Count, who was boiling with fury; 'and where
you like.'

"'Montague House,' says I. 'Good,' says he. And off we went. In
good time too, for the constables came in at the thought of such a
disturbance, and wanted to take us in charge.

"But the gentlemen present, being military men, would not hear of
this. Out came Mac's rapier, and that of half-a-dozen others; and the
constables were then told to do their duty if they liked, or to take a
crown-piece, and leave us to ourselves. Off they went; and presently, in
a couple of coaches, the Count and his friends, I and mine, drove off to
the fields behind Montague House. Oh that vile coffee-house! why did I
enter it?

"We came to the ground. Honest Macshane was my second, and much
disappointed because the second on the other side would not make a fight
of it, and exchange a few passes with him; but he was an old major,
a cool old hand, as brave as steel, and no fool. Well, the swords
are measured, Galgenstein strips off his doublet, and I my handsome
cut-velvet in like fashion. Galgenstein flings off his hat, and I handed
mine over--the lace on it cost me twenty pounds. I longed to be at him,
for--curse him!--I hate him, and know that he has no chance with me at
sword's-play.

"'You'll not fight in that periwig, sure?' says Macshane. 'Of course
not,' says I, and took it off.

"May all barbers be roasted in flames; may all periwigs, bobwigs,
scratchwigs, and Ramillies cocks, frizzle in purgatory from this day
forth to the end of time! Mine was the ruin of me: what might I not have
been now but for that wig!

"I gave it over to Ensign Macshane, and with it went what I had quite
forgotten, the large patch which I wore over one eye, which popped out
fierce, staring, and lively as was ever any eye in the world.

"'Come on!' says I, and made a lunge at my Count; but he sprang back
(the dog was as active as a hare, and knew, from old times, that I was
his master with the small-sword), and his second, wondering, struck up
my blade.

"'I will not fight that man,' says he, looking mighty pale. 'I swear
upon my honour that his name is Peter Brock: he was for two years
my corporal, and deserted, running away with a thousand pounds of my
moneys. Look at the fellow! What is the matter with his eye? why did he
wear a patch over it? But stop!' says he. 'I have more proof. Hand me
my pocket-book.' And from it, sure enough, he produced the infernal
proclamation announcing my desertion! 'See if the fellow has a scar
across his left ear' (and I can't say, my dear, but what I have: it was
done by a cursed Dutchman at the Boyne). 'Tell me if he has not got
C.R. in blue upon his right arm' (and there it is sure enough). 'Yonder
swaggering Irishman may be his accomplice for what I know; but I will
have no dealings with Mr. Brock, save with a constable for a second.'

"'This is an odd story, Captain Wood,' said the old Major who acted for
the Count.

"'A scounthrelly falsehood regarding me and my friend!' shouted out Mr.
Macshane; 'and the Count shall answer for it.'

"'Stop, stop!' says the Major. 'Captain Wood is too gallant a gentleman,
I am sure, not to satisfy the Count; and will show us that he has no
such mark on his arm as only private soldiers put there.'

"'Captain Wood,' says I, 'will do no such thing, Major. I'll fight that
scoundrel Galgenstein, or you, or any of you, like a man of honour; but
I won't submit to be searched like a thief!'

"'No, in coorse,' said Macshane.

"'I must take my man off the ground,' says the Major.

"'Well, take him, sir,' says I, in a rage; 'and just let me have the
pleasure of telling him that he's a coward and a liar; and that my
lodgings are in Piccadilly, where, if ever he finds courage to meet me,
he may hear of me!'

"'Faugh! I shpit on ye all,' cries my gallant ally Macshane. And sure
enough he kept his word, or all but--suiting the action to it at any
rate.

"And so we gathered up our clothes, and went back in our separate
coaches, and no blood spilt.

"'And is it thrue now,' said Mr. Macshane, when we were alone--'is
it thrue now, all these divvles have been saying?' 'Ensign,' says I,
'you're a man of the world?'

"''Deed and I am, and insign these twenty-two years.'

"'Perhaps you'd like a few pieces?' says I.

"'Faith and I should; for to tell you the secred thrut, I've not tasted
mate these four days.'

"'Well then, Ensign, it IS true,' says I; 'and as for meat, you shall
have some at the first cook-shop.' I bade the coach stop until he bought
a plateful, which he ate in the carriage, for my time was precious. I
just told him the whole story: at which he laughed, and swore that it
was the best piece of GENERALSHIP he ever heard on. When his belly was
full, I took out a couple of guineas and gave them to him. Mr. Macshane
began to cry at this, and kissed me, and swore he never would desert me:
as, indeed, my dear, I don't think he will; for we have been the best of
friends ever since, and he's the only man I ever could trust, I think.

"I don't know what put it into my head, but I had a scent of some
mischief in the wind; so stopped the coach a little before I got home,
and, turning into a tavern, begged Macshane to go before me to my
lodging, and see if the coast was clear: which he did; and came back to
me as pale as death, saying that the house was full of constables. The
cursed quarrel at the Tilt-yard had, I suppose, set the beaks upon me;
and a pretty sweep they made of it. Ah, my dear! five hundred pounds
in money, five suits of laced clothes, three periwigs, besides laced
shirts, swords, canes, and snuff-boxes; and all to go back to that
scoundrel Count.

"It was all over with me, I saw--no more being a gentleman for me; and
if I remained to be caught, only a choice between Tyburn and a file
of grenadiers. My love, under such circumstances, a gentleman can't be
particular, and must be prompt; the livery-stable was hard by where I
used to hire my coach to go to Court,--ha! ha!--and was known as a man
of substance. Thither I went immediately. 'Mr. Warmmash,' says I,
'my gallant friend here and I have a mind for a ride and a supper at
Twickenham, so you must lend us a pair of your best horses.' Which he
did in a twinkling, and off we rode.

"We did not go into the Park, but turned off and cantered smartly up
towards Kilburn; and, when we got into the country, galloped as if
the devil were at our heels. Bless you, my love, it was all done in
a minute: and the Ensign and I found ourselves regular knights of the
road, before we knew where we were almost. Only think of our finding you
and your new husband at the 'Three Rooks'! There's not a greater fence
than the landlady in all the country. It was she that put us on seizing
your husband, and introduced us to the other two gentlemen, whose names
I don't know any more than the dead."

"And what became of the horses?" said Mrs. Catherine to Mr. Brock, when
his tale was finished.

"Rips, madam," said he; "mere rips. We sold them at Stourbridge fair,
and got but thirteen guineas for the two."

"And--and--the Count, Max; where is he, Brock?" sighed she.

"Whew!" whistled Mr. Brock. "What, hankering after him still? My dear,
he is off to Flanders with his regiment; and, I make no doubt, there
have been twenty Countesses of Galgenstein since your time."

"I don't believe any such thing, sir," said Mrs. Catherine, starting up
very angrily.

"If you did, I suppose you'd laudanum him; wouldn't you?"

"Leave the room, fellow," said the lady. But she recollected herself
speedily again; and, clasping her hands, and looking very wretched
at Brock, at the ceiling, at the floor, at her husband (from whom she
violently turned away her head), she began to cry piteously: to which
tears the Corporal set up a gentle accompaniment of whistling, as they
trickled one after another down her nose.

I don't think they were tears of repentance; but of regret for the time
when she had her first love, and her fine clothes, and her white hat and
blue feather. Of the two, the Corporal's whistle was much more innocent
than the girl's sobbing: he was a rogue; but a good-natured old fellow
when his humour was not crossed. Surely our novel-writers make a great
mistake in divesting their rascals of all gentle human qualities:
they have such--and the only sad point to think of is, in all private
concerns of life, abstract feelings, and dealings with friends, and
so on, how dreadfully like a rascal is to an honest man. The man who
murdered the Italian boy, set him first to play with his children whom
he loved, and who doubtless deplored his loss.



CHAPTER VI. ADVENTURES OF THE AMBASSADOR, MR. MACSHANE.


If we had not been obliged to follow history in all respects, it
is probable that we should have left out the last adventure of Mrs.
Catherine and her husband, at the inn at Worcester, altogether; for, in
truth, very little came of it, and it is not very romantic or striking.
But we are bound to stick closely, above all, by THE TRUTH--the truth,
though it be not particularly pleasant to read of or to tell. As anybody
may read in the "Newgate Calendar," Mr. and Mrs. Hayes were taken at
an inn at Worcester; were confined there; were swindled by persons who
pretended to impress the bridegroom for military service. What is one
to do after that? Had we been writing novels instead of authentic
histories, we might have carried them anywhere else we chose: and we
had a great mind to make Hayes philosophising with Bolingbroke, like a
certain Devereux; and Mrs. Catherine maitresse en titre to Mr. Alexander
Pope, Doctor Sacheverel, Sir John Reade the oculist, Dean Swift,
or Marshal Tallard; as the very commonest romancer would under such
circumstances. But alas and alas! truth must be spoken, whatever else
is in the wind; and the excellent "Newgate Calendar," which contains the
biographies and thanatographies of Hayes and his wife, does not say a
word of their connections with any of the leading literary or military
heroes of the time of Her Majesty Queen Anne. The "Calendar" says, in so
many words, that Hayes was obliged to send to his father in Warwickshire
for money to get him out of the scrape, and that the old gentleman came
down to his aid. By this truth must we stick; and not for the sake of
the most brilliant episode,--no, not for a bribe of twenty extra guineas
per sheet, would we depart from it.

Mr. Brock's account of his adventure in London has given the reader
some short notice of his friend, Mr Macshane. Neither the wits nor the
principles of that worthy Ensign were particularly firm: for drink,
poverty, and a crack on the skull at the battle of Steenkirk had served
to injure the former; and the Ensign was not in his best days possessed
of any share of the latter. He had really, at one period, held such a
rank in the army, but pawned his half-pay for drink and play; and for
many years past had lived, one of the hundred thousand miracles of our
city, upon nothing that anybody knew of, or of which he himself could
give any account. Who has not a catalogue of these men in his list?
who can tell whence comes the occasional clean shirt, who supplies
the continual means of drunkenness, who wards off the daily-impending
starvation? Their life is a wonder from day to day: their breakfast
a wonder; their dinner a miracle; their bed an interposition of
Providence. If you and I, my dear sir, want a shilling tomorrow, who
will give it us? Will OUR butchers give us mutton-chops? will OUR
laundresses clothe us in clean linen?--not a bone or a rag. Standing as
we do (may it be ever so) somewhat removed from want,[*] is there one of
us who does not shudder at the thought of descending into the lists to
combat with it, and expect anything but to be utterly crushed in the
encounter?

     * The author, it must be remembered, has his lodgings and
     food provided for him by the government of his country.

Not a bit of it, my dear sir. It takes much more than you think for to
starve a man. Starvation is very little when you are used to it. Some
people I know even, who live on it quite comfortably, and make their
daily bread by it. It had been our friend Macshane's sole profession for
many years; and he did not fail to draw from it such a livelihood as was
sufficient, and perhaps too good, for him. He managed to dine upon it
a certain or rather uncertain number of days in the week, to sleep
somewhere, and to get drunk at least three hundred times a year. He
was known to one or two noblemen who occasionally helped him with a
few pieces, and whom he helped in turn--never mind how. He had
other acquaintances whom he pestered undauntedly; and from whom he
occasionally extracted a dinner, or a crown, or mayhap, by mistake, a
goldheaded cane, which found its way to the pawnbroker's. When flush of
cash, he would appear at the coffee-house; when low in funds, the deuce
knows into what mystic caves and dens he slunk for food and lodging. He
was perfectly ready with his sword, and when sober, or better still, a
very little tipsy, was a complete master of it; in the art of boasting
and lying he had hardly any equals; in shoes he stood six feet five
inches; and here is his complete signalement. It was a fact that he had
been in Spain as a volunteer, where he had shown some gallantry, had had
a brain-fever, and was sent home to starve as before.

Mr. Macshane had, however, like Mr. Conrad, the Corsair, one virtue in
the midst of a thousand crimes,--he was faithful to his employer for the
time being: and a story is told of him, which may or may not be to
his credit, viz. that being hired on one occasion by a certain lord to
inflict a punishment upon a roturier who had crossed his lordship in
his amours, he, Macshane, did actually refuse from the person to be
belaboured, and who entreated his forbearance, a larger sum of
money than the nobleman gave him for the beating; which he performed
punctually, as bound in honour and friendship. This tale would the
Ensign himself relate, with much self-satisfaction; and when, after the
sudden flight from London, he and Brock took to their roving occupation,
he cheerfully submitted to the latter as his commanding officer, called
him always Major, and, bating blunders and drunkenness, was perfectly
true to his leader. He had a notion--and, indeed, I don't know that
it was a wrong one--that his profession was now, as before, strictly
military, and according to the rules of honour. Robbing he called
plundering the enemy; and hanging was, in his idea, a dastardly and
cruel advantage that the latter took, and that called for the sternest
reprisals.

The other gentlemen concerned were strangers to Mr. Brock, who felt
little inclined to trust either of them upon such a message, or with
such a large sum to bring back. They had, strange to say, a similar
mistrust on their side; but Mr. Brock lugged out five guineas, which he
placed in the landlady's hand as security for his comrade's return; and
Ensign Macshane, being mounted on poor Hayes's own horse, set off to
visit the parents of that unhappy young man. It was a gallant sight to
behold our thieves' ambassador, in a faded sky-blue suit with orange
facings, in a pair of huge jack-boots unconscious of blacking, with
a mighty basket-hilted sword by his side, and a little shabby beaver
cocked over a large tow-periwig, ride out from the inn of the "Three
Rooks" on his mission to Hayes's paternal village.

It was eighteen miles distant from Worcester; but Mr. Macshane performed
the distance in safety, and in sobriety moreover (for such had been his
instructions), and had no difficulty in discovering the house of old
Hayes: towards which, indeed, John's horse trotted incontinently. Mrs.
Hayes, who was knitting at the house-door, was not a little surprised
at the appearance of the well-known grey gelding, and of the stranger
mounted upon it.

Flinging himself off the steed with much agility, Mr. Macshane, as soon
as his feet reached the ground, brought them rapidly together, in order
to make a profound and elegant bow to Mrs. Hayes; and slapping his
greasy beaver against his heart, and poking his periwig almost into the
nose of the old lady, demanded whether he had the "shooprame honour of
adthressing Misthriss Hees?"

Having been answered in the affirmative, he then proceeded to ask
whether there was a blackguard boy in the house who would take "the
horse to the steeble;" whether "he could have a dthrink of small-beer
or buthermilk, being, faith, uncommon dthry;" and whether, finally, "he
could be feevored with a few minutes' private conversation with her
and Mr. Hees, on a matther of consitherable impartance." All these
preliminaries were to be complied with before Mr. Macshane would enter
at all into the subject of his visit. The horse and man were cared for;
Mr. Hayes was called in; and not a little anxious did Mrs. Hayes grow,
in the meanwhile, with regard to the fate of her darling son. "Where is
he? How is he? Is he dead?" said the old lady. "Oh yes, I'm sure he's
dead!"

"Indeed, madam, and you're misteeken intirely: the young man is
perfectly well in health."

"Oh, praised be Heaven!"

"But mighty cast down in sperrits. To misfortunes, madam, look you, the
best of us are subject; and a trifling one has fell upon your son."

And herewith Mr. Macshane produced a letter in the handwriting of young
Hayes, of which we have had the good luck to procure a copy. It ran
thus:--

"HONORED FATHER AND MOTHER,--The bearer of this is a kind gentleman, who
has left me in a great deal of trouble. Yesterday, at this towne, I fell
in with some gentlemen of the queene's servas; after drinking with
whom, I accepted her Majesty's mony to enliste. Repenting thereof, I did
endeavour to escape; and, in so doing, had the misfortune to strike my
superior officer, whereby I made myself liable to Death, according to
the rules of warr. If, however, I pay twenty ginnys, all will be wel.
You must give the same to the barer, els I shall be shott without fail
on Tewsday morning. And so no more from your loving son,

"JOHN HAYES.

"From my prison at Bristol, this unhappy Monday."


When Mrs. Hayes read this pathetic missive, its success with her
was complete, and she was for going immediately to the cupboard, and
producing the money necessary for her darling son's release. But the
carpenter Hayes was much more suspicious. "I don't know you, sir," said
he to the ambassador.

"Do you doubt my honour, sir?" said the Ensign, very fiercely.

"Why, sir," replied Mr. Hayes "I know little about it one way or other,
but shall take it for granted, if you will explain a little more of this
business."

"I sildom condescind to explean," said Mr. Macshane, "for it's not the
custom in my rank; but I'll explean anything in reason."

"Pray, will you tell me in what regiment my son is enlisted?"

"In coorse. In Colonel Wood's fut, my dear; and a gallant corps it is as
any in the army."

"And you left him?"

"On me soul, only three hours ago, having rid like a horse-jockey ever
since; as in the sacred cause of humanity, curse me, every man should."

As Hayes's house was seventy miles from Bristol, the old gentleman
thought this was marvellous quick riding, and so, cut the conversation
short. "You have said quite enough, sir," said he, "to show me there
is some roguery in the matter, and that the whole story is false from
beginning to end."

At this abrupt charge the Ensign looked somewhat puzzled, and then spoke
with much gravity. "Roguery," said he, "Misthur Hees, is a sthrong term;
and which, in consideration of my friendship for your family, I shall
pass over. You doubt your son's honour, as there wrote by him in black
and white?"

"You have forced him to write," said Mr. Hayes.

"The sly old divvle's right," muttered Mr. Macshane, aside. "Well, sir,
to make a clean breast of it, he HAS been forced to write it. The story
about the enlistment is a pretty fib, if you will, from beginning to
end. And what then, my dear? Do you think your son's any better off for
that?"

"Oh, where is he?" screamed Mrs. Hayes, plumping down on her knees. "We
WILL give him the money, won't we, John?"

"I know you will, madam, when I tell you where he is. He is in the hands
of some gentlemen of my acquaintance, who are at war with the present
government, and no more care about cutting a man's throat than they do
a chicken's. He is a prisoner, madam, of our sword and spear. If you
choose to ransom him, well and good; if not, peace be with him! for
never more shall you see him."

"And how do I know you won't come back to-morrow for more money?" asked
Mr. Hayes.

"Sir, you have my honour; and I'd as lieve break my neck as my word,"
said Mr. Macshane, gravely. "Twenty guineas is the bargain. Take ten
minutes to talk of it--take it then, or leave it; it's all the same
to me, my dear." And it must be said of our friend the Ensign, that he
meant every word he said, and that he considered the embassy on which he
had come as perfectly honourable and regular.

"And pray, what prevents us," said Mr. Hayes, starting up in a rage,
"from taking hold of you, as a surety for him?"

"You wouldn't fire on a flag of truce, would ye, you dishonourable
ould civilian?" replied Mr. Macshane. "Besides," says he, "there's more
reasons to prevent you: the first is this," pointing to his sword; "here
are two more"--and these were pistols; "and the last and the best of all
is, that you might hang me and dthraw me and quarther me, an yet never
see so much as the tip of your son's nose again. Look you, sir, we run
mighty risks in our profession--it's not all play, I can tell you.
We're obliged to be punctual, too, or it's all up with the thrade. If I
promise that your son will die as sure as fate to-morrow morning, unless
I return home safe, our people MUST keep my promise; or else what chance
is there for me? You would be down upon me in a moment with a posse of
constables, and have me swinging before Warwick gaol. Pooh, my dear! you
never would sacrifice a darling boy like John Hayes, let alone his lady,
for the sake of my long carcass. One or two of our gentlemen have been
taken that way already, because parents and guardians would not believe
them."

"AND WHAT BECAME OF THE POOR CHILDREN?" said Mrs. Hayes, who began to
perceive the gist of the argument, and to grow dreadfully frightened.

"Don't let's talk of them, ma'am: humanity shudthers at the thought!"
And herewith Mr. Macshane drew his finger across his throat in such a
dreadful way as to make the two parents tremble. "It's the way of war,
madam, look you. The service I have the honour to belong to is not paid
by the Queen; and so we're obliged to make our prisoners pay, according
to established military practice."

No lawyer could have argued his case better than Mr. Macshane so far;
and he completely succeeded in convincing Mr. and Mrs. Hayes of the
necessity of ransoming their son. Promising that the young man should
be restored to them next morning, along with his beautiful lady, he
courteously took leave of the old couple, and made the best of his way
back to Worcester again. The elder Hayes wondered who the lady could
be of whom the ambassador had spoken, for their son's elopement was
altogether unknown to them; but anger or doubt about this subject was
overwhelmed by their fears for their darling John's safety. Away rode
the gallant Macshane with the money necessary to effect this; and it
must be mentioned, as highly to his credit, that he never once thought
of appropriating the sum to himself, or of deserting his comrades in any
way.

His ride from Worcester had been a long one. He had left that city
at noon, but before his return thither the sun had gone down; and the
landscape, which had been dressed like a prodigal, in purple and
gold, now appeared like a Quaker, in dusky grey; and the trees by the
road-side grew black as undertakers or physicians, and, bending their
solemn heads to each other, whispered ominously among themselves; and
the mists hung on the common; and the cottage lights went out one by
one; and the earth and heaven grew black, but for some twinkling useless
stars, which freckled the ebon countenance of the latter; and the
air grew colder; and about two o'clock the moon appeared, a dismal
pale-faced rake, walking solitary through the deserted sky; and about
four, mayhap, the Dawn (wretched 'prentice-boy!) opened in the east
the shutters of the Day:--in other words, more than a dozen hours had
passed. Corporal Brock had been relieved by Mr. Redcap, the latter by
Mr. Sicklop, the one-eyed gentleman; Mrs. John Hayes, in spite of her
sorrows and bashfulness, had followed the example of her husband, and
fallen asleep by his side--slept for many hours--and awakened still
under the guardianship of Mr. Brock's troop; and all parties began
anxiously to expect the return of the ambassador, Mr. Macshane.

That officer, who had performed the first part of his journey with such
distinguished prudence and success, found the night, on his journey
homewards, was growing mighty cold and dark; and as he was thirsty and
hungry, had money in his purse, and saw no cause to hurry, he determined
to take refuge at an alehouse for the night, and to make for Worcester
by dawn the next morning. He accordingly alighted at the first inn on
his road, consigned his horse to the stable, and, entering the kitchen,
called for the best liquor in the house.

A small company was assembled at the inn, among whom Mr. Macshane took
his place with a great deal of dignity; and, having a considerable sum
of money in his pocket, felt a mighty contempt for his society, and soon
let them know the contempt he felt for them. After a third flagon of
ale, he discovered that the liquor was sour, and emptied, with much
spluttering and grimaces, the remainder of the beer into the fire. This
process so offended the parson of the parish (who in those good old
times did not disdain to take the post of honour in the chimney-nook),
that he left his corner, looking wrathfully at the offender; who without
any more ado instantly occupied it. It was a fine thing to hear
the jingling of the twenty pieces in his pocket, the oaths which he
distributed between the landlord, the guests, and the liquor--to remark
the sprawl of his mighty jack-boots, before the sweep of which the timid
guests edged farther and farther away; and the languishing leers which
he cast on the landlady, as with wide-spread arms he attempted to seize
upon her.

When the ostler had done his duties in the stable, he entered the inn,
and whispered the landlord that "the stranger was riding John Hayes's
horse:" of which fact the host soon convinced himself, and did not fail
to have some suspicions of his guest. Had he not thought that times
were unquiet, horses might be sold, and one man's money was as good as
another's, he probably would have arrested the Ensign immediately, and
so lost all the profit of the score which the latter was causing every
moment to be enlarged.

In a couple of hours, with that happy facility which one may have
often remarked in men of the gallant Ensign's nation, he had managed to
disgust every one of the landlord's other guests, and scare them from
the kitchen. Frightened by his addresses, the landlady too had taken
flight; and the host was the only person left in the apartment; who
there stayed for interest's sake merely, and listened moodily to
his tipsy guest's conversation. In an hour more, the whole house was
awakened by a violent noise of howling, curses, and pots clattering to
and fro. Forth issued Mrs. Landlady in her night-gear, out came John
Ostler with his pitchfork, downstairs tumbled Mrs. Cook and one or two
guests, and found the landlord and ensign on the kitchen-floor--the wig
of the latter lying, much singed and emitting strange odours, in the
fireplace, his face hideously distorted, and a great quantity of his
natural hair in the partial occupation of the landlord; who had drawn it
and the head down towards him, in order that he might have the benefit
of pummelling the latter more at his ease. In revenge, the landlord was
undermost, and the Ensign's arms were working up and down his face and
body like the flaps of a paddle-wheel: the man of war had clearly the
best of it.

The combatants were separated as soon as possible; but, as soon as the
excitement of the fight was over, Ensign Macshane was found to have no
further powers of speech, sense, or locomotion, and was carried by his
late antagonist to bed. His sword and pistols, which had been placed at
his side at the commencement of the evening, were carefully put by,
and his pocket visited. Twenty guineas in gold, a large knife--used,
probably, for the cutting of bread-and-cheese--some crumbs of those
delicacies and a paper of tobacco found in the breeches-pockets, and in
the bosom of the sky-blue coat, the leg of a cold fowl and half of a raw
onion, constituted his whole property.

These articles were not very suspicious; but the beating which the
landlord had received tended greatly to confirm his own and his wife's
doubts about their guest; and it was determined to send off in the early
morning to Mr. Hayes, informing him how a person had lain at their inn
who had ridden thither mounted upon young Hayes's horse. Off set John
Ostler at earliest dawn; but on his way he woke up Mr. Justice's clerk,
and communicated his suspicions to him; and Mr. Clerk consulted with the
village baker, who was always up early; and the clerk, the baker, the
butcher with his cleaver, and two gentlemen who were going to work, all
adjourned to the inn.

Accordingly, when Ensign Macshane was in a truckle-bed, plunged in that
deep slumber which only innocence and drunkenness enjoy in this world,
and charming the ears of morn by the regular and melodious music of
his nose, a vile plot was laid against him; and when about seven of the
clock he woke, he found, on sitting up in his bed, three gentlemen on
each side of it, armed, and looking ominous. One held a constable's
staff, and albeit unprovided with a warrant, would take upon himself the
responsibility of seizing Mr. Macshane and of carrying him before his
worship at the hall.

"Taranouns, man!" said the Ensign, springing up in bed, and abruptly
breaking off a loud sonorous yawn, with which he had opened the business
of the day, "you won't deteen a gentleman who's on life and death? I
give ye my word, an affair of honour."

"How came you by that there horse?" said the baker.

"How came you by these here fifteen guineas?" said the landlord, in
whose hands, by some process, five of the gold pieces had disappeared.

"What is this here idolatrous string of beads?" said the clerk.

Mr. Macshane, the fact is, was a Catholic, but did not care to own it:
for in those days his religion was not popular.

"Baids? Holy Mother of saints! give me back them baids," said Mr.
Macshane, clasping his hands. "They were blest, I tell you, by his
holiness the po--psha! I mane they belong to a darling little daughter
I had that's in heaven now: and as for the money and the horse, I should
like to know how a gentleman is to travel in this counthry without
them."

"Why, you see, he may travel in the country to GIT 'em," here shrewdly
remarked the constable; "and it's our belief that neither horse nor
money is honestly come by. If his worship is satisfied, why so, in
course, shall we be; but there is highwaymen abroad, look you; and, to
our notion, you have very much the cut of one."

Further remonstrances or threats on the part of Mr. Macshane were
useless. Although he vowed that he was first cousin to the Duke of
Leinster, an officer in Her Majesty's service, and the dearest friend
Lord Marlborough had, his impudent captors would not believe a word of
his statement (which, further, was garnished with a tremendous number
of oaths); and he was, about eight o'clock, carried up to the house of
Squire Ballance, the neighbouring justice of the peace.

When the worthy magistrate asked the crime of which the prisoner had
been guilty, the captors looked somewhat puzzled for the moment; since,
in truth, it could not be shown that the Ensign had committed any crime
at all; and if he had confined himself to simple silence, and thrown
upon them the onus of proving his misdemeanours, Justice Ballance must
have let him loose, and soundly rated his clerk and the landlord for
detaining an honest gentleman on so frivolous a charge.

But this caution was not in the Ensign's disposition; and though his
accusers produced no satisfactory charge against him, his own words were
quite enough to show how suspicious his character was. When asked his
name, he gave it in as Captain Geraldine, on his way to Ireland,
by Bristol, on a visit to his cousin the Duke of Leinster. He
swore solemnly that his friends, the Duke of Marlborough and Lord
Peterborough, under both of whom he had served, should hear of the
manner in which he had been treated; and when the justice,--a sly old
gentleman, and one that read the Gazettes, asked him at what battles he
had been present, the gallant Ensign pitched on a couple in Spain and in
Flanders, which had been fought within a week of each other, and vowed
that he had been desperately wounded at both; so that, at the end of his
examination, which had been taken down by the clerk, he had been made
to acknowledge as follows:--Captain Geraldine, six feet four inches in
height; thin, with a very long red nose, and red hair; grey eyes, and
speaks with a strong Irish accent; is the first-cousin of the Duke of
Leinster, and in constant communication with him: does not know whether
his Grace has any children; does not know whereabouts he lives
in London; cannot say what sort of a looking man his Grace is: is
acquainted with the Duke of Marlborough, and served in the dragoons at
the battle of Ramillies; at which time he was with my Lord Peterborough
before Barcelona. Borrowed the horse which he rides from a friend in
London, three weeks since. Peter Hobbs, ostler, swears that it was in
his master's stable four days ago, and is the property of John Hayes,
carpenter. Cannot account for the fifteen guineas found on him by the
landlord; says there were twenty; says he won them at cards, a fortnight
since, at Edinburgh; says he is riding about the country for his
amusement: afterwards says he is on a matter of life and death, and
going to Bristol; declared last night, in the hearing of several
witnesses, that he was going to York; says he is a man of independent
property, and has large estates in Ireland, and a hundred thousand
pounds in the Bank of England. Has no shirt or stockings, and the coat
he wears is marked "S.S." In his boots is written "Thomas Rodgers," and
in his hat is the name of the "Rev. Doctor Snoffler."

Doctor Snoffler lived at Worcester, and had lately advertised in the Hue
and Cry a number of articles taken from his house. Mr. Macshane said,
in reply to this, that his hat had been changed at the inn, and he was
ready to take his oath that he came thither in a gold-laced one. But
this fact was disproved by the oaths of many persons who had seen him at
the inn. And he was about to be imprisoned for the thefts which he had
not committed (the fact about the hat being, that he had purchased it
from a gentleman at the "Three Rooks" for two pints of beer)--he was
about to be remanded, when, behold, Mrs. Hayes the elder made her
appearance; and to her it was that the Ensign was indebted for his
freedom.

Old Hayes had gone to work before the ostler arrived; but when his wife
heard the lad's message, she instantly caused her pillion to be placed
behind the saddle, and mounting the grey horse, urged the stable-boy to
gallop as hard as ever he could to the justice's house.

She entered panting and alarmed. "Oh, what is your honour going to do
to this honest gentleman?" said she. "In the name of Heaven, let him go!
His time is precious--he has important business--business of life and
death."

"I tould the jidge so," said the Ensign, "but he refused to take my
word--the sacred wurrd of honour of Captain Geraldine."

Macshane was good at a single lie, though easily flustered on an
examination; and this was a very creditable stratagem to acquaint Mrs.
Hayes with the name that he bore.

"What! you know Captain Geraldine?" said Mr. Ballance, who was perfectly
well acquainted with the carpenter's wife.

"In coorse she does. Hasn't she known me these tin years? Are we not
related? Didn't she give me the very horse which I rode, and, to make
belave, tould you I'd bought in London?"

"Let her tell her own story. Are you related to Captain Geraldine, Mrs.
Hayes?"

"Yes--oh, yes!"

"A very elegant connection! And you gave him the horse, did you, of your
own free-will?"

"Oh yes! of my own will--I would give him anything. Do, do, your honour,
let him go! His child is dying," said the old lady, bursting into
tears. "It may be dead before he gets to--before he gets there. Oh, your
honour, your honour, pray, pray, don't detain him!"

The justice did not seem to understand this excessive sympathy on the
part of Mrs. Hayes; nor did the father himself appear to be nearly so
affected by his child's probable fate as the honest woman who interested
herself for him. On the contrary, when she made this passionate speech,
Captain Geraldine only grinned, and said, "Niver mind, my dear. If
his honour will keep an honest gentleman for doing nothing, why, let
him--the law must settle between us; and as for the child, poor thing,
the Lord deliver it!"

At this, Mrs. Hayes fell to entreating more loudly than ever; and as
there was really no charge against him, Mr. Ballance was constrained to
let him go.

The landlord and his friends were making off, rather confused, when
Ensign Macshane called upon the former in a thundering voice to stop,
and refund the five guineas which he had stolen from him. Again the host
swore there were but fifteen in his pocket. But when, on the Bible, the
Ensign solemnly vowed that he had twenty, and called upon Mrs. Hayes to
say whether yesterday, half-an-hour before he entered the inn, she had
not seen him with twenty guineas, and that lady expressed herself ready
to swear that she had, Mr. Landlord looked more crestfallen than ever,
and said that he had not counted the money when he took it; and though
he did in his soul believe that there were only fifteen guineas, rather
than be suspected of a shabby action, he would pay the five guineas out
of his own pocket: which he did, and with the Ensign's, or rather Mrs.
Hayes's, own coin.

As soon as they were out of the justice's house, Mr. Macshane, in the
fulness of his gratitude, could not help bestowing an embrace upon
Mrs. Hayes. And when she implored him to let her ride behind him to her
darling son, he yielded with a very good grace, and off the pair set on
John Hayes's grey.

"Who has Nosey brought with him now?" said Mr. Sicklop, Brock's one-eyed
confederate, who, about three hours after the above adventure, was
lolling in the yard of the "Three Rooks." It was our Ensign, with the
mother of his captive. They had not met with any accident in their ride.

"I shall now have the shooprame bliss," said Mr. Macshane, with much
feeling, as he lifted Mrs. Hayes from the saddle---"the shooprame bliss
of intwining two harrts that are mead for one another. Ours, my dear,
is a dismal profession; but ah! don't moments like this make aminds
for years of pain? This way, my dear. Turn to your right, then to your
left--mind the stip--and the third door round the corner."

All these precautions were attended to; and after giving his concerted
knock, Mr. Macshane was admitted into an apartment, which he entered
holding his gold pieces in the one hand, and a lady by the other.

We shall not describe the meeting which took place between mother and
son. The old lady wept copiously; the young man was really glad to see
his relative, for he deemed that his troubles were over. Mrs. Cat bit
her lips, and stood aside, looking somewhat foolish; Mr. Brock counted
the money; and Mr. Macshane took a large dose of strong waters, as a
pleasing solace for his labours, dangers, and fatigue.

When the maternal feelings were somewhat calmed, the old lady had
leisure to look about her, and really felt a kind of friendship and
goodwill for the company of thieves in which she found herself. It
seemed to her that they had conferred an actual favour on her, in
robbing her of twenty guineas, threatening her son's life, and finally
letting him go.

"Who is that droll old gentleman?" said she; and being told that it was
Captain Wood, she dropped him a curtsey, and said, with much respect,
"Captain, your very humble servant;" which compliment Mr. Brock
acknowledged by a gracious smile and bow. "And who is this pretty young
lady?" continued Mrs. Hayes.

"Why--hum--oh--mother, you must give her your blessing. She is Mrs. John
Hayes." And herewith Mr. Hayes brought forward his interesting lady, to
introduce her to his mamma.

The news did not at all please the old lady; who received Mrs.
Catherine's embrace with a very sour face indeed. However, the mischief
was done; and she was too glad to get back her son to be, on such an
occasion, very angry with him. So, after a proper rebuke, she told Mrs.
John Hayes that though she never approved of her son's attachment, and
thought he married below his condition, yet as the evil was done, it was
their duty to make the best of it; and she, for her part, would receive
her into her house, and make her as comfortable there as she could.

"I wonder whether she has any more money in that house?" whispered Mr.
Sicklop to Mr. Redcap; who, with the landlady, had come to the door of
the room, and had been amusing themselves by the contemplation of this
sentimental scene.

"What a fool that wild Hirishman was not to bleed her for more!" said
the landlady; "but he's a poor ignorant Papist. I'm sure my man"
(this gentleman had been hanged), "wouldn't have come away with such a
beggarly sum."

"Suppose we have some more out of 'em?" said Mr. Redcap. "What prevents
us? We have got the old mare, and the colt too,--ha! ha!--and the pair
of 'em ought to be worth at least a hundred to us."

This conversation was carried on sotto voce; and I don't know whether
Mr. Brock had any notion of the plot which was arranged by the three
worthies. The landlady began it. "Which punch, madam, will you take?"
says she. "You must have something for the good of the house, now you
are in it."

"In coorse," said the Ensign.

"Certainly," said the other three. But the old lady said she was anxious
to leave the place; and putting down a crown-piece, requested the
hostess to treat the gentlemen in her absence. "Good-bye, Captain," said
the old lady.

"Ajew!" cried the Ensign, "and long life to you, my dear. You got me out
of a scrape at the justice's yonder; and, split me! but Insign Macshane
will remimber it as long as he lives."

And now Hayes and the two ladies made for the door; but the landlady
placed herself against it, and Mr. Sicklop said, "No, no, my pretty
madams, you ain't a-going off so cheap as that neither; you are not
going out for a beggarly twenty guineas, look you,--we must have more."

Mr. Hayes starting back, and cursing his fate, fairly burst into tears;
the two women screamed; and Mr. Brock looked as if the proposition both
amused and had been expected by him: but not so Ensign Macshane.

"Major!" said he, clawing fiercely hold of Brock's arms.

"Ensign," said Mr. Brock, smiling.

"Arr we, or arr we not, men of honour?"

"Oh, in coorse," said Brock, laughing, and using Macshane's favourite
expression.

"If we ARR men of honour, we are bound to stick to our word; and, hark
ye, you dirty one-eyed scoundrel, if you don't immadiately make way for
these leedies, and this lily-livered young jontleman who's crying so,
the Meejor here and I will lug out and force you." And so saying,
he drew his great sword and made a pass at Mr. Sicklop; which that
gentleman avoided, and which caused him and his companion to retreat
from the door. The landlady still kept her position at it, and with a
storm of oaths against the Ensign, and against two Englishmen who ran
away from a wild Hirishman, swore she would not budge a foot, and would
stand there until her dying day.

"Faith, then, needs must," said the Ensign, and made a lunge at the
hostess, which passed so near the wretch's throat, that she screamed,
sank on her knees, and at last opened the door.

Down the stairs, then, with great state, Mr. Macshane led the elder
lady, the married couple following; and having seen them to the street,
took an affectionate farewell of the party, whom he vowed that he would
come and see. "You can walk the eighteen miles aisy, between this and
nightfall," said he.

"WALK!" exclaimed Mr. Hayes. "Why, haven't we got Ball, and shall ride
and tie all the way?"

"Madam!" cried Macshane, in a stern voice, "honour before everything.
Did you not, in the presence of his worship, vow and declare that you
gave me that horse, and now d'ye talk of taking it back again? Let me
tell you, madam, that such paltry thricks ill become a person of your
years and respectability, and ought never to be played with Insign
Timothy Macshane."

He waved his hat and strutted down the street; and Mrs. Catherine Hayes,
along with her bridegroom and mother-in-law, made the best of their way
homeward on foot.



CHAPTER VII. WHICH EMBRACES A PERIOD OF SEVEN YEARS.


The recovery of so considerable a portion of his property from the
clutches of Brock was, as may be imagined, no trifling source of joy to
that excellent young man, Count Gustavus Adolphus de Galgenstein; and
he was often known to say, with much archness, and a proper feeling of
gratitude to the Fate which had ordained things so, that the robbery
was, in reality, one of the best things that could have happened to him:
for, in event of Mr. Brock's NOT stealing the money, his Excellency the
Count would have had to pay the whole to the Warwickshire Squire, who
had won it from him at play. He was enabled, in the present instance, to
plead his notorious poverty as an excuse; and the Warwickshire conqueror
got off with nothing, except a very badly written autograph of the
Count's, simply acknowledging the debt.

This point his Excellency conceded with the greatest candour; but (as,
doubtless, the reader may have remarked in the course of his experience)
to owe is not quite the same thing as to pay; and from the day of his
winning the money until the day of his death the Warwickshire Squire
did never, by any chance, touch a single bob, tizzy, tester, moidore,
maravedi, doubloon, tomaun, or rupee, of the sum which Monsieur de
Galgenstein had lost to him.

That young nobleman was, as Mr. Brock hinted in the little
autobiographical sketch which we gave in a former chapter, incarcerated
for a certain period, and for certain other debts, in the donjons
of Shrewsbury; but he released himself from them by that noble and
consolatory method of whitewashing which the law has provided for
gentlemen in his oppressed condition; and he had not been a week in
London, when he fell in with, and overcame, or put to flight, Captain
Wood, alias Brock, and immediately seized upon the remainder of his
property. After receiving this, the Count, with commendable discretion,
disappeared from England altogether for a while; nor are we at all
authorised to state that any of his debts to his tradesmen were
discharged, any more than his debts of honour, as they are pleasantly
called.

Having thus settled with his creditors, the gallant Count had interest
enough with some of the great folk to procure for himself a post abroad,
and was absent in Holland for some time. It was here that he became
acquainted with the lovely Madam Silverkoop, the widow of a deceased
gentleman of Leyden; and although the lady was not at that age at which
tender passions are usually inspired--being sixty--and though she could
not, like Mademoiselle Ninon de l'Enclos, then at Paris, boast of charms
which defied the progress of time,--for Mrs. Silverkoop was as red as a
boiled lobster, and as unwieldy as a porpoise; and although her mental
attractions did by no means make up for her personal deficiencies,--for
she was jealous, violent, vulgar, drunken, and stingy to a miracle:
yet her charms had an immediate effect on Monsieur de Galgenstein; and
hence, perhaps, the reader (the rogue! how well he knows the world!)
will be led to conclude that the honest widow was RICH.

Such, indeed, she was; and Count Gustavus, despising the difference
between his twenty quarterings and her twenty thousand pounds, laid the
most desperate siege to her, and finished by causing her to capitulate;
as I do believe, after a reasonable degree of pressing, any woman will
do to any man: such, at least, has been MY experience in the matter.

The Count then married; and it was curious to see how he--who, as
we have seen in the case of Mrs. Cat, had been as great a tiger and
domestic bully as any extant--now, by degrees, fell into a quiet
submission towards his enormous Countess; who ordered him up and down as
a lady orders her footman, who permitted him speedily not to have a will
of his own, and who did not allow him a shilling of her money without
receiving for the same an accurate account.

How was it that he, the abject slave of Madam Silverkoop, had been
victorious over Mrs. Cat? The first blow is, I believe, the decisive
one in these cases, and the Countess had stricken it a week after their
marriage;--establishing a supremacy which the Count never afterwards
attempted to question.

We have alluded to his Excellency's marriage, as in duty bound, because
it will be necessary to account for his appearance hereafter in a more
splendid fashion than that under which he has hitherto been known to us;
and just comforting the reader by the knowledge that the union, though
prosperous in a worldly point of view, was, in reality, extremely
unhappy, we must say no more from this time forth of the fat and
legitimate Madam de Galgenstein. Our darling is Mrs. Catherine, who had
formerly acted in her stead; and only in so much as the fat Countess
did influence in any way the destinies of our heroine, or those wise
and virtuous persons who have appeared and are to follow her to her end,
shall we in any degree allow her name to figure here. It is an awful
thing to get a glimpse, as one sometimes does, when the time is past, of
some little little wheel which works the whole mighty machinery of FATE,
and see how our destinies turn on a minute's delay or advance, or on the
turning of a street, or on somebody else's turning of a street, or
on somebody else's doing of something else in Downing Street or in
Timbuctoo, now or a thousand years ago. Thus, for instance, if Miss
Poots, in the year 1695, had never been the lovely inmate of a Spielhaus
at Amsterdam, Mr. Van Silverkoop would never have seen her; if the day
had not been extraordinarily hot, the worthy merchant would never have
gone thither; if he had not been fond of Rhenish wine and sugar, he
never would have called for any such delicacies; if he had not called
for them, Miss Ottilia Poots would never have brought them, and partaken
of them; if he had not been rich, she would certainly have rejected all
the advances made to her by Silverkoop; if he had not been so fond of
Rhenish and sugar, he never would have died; and Mrs. Silverkoop would
have been neither rich nor a widow, nor a wife to Count von Galgenstein.
Nay, nor would this history have ever been written; for if Count
Galgenstein had not married the rich widow, Mrs. Catherine would never
have--

Oh, my dear madam! you thought we were going to tell you. Pooh!
nonsense!--no such thing! not for two or three and seventy pages or
so,--when, perhaps, you MAY know what Mrs. Catherine never would have
done.

The reader will remember, in the second chapter of these Memoirs, the
announcement that Mrs. Catherine had given to the world a child, who
might bear, if he chose, the arms of Galgenstein, with the further
adornment of a bar-sinister. This child had been put out to nurse some
time before its mother's elopement from the Count; and as that nobleman
was in funds at the time (having had that success at play which we duly
chronicled), he paid a sum of no less than twenty guineas, which was to
be the yearly reward of the nurse into whose charge the boy was put. The
woman grew fond of the brat; and when, after the first year, she had no
further news or remittances from father or mother, she determined, for
a while at least, to maintain the infant at her own expense; for, when
rebuked by her neighbours on this score, she stoutly swore that no
parents could ever desert their children, and that some day or other she
should not fail to be rewarded for her trouble with this one.

Under this strange mental hallucination poor Goody Billings, who had
five children and a husband of her own, continued to give food and
shelter to little Tom for a period of no less than seven years; and
though it must be acknowledged that the young gentleman did not in the
slightest degree merit the kindnesses shown to him, Goody Billings, who
was of a very soft and pitiful disposition, continued to bestow them
upon him: because, she said, he was lonely and unprotected, and deserved
them more than other children who had fathers and mothers to look after
them. If, then, any difference was made between Tom's treatment and that
of her own brood, it was considerably in favour of the former; to whom
the largest proportions of treacle were allotted for his bread, and
the handsomest supplies of hasty pudding. Besides, to do Mrs. Billings
justice, there WAS a party against him; and that consisted not only of
her husband and her five children, but of every single person in the
neighbourhood who had an opportunity of seeing and becoming acquainted
with Master Tom.

A celebrated philosopher--I think Miss Edgeworth--has broached the
consolatory doctrine, that in intellect and disposition all human beings
are entirely equal, and that circumstance and education are the causes
of the distinctions and divisions which afterwards unhappily take place
among them. Not to argue this question, which places Jack Howard and
Jack Thurtell on an exact level,--which would have us to believe that
Lord Melbourne is by natural gifts and excellences a man as honest,
brave, and far-sighted as the Duke of Wellington,--which would make out
that Lord Lyndhurst is, in point of principle, eloquence, and political
honesty, no better than Mr. O'Connell,--not, I say, arguing this
doctrine, let us simply state that Master Thomas Billings (for, having
no other, he took the name of the worthy people who adopted him) was in
his long-coats fearfully passionate, screaming and roaring perpetually,
and showing all the ill that he COULD show. At the age of two, when
his strength enabled him to toddle abroad, his favourite resort was
the coal-hole or the dung-heap: his roarings had not diminished in the
least, and he had added to his former virtues two new ones,--a love
of fighting and stealing; both which amiable qualities he had many
opportunities of exercising every day. He fought his little adoptive
brothers and sisters; he kicked and cuffed his father and mother; he
fought the cat, stamped upon the kittens, was worsted in a severe battle
with the hen in the backyard; but, in revenge, nearly beat a little
sucking-pig to death, whom he caught alone and rambling near his
favourite haunt, the dung-hill. As for stealing, he stole the eggs,
which he perforated and emptied; the butter, which he ate with or
without bread, as he could find it; the sugar, which he cunningly
secreted in the leaves of a "Baker's Chronicle," that nobody in the
establishment could read; and thus from the pages of history he used to
suck in all he knew--thieving and lying namely; in which, for his years,
he made wonderful progress. If any followers of Miss Edgeworth and the
philosophers are inclined to disbelieve this statement, or to set it
down as overcharged and distorted, let them be assured that just this
very picture was, of all the pictures in the world, taken from nature.
I, Ikey Solomons, once had a dear little brother who could steal before
he could walk (and this not from encouragement,--for, if you know the
world, you must know that in families of our profession the point of
honour is sacred at home,--but from pure nature)--who could steal, I
say, before he could walk, and lie before he could speak; and who, at
four and a half years of age, having attacked my sister Rebecca on some
question of lollipops, had smitten her on the elbow with a fire-shovel,
apologising to us by saying simply, "---- her, I wish it had been her
head!" Dear, dear Aminadab! I think of you, and laugh these philosophers
to scorn. Nature made you for that career which you fulfilled: you
were from your birth to your dying a scoundrel; you COULDN'T have been
anything else, however your lot was cast; and blessed it was that you
were born among the prigs,--for had you been of any other profession,
alas! alas! what ills might you have done! As I have heard the author of
"Richelieu," "Siamese Twins," etc. say "Poeta nascitur non fit," which
means that though he had tried ever so much to be a poet, it was all
moonshine: in the like manner, I say, "ROAGUS nascitur, non fit." We
have it from nature, and so a fig for Miss Edgeworth.

In this manner, then, while his father, blessed with a wealthy wife, was
leading, in a fine house, the life of a galley-slave; while his mother,
married to Mr. Hayes, and made an honest women of, as the saying is, was
passing her time respectably in Warwickshire, Mr. Thomas Billings
was inhabiting the same county, not cared for by either of them; but
ordained by Fate to join them one day, and have a mighty influence upon
the fortunes of both. For, as it has often happened to the traveller in
the York or the Exeter coach to fall snugly asleep in his corner, and on
awaking suddenly to find himself sixty or seventy miles from the place
where Somnus first visited him: as, we say, although you sit still,
Time, poor wretch, keeps perpetually running on, and so must run day
and night, with never a pause or a halt of five minutes to get a drink,
until his dying day; let the reader imagine that since he left Mrs.
Hayes and all the other worthy personages of this history, in the last
chapter, seven years have sped away; during which, all our heroes and
heroines have been accomplishing their destinies.

Seven years of country carpentering, or rather trading, on the part of a
husband, of ceaseless scolding, violence, and discontent on the part of
a wife, are not pleasant to describe: so we shall omit altogether
any account of the early married life of Mr. and Mrs. John Hayes. The
"Newgate Calendar" (to which excellent compilation we and the OTHER
popular novelists of the day can never be sufficiently grateful) states
that Hayes left his house three or four times during this period, and,
urged by the restless humours of his wife, tried several professions:
returning, however, as he grew weary of each, to his wife and his
paternal home. After a certain time his parents died, and by their
demise he succeeded to a small property, and the carpentering business,
which he for some time followed.

What, then, in the meanwhile, had become of Captain Wood, or Brock,
and Ensign Macshane?--the only persons now to be accounted for in our
catalogue. For about six months after their capture and release of
Mr. Hayes, those noble gentlemen had followed, with much prudence and
success, that trade which the celebrated and polite Duval, the ingenious
Sheppard, the dauntless Turpin, and indeed many other heroes of our most
popular novels, had pursued,--or were pursuing, in their time. And so
considerable were said to be Captain Wood's gains, that reports were
abroad of his having somewhere a buried treasure; to which he might have
added more, had not Fate suddenly cut short his career as a prig. He
and the Ensign were--shame to say--transported for stealing three
pewter-pots off a railing at Exeter; and not being known in the town,
which they had only reached that morning, they were detained by
no further charges, but simply condemned on this one. For this
misdemeanour, Her Majesty's Government vindictively sent them for seven
years beyond the sea; and, as the fashion then was, sold the use of
their bodies to Virginian planters during that space of time. It is
thus, alas! that the strong are always used to deal with the weak, and
many an honest fellow has been led to rue his unfortunate difference
with the law.

Thus, then, we have settled all scores. The Count is in Holland with his
wife; Mrs. Cat in Warwickshire along with her excellent husband; Master
Thomas Billings with his adoptive parents in the same county; and the
two military gentlemen watching the progress and cultivation of the
tobacco and cotton plant in the New World. All these things having
passed between the acts, dingaring-a-dingaring-a-dingledingleding, the
drop draws up, and the next act begins. By the way, the play ENDS with a
drop: but that is neither here nor there.

                    *****

(Here, as in a theatre, the orchestra is supposed to play something
melodious. The people get up, shake themselves, yawn, and settle down
in their seats again. "Porter, ale, ginger-beer, cider," comes round,
squeezing through the legs of the gentlemen in the pit. Nobody takes
anything, as usual; and lo! the curtain rises again. "Sh, 'shsh,
'shshshhh! Hats off!" says everybody.)

                    *****

Mrs. Hayes had now been for six years the adored wife of Mr. Hayes, and
no offspring had arisen to bless their loves and perpetuate their name.
She had obtained a complete mastery over her lord and master; and
having had, as far as was in that gentleman's power, every single wish
gratified that she could demand, in the way of dress, treats to Coventry
and Birmingham, drink, and what not--for, though a hard man, John Hayes
had learned to spend his money pretty freely on himself and her--having
had all her wishes gratified, it was natural that she should begin to
find out some more; and the next whim she hit upon was to be restored
to her child. It may be as well to state that she had never informed her
husband of the existence of that phenomenon, although he was aware
of his wife's former connection with the Count,--Mrs. Hayes, in their
matrimonial quarrels, invariably taunting him with accounts of her
former splendour and happiness, and with his own meanness of taste in
condescending to take up with his Excellency's leavings.

She determined, then (but as yet had not confided her determination
to her husband), she would have her boy; although in her seven years'
residence within twenty miles of him she had never once thought of
seeing him: and the kind reader knows that when his excellent lady
determines on a thing--a shawl, or an opera-box, or a new carriage, or
twenty-four singing-lessons from Tamburini, or a night at the "Eagle
Tavern," City Road, or a ride in a 'bus to Richmond and tea and
brandy-and-water at "Rose Cottage Hotel"--the reader, high or low, knows
that when Mrs. Reader desires a thing have it she will; you may just as
well talk of avoiding her as of avoiding gout, bills, or grey hairs--and
that, you know, is impossible. I, for my part, have had all three--ay,
and a wife too.

I say that when a woman is resolved on a thing, happen it will; if
husbands refuse, Fate will interfere (flectere si nequeo, etc.; but
quotations are odious). And some hidden power was working in the case of
Mrs. Hayes, and, for its own awful purposes, lending her its aid.

Who has not felt how he works--the dreadful conquering Spirit of
Ill? Who cannot see, in the circle of his own society, the fated and
foredoomed to woe and evil? Some call the doctrine of destiny a dark
creed; but, for me, I would fain try and think it a consolatory one. It
is better, with all one's sins upon one's head, to deem oneself in
the hands of Fate, than to think--with our fierce passions and weak
repentances; with our resolves so loud, so vain, so ludicrously,
despicably weak and frail; with our dim, wavering, wretched conceits
about virtue, and our irresistible propensity to wrong,--that we are the
workers of our future sorrow or happiness. If we depend on our strength,
what is it against mighty circumstance? If we look to ourselves, what
hope have we? Look back at the whole of your life, and see how Fate has
mastered you and it. Think of your disappointments and your successes.
Has YOUR striving influenced one or the other? A fit of indigestion puts
itself between you and honours and reputation; an apple plops on your
nose and makes you a world's wonder and glory; a fit of poverty makes a
rascal of you, who were, and are still, an honest man; clubs, trumps,
or six lucky mains at dice, make an honest man for life of you, who ever
were, will be, and are a rascal. Who sends the illness? who causes the
apple to fall? who deprives you of your worldly goods? or who shuffles
the cards, and brings trumps, honour, virtue, and prosperity back again?
You call it chance; ay, and so it is chance that when the floor
gives way, and the rope stretches tight, the poor wretch before St.
Sepulchre's clock dies. Only with us, clear-sighted mortals as we are,
we can't SEE the rope by which we hang, and know not when or how the
drop may fall.

But revenons a nos moutons: let us return to that sweet lamb Master
Thomas, and the milk-white ewe Mrs. Cat. Seven years had passed away,
and she began to think that she should very much like to see her child
once more. It was written that she should; and you shall hear how, soon
after, without any great exertions of hers, back he came to her.

In the month of July, in the year 1715, there came down a road about
ten miles from the city of Worcester, two gentlemen; not mounted,
Templar-like, upon one horse, but having a horse between them--a sorry
bay, with a sorry saddle, and a large pack behind it; on which each by
turn took a ride. Of the two, one was a man of excessive stature, with
red hair, a very prominent nose, and a faded military dress; while the
other, an old weather-beaten, sober-looking personage, wore the
costume of a civilian--both man and dress appearing to have reached the
autumnal, or seedy state. However, the pair seemed, in spite of their
apparent poverty, to be passably merry. The old gentleman rode the
horse; and had, in the course of their journey, ridden him two miles at
least in every three. The tall one walked with immense strides by his
side; and seemed, indeed, as if he could have quickly outstripped
the four-footed animal, had he chosen to exert his speed, or had not
affection for his comrade retained him at his stirrup.

A short time previously the horse had cast a shoe; and this the tall
man on foot had gathered up, and was holding in his hand: it having been
voted that the first blacksmith to whose shop they should come should be
called upon to fit it again upon the bay horse.

"Do you remimber this counthry, Meejor?" said the tall man, who was
looking about him very much pleased, and sucking a flower. "I think
thim green cornfields is prettier looking at than the d----- tobacky out
yondther, and bad lack to it!"

"I recollect the place right well, and some queer pranks we played here
seven years agone," responded the gentleman addressed as Major. "You
remember that man and his wife, whom we took in pawn at the 'Three
Rooks'?"

"And the landlady only hung last Michaelmas?" said the tall man,
parenthetically.

"Hang the landlady!--we've got all we ever would out of HER, you know.
But about the man and woman. You went after the chap's mother, and, like
a jackass, as you are, let him loose. Well, the woman was that Catherine
that you've often heard me talk about. I like the wench, ---- her, for
I almost brought her up; and she was for a year or two along with that
scoundrel Galgenstein, who has been the cause of my ruin."

"The infernal blackguard and ruffian!" said the tall man; who, with his
companion, has no doubt been recognised by the reader.

"Well, this Catherine had a child by Galgenstein; and somewhere here
hard by the woman lived to whom we carried the brat to nurse. She was
the wife of a blacksmith, one Billings: it won't be out of the way to
get our horse shod at his house, if he is alive still, and we may learn
something about the little beast. I should be glad to see the mother
well enough."

"Do I remimber her?" said the Ensign. "Do I remimber whisky? Sure I
do, and the snivelling sneak her husband, and the stout old lady her
mother-in-law, and the dirty one-eyed ruffian who sold me the parson's
hat that had so nearly brought me into trouble. Oh but it was a rare
rise we got out of them chaps, and the old landlady that's hanged too!"
And here both Ensign Macshane and Major Brock, or Wood, grinned, and
showed much satisfaction.

It will be necessary to explain the reason of it. We gave the British
public to understand that the landlady of the "Three Rooks," at
Worcester, was a notorious fence, or banker of thieves; that is, a
purchaser of their merchandise. In her hands Mr. Brock and his companion
had left property to the amount of sixty or seventy pounds, which was
secreted in a cunning recess in a chamber of the "Three Rooks" known
only to the landlady and the gentlemen who banked with her; and in
this place, Mr. Sicklop, the one-eyed man who had joined in the Hayes
adventure, his comrade, and one or two of the topping prigs of the
county, were free. Mr. Sicklop had been shot dead in a night attack near
Bath: the landlady had been suddenly hanged, as an accomplice in another
case of robbery; and when, on their return from Virginia, our two
heroes, whose hopes of livelihood depended upon it, had bent their steps
towards Worcester, they were not a little frightened to hear of the
cruel fate of the hostess and many of the amiable frequenters of the
"Three Rooks." All the goodly company were separated; the house was no
longer an inn. Was the money gone too? At least it was worth while to
look--which Messrs. Brock and Macshane determined to do.

The house being now a private one, Mr. Brock, with a genius that was
above his station, visited its owner, with a huge portfolio under his
arm, and, in the character of a painter, requested permission to take a
particular sketch from a particular window. The Ensign followed with the
artist's materials (consisting simply of a screwdriver and a crowbar);
and it is hardly necessary to say that, when admission was granted
to them, they opened the well-known door, and to their inexpressible
satisfaction discovered, not their own peculiar savings exactly,
for these had been appropriated instantly, on hearing of their
transportation, but stores of money and goods to the amount of near
three hundred pounds: to which Mr. Macshane said they had as just and
honourable a right as anybody else. And so they had as just a right as
anybody--except the original owners: but who was to discover them?

With this booty they set out on their journey--anywhere, for they knew
not whither; and it so chanced that when their horse's shoe came off,
they were within a few furlongs of the cottage of Mr. Billings, the
blacksmith. As they came near, they were saluted by tremendous roars
issuing from the smithy. A small boy was held across the bellows, two or
three children of smaller and larger growth were holding him down, and
many others of the village were gazing in at the window, while a man,
half-naked, was lashing the little boy with a whip, and occasioning the
cries heard by the travellers. As the horse drew up, the operator looked
at the new-comers for a moment, and then proceeded incontinently with
his work; belabouring the child more fiercely than ever.

When he had done, he turned round to the new-comers and asked how he
could serve them? whereupon Mr. Wood (for such was the name he adopted,
and by such we shall call him to the end) wittily remarked that however
he might wish to serve THEM, he seemed mightily inclined to serve that
young gentleman first.

"It's no joking matter," said the blacksmith: "if I don't serve him so
now, he'll be worse off in his old age. He'll come to the gallows, as
sure as his name is Bill---never mind what his name is." And so saying,
he gave the urchin another cut; which elicited, of course, another
scream.

"Oh! his name is Bill?" said Captain Wood.

"His name's NOT Bill!" said the blacksmith, sulkily. "He's no name; and
no heart, neither. My wife took the brat in, seven years ago, from a
beggarly French chap to nurse, and she kept him, for she was a good
soul" (here his eyes began to wink), "and she's--she's gone now" (here
he began fairly to blubber). "And d--- him, out of love for her, I kept
him too, and the scoundrel is a liar and a thief. This blessed day,
merely to vex me and my boys here, he spoke ill of her, he did, and
I'll--cut--his--life--out--I--will!" and with each word honest Mulciber
applied a whack on the body of little Tom Billings; who, by shrill
shrieks, and oaths in treble, acknowledged the receipt of the blows.

"Come, come," said Mr. Wood, "set the boy down, and the bellows a-going;
my horse wants shoeing, and the poor lad has had strapping enough."

The blacksmith obeyed, and cast poor Master Thomas loose. As he
staggered away and looked back at his tormentor, his countenance assumed
an expression which made Mr. Wood say, grasping hold of Macshane's
arm, "It's the boy, it's the boy! When his mother gave Galgenstein the
laudanum, she had the self-same look with her!"

"Had she really now?" said Mr. Macshane. "And pree, Meejor, who WAS his
mother?"

"Mrs. Cat, you fool!" answered Wood.

"Then, upon my secred word of honour, she has a mighty fine KITTEN
anyhow, my dear. Aha!"

"They don't DROWN such kittens," said Mr. Wood, archly; and Macshane,
taking the allusion, clapped his finger to his nose in token of perfect
approbation of his commander's sentiment.

While the blacksmith was shoeing the horse, Mr. Wood asked him many
questions concerning the lad whom he had just been chastising, and
succeeded, beyond a doubt, in establishing his identity with the child
whom Catherine Hall had brought into the world seven years since.
Billings told him of all the virtues of his wife, and the manifold
crimes of the lad: how he stole, and fought, and lied, and swore; and
though the youngest under his roof, exercised the most baneful influence
over all the rest of his family. He was determined at last, he said, to
put him to the parish, for he did not dare to keep him.

"He's a fine whelp, and would fetch ten pieces in Virginny," sighed the
Ensign.

"Crimp, of Bristol, would give five for him," said Mr. Wood, ruminating.

"Why not take him?" said the Ensign.

"Faith, why not?" said Mr. Wood. "His keep, meanwhile, will not be
sixpence a day." Then turning round to the blacksmith, "Mr. Billings,"
said he, "you will be surprised, perhaps, to hear that I know everything
regarding that poor lad's history. His mother was an unfortunate lady
of high family, now no more; his father a German nobleman, Count de
Galgenstein by name."

"The very man!" said Billings: "a young, fair-haired man, who came here
with the child, and a dragoon sergeant."

"Count de Galgenstein by name, who, on the point of death, recommended
the infant to me."

"And did he pay you seven years' boarding?" said Mr. Billings, who was
quite alive at the very idea.

"Alas, sir, not a jot! He died, sir, six hundred pounds in my debt;
didn't he, Ensign?"

"Six hundred, upon my secred honour! I remember when he got into the
house along with the poli--"

"Psha! what matters it?" here broke out Mr. Wood, looking fiercely at
the Ensign. "Six hundred pounds he owes me: how was he to pay you? But
he told me to take charge of this boy, if I found him; and found him I
have, and WILL take charge of him, if you will hand him over."

"Send our Tom!" cried Billings. And when that youth appeared, scowling,
and yet trembling, and prepared, as it seemed, for another castigation,
his father, to his surprise, asked him if he was willing to go along
with those gentlemen, or whether he would be a good lad and stay with
him.

Mr. Tom replied immediately, "I won't be a good lad, and I'd rather go
to ---- than stay with you!"

"Will you leave your brothers and sisters?" said Billings, looking very
dismal.

"Hang my brothers and sisters--I hate 'em; and, besides, I haven't got
any!"

"But you had a good mother, hadn't you, Tom?"

Tom paused for a moment.

"Mother's gone," said he, "and you flog me, and I'll go with these men."

"Well, then, go thy ways," said Billings, starting up in a passion: "go
thy ways for a graceless reprobate; and if this gentleman will take you,
he may do so."

After some further parley, the conversation ended, and the next morning
Mr. Wood's party consisted of three: a little boy being mounted upon the
bay horse, in addition to the Ensign or himself; and the whole company
went journeying towards Bristol.

                    *****

We have said that Mrs. Hayes had, on a sudden, taken a fit of maternal
affection, and was bent upon being restored to her child; and that
benign destiny which watched over the life of this lucky lady instantly
set about gratifying her wish, and, without cost to herself of
coach-hire or saddle-horse, sent the young gentleman very quickly to her
arms. The village in which the Hayeses dwelt was but a very few miles
out of the road from Bristol; whither, on the benevolent mission above,
hinted at, our party of worthies were bound: and coming, towards the
afternoon, in sight of the house of that very Justice Ballance who had
been so nearly the ruin of Ensign Macshane, that officer narrated, for
the hundredth time, and with much glee, the circumstances which had
then befallen him, and the manner in which Mrs. Hayes the elder had come
forward to his rescue.

"Suppose we go and see the old girl?" suggested Mr. Wood. "No harm can
come to us now." And his comrade always assenting, they wound their
way towards the village, and reached it as the evening came on. In the
public-house where they rested, Wood made inquiries concerning the
Hayes family; was informed of the death of the old couple, of the
establishment of John Hayes and his wife in their place, and of the kind
of life that these latter led together. When all these points had been
imparted to him, he ruminated much: an expression of sublime triumph and
exultation at length lighted up his features. "I think, Tim," said he at
last, "that we can make more than five pieces of that boy."

"Oh, in coorse!" said Timothy Macshane, Esquire; who always agreed with
his "Meejor."

"In coorse, you fool! and how? I'll tell you how. This Hayes is well to
do in the world, and--"

"And we'll nab him again--ha, ha!" roared out Macshane. "By my secred
honour, Meejor, there never was a gineral like you at a strathyjam!"

"Peace, you bellowing donkey, and don't wake the child. The man is well
to do, his wife rules him, and they have no children. Now, either she
will be very glad to have the boy back again, and pay for the finding of
him, or else she has said nothing about him, and will pay us for being
silent too: or, at any rate, Hayes himself will be ashamed at finding
his wife the mother of a child a year older than his marriage, and will
pay for the keeping of the brat away. There's profit, my dear, in any
one of the cases, or my name's not Peter Brock."

When the Ensign understood this wondrous argument, he would fain have
fallen on his knees and worshipped his friend and guide. They began
operations, almost immediately, by an attack on Mrs. Hayes. On hearing,
as she did in private interview with the ex-corporal the next morning,
that her son was found, she was agitated by both of the passions which
Wood attributed to her. She longed to have the boy back, and would give
any reasonable sum to see him; but she dreaded exposure, and would pay
equally to avoid that. How could she gain the one point and escape the
other?

Mrs. Hayes hit upon an expedient which, I am given to understand, is not
uncommon nowadays. She suddenly discovered that she had a dear brother,
who had been obliged to fly the country in consequence of having joined
the Pretender, and had died in France, leaving behind him an only son.
This boy her brother had, with his last breath, recommended to her
protection, and had confided him to the charge of a brother officer who
was now in the country, and would speedily make his appearance; and, to
put the story beyond a doubt, Mr. Wood wrote the letter from her
brother stating all these particulars, and Ensign Macshane received
full instructions how to perform the part of the "brother officer." What
consideration Mr. Wood received for his services, we cannot say; only
it is well known that Mr. Hayes caused to be committed to gaol a young
apprentice in his service, charged with having broken open a cupboard in
which Mr. Hayes had forty guineas in gold and silver, and to which none
but he and his wife had access.

Having made these arrangements, the Corporal and his little party
decamped to a short distance, and Mrs. Catherine was left to prepare
her husband for a speedy addition to his family, in the shape of this
darling nephew. John Hayes received the news with anything but pleasure.
He had never heard of any brother of Catherine's; she had been bred at
the workhouse, and nobody ever hinted that she had relatives: but it
is easy for a lady of moderate genius to invent circumstances; and with
lies, tears, threats, coaxings, oaths, and other blandishments, she
compelled him to submit.

Two days afterwards, as Mr. Hayes was working in his shop with his lady
seated beside him, the trampling of a horse was heard in his courtyard,
and a gentleman, of huge stature, descended from it, and strode into the
shop. His figure was wrapped in a large cloak; but Mr. Hayes could not
help fancying that he had somewhere seen his face before.

"This, I preshoom," said the gentleman, "is Misther Hayes, that I have
come so many miles to see, and this is his amiable lady? I was the
most intimate frind, madam, of your laminted brother, who died in King
Lewis's service, and whose last touching letthers I despatched to you
two days ago. I have with me a further precious token of my dear friend,
Captain Hall--it is HERE."

And so saying, the military gentleman, with one arm, removed his cloak,
and stretching forward the other into Hayes's face almost, stretched
likewise forward a little boy, grinning and sprawling in the air, and
prevented only from falling to the ground by the hold which the Ensign
kept of the waistband of his little coat and breeches.

"Isn't he a pretty boy?" said Mrs. Hayes, sidling up to her husband
tenderly, and pressing one of Mr. Hayes's hands.

                    *****

About the lad's beauty it is needless to say what the carpenter thought;
but that night, and for many many nights after, the lad stayed at Mr.
Hayes's.



CHAPTER VIII. ENUMERATES THE ACCOMPLISHMENTS OF MASTER THOMAS
BILLINGS--INTRODUCES BROCK AS DOCTOR WOOD--AND ANNOUNCES THE EXECUTION
OF ENSIGN MACSHANE.


We are obliged, in recording this history, to follow accurately that
great authority, the "Calendarium Newgaticum Roagorumque Registerium,"
of which every lover of literature, in the present day knows the value;
and as that remarkable work totally discards all the unities in its
narratives, and reckons the life of its heroes only by their actions,
and not by periods of time, we must follow in the wake of this mighty
ark--a humble cock-boat. When it pauses, we pause; when it runs ten
knots an hour, we run with the same celerity; and as, in order to carry
the reader from the penultimate chapter of this work unto the last
chapter, we were compelled to make him leap over a gap of seven blank
years, ten years more must likewise be granted to us before we are at
liberty to resume our history.

During that period, Master Thomas Billings had been under the especial
care of his mother; and, as may be imagined, he rather increased than
diminished the accomplishments for which he had been remarkable while
under the roof of his foster-father. And with this advantage, that while
at the blacksmith's, and only three or four years of age, his virtues
were necessarily appreciated only in his family circle and among those
few acquaintances of his own time of life whom a youth of three can be
expected to meet in the alleys or over the gutters of a small country
hamlet,--in his mothers residence, his circle extended with his own
growth, and he began to give proofs of those powers of which in
infancy there had been only encouraging indications. Thus it was nowise
remarkable that a child of four years should not know his letters, and
should have had a great disinclination to learn them; but when a
young man of fifteen showed the same creditable ignorance, the
same undeviating dislike, it was easy to see that he possessed much
resolution and perseverance. When it was remarked, too, that, in case of
any difference, he not only beat the usher, but by no means disdained to
torment and bully the very smallest boys of the school, it was easy to
see that his mind was comprehensive and careful, as well as courageous
and grasping. As it was said of the Duke of Wellington, in the
Peninsula, that he had a thought for everybody--from Lord Hill to the
smallest drummer in the army--in like manner Tom Billings bestowed HIS
attention on high and low; but in the shape of blows: he would fight the
strongest and kick the smallest, and was always at work with one or the
other. At thirteen, when he was removed from the establishment whither
he had been sent, he was the cock of the school out of doors, and the
very last boy in. He used to let the little boys and new-comers pass him
by, and laugh; but he always belaboured them unmercifully afterwards;
and then it was, he said, HIS turn to laugh. With such a pugnacious
turn, Tom Billings ought to have been made a soldier, and might have
died a marshal; but, by an unlucky ordinance of fate, he was made a
tailor, and died a--never mind what for the present; suffice it to say,
that he was suddenly cut off, at a very early period of his existence,
by a disease which has exercised considerable ravages among the British
youth.

By consulting the authority above mentioned, we find that Hayes did
not confine himself to the profession of a carpenter, or remain long
established in the country; but was induced, by the eager spirit of Mrs.
Catherine most probably, to try his fortune in the metropolis; where he
lived, flourished, and died. Oxford Road, Saint Giles's, and Tottenham
Court were, at various periods of his residence in town, inhabited
by him. At one place he carried on the business of greengrocer and
small-coalman; in another, he was carpenter, undertaker, and lender of
money to the poor; finally, he was a lodging-house keeper in the Oxford
or Tyburn Road; but continued to exercise the last-named charitable
profession.

Lending as he did upon pledges, and carrying on a pretty large trade,
it was not for him, of course, to inquire into the pedigree of all
the pieces of plate, the bales of cloth, swords, watches, wigs,
shoe-buckles, etc. that were confided by his friends to his keeping; but
it is clear that his friends had the requisite confidence in him, and
that he enjoyed the esteem of a class of characters who still live in
history, and are admired unto this very day. The mind loves to think
that, perhaps, in Mr. Hayes's back parlour the gallant Turpin might
have hob-and-nobbed with Mrs. Catherine; that here, perhaps, the noble
Sheppard might have cracked his joke, or quaffed his pint of rum. Who
knows but that Macheath and Paul Clifford may have crossed legs under
Hayes's dinner-table? But why pause to speculate on things that might
have been? why desert reality for fond imagination, or call up from
their honoured graves the sacred dead? I know not: and yet, in sooth, I
can never pass Cumberland Gate without a sigh, as I think of the gallant
cavaliers who traversed that road in old time. Pious priests accompanied
their triumphs; their chariots were surrounded by hosts of glittering
javelin-men. As the slave at the car of the Roman conqueror shouted,
"Remember thou art mortal!", before the eyes of the British warrior rode
the undertaker and his coffin, telling him that he too must die! Mark
well the spot! A hundred years ago Albion Street (where comic Power
dwelt, Milesia's darling son)--Albion Street was a desert. The square of
Connaught was without its penultimate, and, strictly speaking, NAUGHT.
The Edgware Road was then a road, 'tis true; with tinkling waggons
passing now and then, and fragrant walls of snowy hawthorn blossoms.
The ploughman whistled over Nutford Place; down the green solitudes of
Sovereign Street the merry milkmaid led the lowing kine. Here, then, in
the midst of green fields and sweet air--before ever omnibuses were,
and when Pineapple Turnpike and Terrace were alike unknown--here stood
Tyburn: and on the road towards it, perhaps to enjoy the prospect,
stood, in the year 1725, the habitation of Mr. John Hayes.

One fine morning in the year 1725, Mrs. Hayes, who had been abroad
in her best hat and riding-hood; Mr. Hayes, who for a wonder had
accompanied her; and Mrs. Springatt, a lodger, who for a remuneration
had the honour of sharing Mrs. Hayes's friendship and table: all
returned, smiling and rosy, at about half-past ten o'clock, from a
walk which they had taken to Bayswater. Many thousands of people were
likewise seen flocking down the Oxford Road; and you would rather
have thought, from the smartness of their appearance and the pleasure
depicted in their countenances, that they were just issuing from a
sermon, than quitting the ceremony which they had been to attend.

The fact is, that they had just been to see a gentleman hanged,--a
cheap pleasure, which the Hayes family never denied themselves; and they
returned home with a good appetite to breakfast, braced by the walk, and
tickled into hunger, as it were, by the spectacle. I can recollect, when
I was a gyp at Cambridge, that the "men" used to have breakfast-parties
for the very same purpose; and the exhibition of the morning acted
infallibly upon the stomach, and caused the young students to eat with
much voracity.

Well, Mrs. Catherine, a handsome, well-dressed, plump, rosy woman of
three or four and thirty (and when, my dear, is a woman handsomer than
at that age?), came in quite merrily from her walk, and entered the
back-parlour, which looked into a pleasant yard, or garden, whereon the
sun was shining very gaily; and where, at a table covered with a nice
white cloth, laid out with some silver mugs, too, and knives, all with
different crests and patterns, sat an old gentleman reading in an old
book.

"Here we are at last, Doctor," said Mrs. Hayes, "and here's his speech."
She produced the little halfpenny tract, which to this day is sold at
the gallows-foot upon the death of every offender. "I've seen a many men
turned off, to be sure; but I never did see one who bore it more like a
man than he did."

"My dear," said the gentleman addressed as Doctor, "he was as cool and
as brave as steel, and no more minded hanging than tooth-drawing."

"It was the drink that ruined him," said Mrs. Cat.

"Drink, and bad company. I warned him, my dear,--I warned him years ago:
and directly he got into Wild's gang, I knew that he had not a year
to run. Ah, why, my love, will men continue such dangerous courses,"
continued the Doctor, with a sigh, "and jeopardy their lives for a
miserable watch or a snuff-box, of which Mr. Wild takes three-fourths of
the produce? But here comes the breakfast; and, egad, I am as hungry as
a lad of twenty."

Indeed, at this moment Mrs. Hayes's servant appeared with a smoking dish
of bacon and greens; and Mr. Hayes himself ascended from the cellar
(of which he kept the key), bearing with him a tolerably large jug
of small-beer. To this repast the Doctor, Mrs. Springatt (the other
lodger), and Mr. and Mrs. Hayes, proceeded with great alacrity. A fifth
cover was laid, but not used; the company remarking that "Tom had very
likely found some acquaintances at Tyburn, with whom he might choose to
pass the morning."

Tom was Master Thomas Billings, now of the age of sixteen: slim,
smart, five feet ten inches in height, handsome, sallow in complexion,
black-eyed and black-haired. Mr. Billings was apprentice to a tailor, of
tolerable practice, who was to take him into partnership at the end of
his term. It was supposed, and with reason, that Tom would not fail
to make a fortune in this business; of which the present head was one
Beinkleider, a German. Beinkleider was skilful in his trade (after
the manner of his nation, which in breeches and metaphysics--in
inexpressibles and incomprehensibles--may instruct all Europe), but too
fond of his pleasure. Some promissory notes of his had found their way
into Hayes's hands, and had given him the means not only of providing
Master Billings with a cheap apprenticeship, and a cheap partnership
afterwards; but would empower him, in one or two years after the young
partner had joined the firm, to eject the old one altogether. So that
there was every prospect that, when Mr. Billings was twenty-one years
of age, poor Beinkleider would have to act, not as his master, but his
journeyman.

Tom was a very precocious youth; was supplied by a doting mother with
plenty of pocket-money, and spent it with a number of lively companions
of both sexes, at plays, bull-baitings, fairs, jolly parties on the
river, and such-like innocent amusements. He could throw a main, too, as
well as his elders; had pinked his man, in a row at Madam King's in the
Piazza; and was much respected at the Roundhouse.

Mr. Hayes was not very fond of this promising young gentleman; indeed,
he had the baseness to bear malice, because, in a quarrel which occurred
about two years previously, he, Hayes, being desirous to chastise Mr.
Billings, had found himself not only quite incompetent, but actually at
the mercy of the boy; who struck him over the head with a joint-stool,
felled him to the ground, and swore he would have his life. The Doctor,
who was then also a lodger at Mr. Hayes's, interposed, and restored
the combatants, not to friendship, but to peace. Hayes never afterwards
attempted to lift his hand to the young man, but contented himself
with hating him profoundly. In this sentiment Mr. Billings participated
cordially; and, quite unlike Mr. Hayes, who never dared to show his
dislike, used on every occasion when they met, by actions, looks, words,
sneers, and curses, to let his stepfather know the opinion which he had
of him. Why did not Hayes discard the boy altogether? Because, if he
did so, he was really afraid of his life, and because he trembled
before Mrs. Hayes, his lady, as the leaf trembles before the tempest in
October. His breath was not his own, but hers; his money, too, had been
chiefly of her getting,--for though he was as stingy and mean as mortal
man can be, and so likely to save much, he had not the genius for
GETTING which Mrs. Hayes possessed. She kept his books (for she had
learned to read and write by this time), she made his bargains, and she
directed the operations of the poor-spirited little capitalist. When
bills became due, and debtors pressed for time, then she brought Hayes's
own professional merits into play. The man was as deaf and cold as a
rock; never did poor tradesmen gain a penny from him; never were the
bailiffs delayed one single minute from their prey. The Beinkleider
business, for instance, showed pretty well the genius of the two. Hayes
was for closing with him at once; but his wife saw the vast profits
which might be drawn out of him, and arranged the apprenticeship and the
partnership before alluded to. The woman heartily scorned and spit upon
her husband, who fawned upon her like a spaniel. She loved good cheer;
she did not want for a certain kind of generosity. The only feeling that
Hayes had for anyone except himself was for his wife, whom he held in
a cowardly awe and attachment: he liked drink, too, which made
him chirping and merry, and accepted willingly any treats that his
acquaintances might offer him; but he would suffer agonies when his wife
brought or ordered from the cellar a bottle of wine.

And now for the Doctor. He was about seventy years of age. He had been
much abroad; he was of a sober, cheerful aspect; he dressed handsomely
and quietly in a broad hat and cassock; but saw no company except the
few friends whom he met at the coffee-house. He had an income of about
one hundred pounds, which he promised to leave to young Billings. He was
amused with the lad, and fond of his mother, and had boarded with them
for some years past. The Doctor, in fact, was our old friend Corporal
Brock, the Reverend Doctor Wood now, as he had been Major Wood fifteen
years back.

Anyone who has read the former part of this history must have seen that
we have spoken throughout with invariable respect of Mr. Brock; and that
in every circumstance in which he has appeared, he has acted not only
with prudence, but often with genius. The early obstacle to Mr. Brock's
success was want of conduct simply. Drink, women, play--how many a brave
fellow have they ruined!--had pulled Brock down as often as his merit
had carried him up. When a man's passion for play has brought him to be
a scoundrel, it at once ceases to be hurtful to him in a worldly point
of view; he cheats, and wins. It is only for the idle and luxurious
that women retain their fascinations to a very late period; and Brock's
passions had been whipped out of him in Virginia; where much ill-health,
ill-treatment, hard labour, and hard food, speedily put an end to them.
He forgot there even how to drink; rum or wine made this poor declining
gentleman so ill that he could indulge in them no longer; and so his
three vices were cured.

Had he been ambitious, there is little doubt but that Mr. Brock, on his
return from transportation, might have risen in the world; but he was
old and a philosopher: he did not care about rising. Living was cheaper
in those days, and interest for money higher: when he had amassed about
six hundred pounds, he purchased an annuity of seventy-two pounds, and
gave out--why should he not?--that he had the capital as well as the
interest. After leaving the Hayes family in the country, he found them
again in London: he took up his abode with them, and was attached to the
mother and the son. Do you suppose that rascals have not affections
like other people? hearts, madam--ay, hearts--and family ties which they
cherish? As the Doctor lived on with this charming family he began to
regret that he had sunk all his money in annuities, and could not, as he
repeatedly vowed he would, leave his savings to his adopted children.

He felt an indescribable pleasure ("suave mari magno," etc.) in watching
the storms and tempests of the Hayes menage. He used to encourage Mrs.
Catherine into anger when, haply, that lady's fits of calm would last
too long; he used to warm up the disputes between wife and husband,
mother and son, and enjoy them beyond expression: they served him for
daily amusement; and he used to laugh until the tears ran down his
venerable cheeks at the accounts which young Tom continually brought
him of his pranks abroad, among watchmen and constables, at taverns or
elsewhere.

When, therefore, as the party were discussing their bacon and cabbage,
before which the Reverend Doctor with much gravity said grace, Master
Tom entered. Doctor Wood, who had before been rather gloomy, immediately
brightened up, and made a place for Billings between himself and Mrs.
Catherine.

"How do, old cock?" said that young gentleman familiarly. "How goes it,
mother?" And so saying, he seized eagerly upon the jug of beer which Mr.
Hayes had drawn, and from which the latter was about to help himself,
and poured down his throat exactly one quart.

"Ah!" said Mr. Billings, drawing breath after a draught which he had
learned accurately to gauge from the habit of drinking out of pewter
measures which held precisely that quantity.--"Ah!" said Mr. Billings,
drawing breath, and wiping his mouth with his sleeves, "this is very
thin stuff, old Squaretoes; but my coppers have been red-hot since last
night, and they wanted a sluicing."

"Should you like some ale, dear?" said Mrs. Hayes, that fond and
judicious parent.

"A quart of brandy, Tom?" said Doctor Wood. "Your papa will run down to
the cellar for it in a minute."

"I'll see him hanged first!" cried Mr. Hayes, quite frightened.

"Oh, fie, now, you unnatural father!" said the Doctor.

The very name of father used to put Mr. Hayes in a fury. "I'm not his
father, thank Heaven!" said he.

"No, nor nobody else's," said Tom.

Mr. Hayes only muttered "Base-born brat!"

"His father was a gentleman,--that's more than you ever were!" screamed
Mrs. Hayes. "His father was a man of spirit; no cowardly sneak of a
carpenter, Mr Hayes! Tom has noble blood in his veins, for all he has a
tailor's appearance; and if his mother had had her right, she would be
now in a coach-and-six."

"I wish I could find my father," said Tom; "for I think Polly Briggs and
I would look mighty well in a coach-and-six." Tom fancied that if his
father was a count at the time of his birth, he must be a prince now;
and, indeed, went among his companions by the latter august title.

"Ay, Tom, that you would," cried his mother, looking at him fondly.

"With a sword by my side, and a hat and feather there's never a lord at
St. James's would cut a finer figure."

After a little more of this talk, in which Mrs. Hayes let the company
know her high opinion of her son--who, as usual, took care to show
his extreme contempt for his stepfather--the latter retired to his
occupations; the lodger, Mrs. Springatt, who had never said a word all
this time, retired to her apartment on the second floor; and, pulling
out their pipes and tobacco, the old gentleman and the young one solaced
themselves with half-an-hour's more talk and smoking; while the thrifty
Mrs. Hayes, opposite to them, was busy with her books.

"What's in the confessions?" said Mr. Billings to Doctor Wood. "There
were six of 'em besides Mac: two for sheep, four housebreakers; but
nothing of consequence, I fancy."

"There's the paper," said Wood, archly. "Read for yourself, Tom."

Mr. Tom looked at the same time very fierce and very foolish; for,
though he could drink, swear, and fight as well as any lad of his inches
in England, reading was not among his accomplishments. "I tell you what,
Doctor," said he, "---- you! have no bantering with me,--for I'm not the
man that will bear it, ---- me!" and he threw a tremendous swaggering look
across the table.

"I want you to learn to read, Tommy dear. Look at your mother there over
her books: she keeps them as neat as a scrivener now, and at twenty she
could make never a stroke."

"Your godfather speaks for your good, child; and for me, thou knowest
that I have promised thee a gold-headed cane and periwig on the first
day that thou canst read me a column of the Flying Post."

"Hang the periwig!" said Mr. Tom, testily. "Let my godfather read the
paper himself, if he has a liking for it."

Whereupon the old gentleman put on his spectacles, and glanced over
the sheet of whity-brown paper, which, ornamented with a picture of
a gallows at the top, contained the biographies of the seven unlucky
individuals who had that morning suffered the penalty of the law. With
the six heroes who came first in the list we have nothing to do; but
have before us a copy of the paper containing the life of No. 7, and
which the Doctor read in an audible voice.

                     "CAPTAIN MACSHANE.

"The seventh victim to his own crimes was the famous highwayman, Captain
Macshane, so well known as the Irish Fire-eater.

"The Captain came to the ground in a fine white lawn shirt and nightcap;
and, being a Papist in his religion, was attended by Father O'Flaherty,
Popish priest, and chaplain to the Bavarian Envoy.

"Captain Macshane was born of respectable parents, in the town of
Clonakilty, in Ireland, being descended from most of the kings in that
country. He had the honour of serving their Majesties King William
and Queen Mary, and Her Majesty Queen Anne, in Flanders and Spain, and
obtained much credit from my Lords Marlborough and Peterborough for his
valour.

"But being placed on half-pay at the end of the war, Ensign Macshane
took to evil courses; and, frequenting the bagnios and dice-houses, was
speedily brought to ruin.

"Being at this pass, he fell in with the notorious Captain Wood, and
they two together committed many atrocious robberies in the inland
counties; but these being too hot to hold them, they went into the west,
where they were unknown. Here, however, the day of retribution arrived;
for, having stolen three pewter-pots from a public-house, they, under
false names, were tried at Exeter, and transported for seven years
beyond the sea. Thus it is seen that Justice never sleeps; but, sooner
or latter, is sure to overtake the criminal.

"On their return from Virginia, a quarrel about booty arose between
these two, and Macshane killed Wood in a combat that took place between
them near to the town of Bristol; but a waggon coming up, Macshane
was obliged to fly without the ill-gotten wealth: so true is it, that
wickedness never prospers.

"Two days afterwards, Macshane met the coach of Miss Macraw, a Scotch
lady and heiress, going, for lumbago and gout, to the Bath. He at first
would have robbed this lady; but such were his arts, that he induced
her to marry him; and they lived together for seven years in the town of
Eddenboro, in Scotland,--he passing under the name of Colonel Geraldine.
The lady dying, and Macshane having expended all her wealth, he was
obliged to resume his former evil courses, in order to save himself
from starvation; whereupon he robbed a Scotch lord, by name the Lord of
Whistlebinkie, of a mull of snuff; for which crime he was condemned to
the Tolbooth prison at Eddenboro, in Scotland, and whipped many times in
publick.

"These deserved punishments did not at all alter Captain Macshane's
disposition; and on the 17th of February last, he stopped the Bavarian
Envoy's coach on Blackheath, coming from Dover, and robbed his
Excellency and his chaplain; taking from the former his money, watches,
star, a fur-cloak, his sword (a very valuable one); and from the latter
a Romish missal, out of which he was then reading, and a case-bottle."

"The Bavarian Envoy!" said Tom parenthetically. "My master, Beinkleider,
was his Lordship's regimental tailor in Germany, and is now making a
Court suit for him. It will be a matter of a hundred pounds to him, I
warrant."

Doctor Wood resumed his reading. "Hum--hum! A Romish missal, out of
which he was reading, and a case-bottle.

"By means of the famous Mr. Wild, this notorious criminal was brought
to justice, and the case-bottle and missal have been restored to Father
O'Flaherty.

"During his confinement in Newgate, Mr. Macshane could not be brought to
express any contrition for his crimes, except that of having killed his
commanding officer. For this Wood he pretended an excessive sorrow,
and vowed that usquebaugh had been the cause of his death,--indeed, in
prison he partook of no other liquor, and drunk a bottle of it on the
day before his death.

"He was visited by several of the clergy and gentry in his cell; among
others, by the Popish priest whom he had robbed, Father O'Flaherty,
before mentioned, who attended him likewise in his last moments (if
that idolatrous worship may be called attention), and likewise by
the Father's patron, the Bavarian Ambassador, his Excellency Count
Maximilian de Galgenstein."

As old Wood came to these words, he paused to give them utterance.

"What! Max?" screamed Mrs. Hayes, letting her ink-bottle fall over her
ledgers.

"Why, be hanged if it ben't my father!" said Mr. Billings.

"Your father, sure enough, unless there be others of his name, and
unless the scoundrel is hanged," said the Doctor--sinking his voice,
however, at the end of the sentence.

Mr. Billings broke his pipe in an agony of joy. "I think we'll have the
coach now, Mother," says he; "and I'm blessed if Polly Briggs shall not
look as fine as a duchess."

"Polly Briggs is a low slut, Tom, and not fit for the likes of you, his
Excellency's son. Oh, fie! You must be a gentleman now, sirrah; and
I doubt whether I shan't take you away from that odious tailor's shop
altogether."

To this proposition Mr. Billings objected altogether; for, besides Mrs.
Briggs before alluded to, the young gentleman was much attached to his
master's daughter, Mrs. Margaret Gretel, or Gretchen Beinkleider.

"No," says he. "There will be time to think of that hereafter, ma'am. If
my pa makes a man of me, why, of course, the shop may go to the deuce,
for what I care; but we had better wait, look you, for something certain
before we give up such a pretty bird in the hand as this."

"He speaks like Solomon," said the Doctor.

"I always said he would be a credit to his old mother, didn't I, Brock?"
cried Mrs. Cat, embracing her son very affectionately. "A credit to her;
ay, I warrant, a real blessing! And dost thou want any money, Tom? for
a lord's son must not go about without a few pieces in his pocket. And I
tell thee, Tommy, thou must go and see his Lordship; and thou shalt
have a piece of brocade for a waistcoat, thou shalt; ay, and the
silver-hilted sword I told thee of; but oh, Tommy, Tommy! have a care,
and don't be a-drawing of it in naughty company at the gaming-houses, or
at the--"

"A drawing of fiddlesticks, Mother! If I go to see my father, I must
have a reason for it; and instead of going with a sword in my hand, I
shall take something else in it."

"The lad IS a lad of nous," cried Doctor Wood, "although his mother does
spoil him so cruelly. Look you, Madam Cat: did you not hear what he said
about Beinkleider and the clothes? Tommy will just wait on the Count
with his Lordship's breeches. A man may learn a deal of news in the
trying on of a pair of breeches."

And so it was agreed that in this manner the son should at first
make his appearance before his father. Mrs. Cat gave him the piece of
brocade, which, in the course of the day, was fashioned into a smart
waistcoat (for Beinkleider's shop was close by, in Cavendish Square).
Mrs. Gretel, with many blushes, tied a fine blue riband round his neck;
and, in a pair of silk stockings, with gold buckles to his shoes, Master
Billings looked a very proper young gentleman.

"And, Tommy," said his mother, blushing and hesitating, "should
Max--should his Lordship ask after your--want to know if your mother is
alive, you can say she is, and well, and often talks of old times. And,
Tommy" (after another pause), "you needn't say anything about Mr. Hayes;
only say I'm quite well."

Mrs. Hayes looked at him as he marched down the street, a long long way.
Tom was proud and gay in his new costume, and was not unlike his father.
As she looked, lo! Oxford Street disappeared, and she saw a green
common, and a village, and a little inn. There was a soldier leading a
pair of horses about on the green common; and in the inn sat a cavalier,
so young, so merry, so beautiful! Oh, what slim white hands he had; and
winning words, and tender, gentle blue eyes! Was it not an honour to
a country lass that such a noble gentleman should look at her for a
moment? Had he not some charm about him that she must needs obey when he
whispered in her ear, "Come, follow me!" As she walked towards the lane
that morning, how well she remembered each spot as she passed it, and
the look it wore for the last time! How the smoke was rising from the
pastures, how the fish were jumping and plashing in the mill-stream!
There was the church, with all its windows lighted up with gold, and
yonder were the reapers sweeping down the brown corn. She tried to sing
as she went up the hill--what was it? She could not remember; but oh,
how well she remembered the sound of the horse's hoofs, as they came
quicker, quicker--nearer, nearer! How noble he looked on his great
horse! Was he thinking of her, or were they all silly words which he
spoke last night, merely to pass away the time and deceive poor girls
with? Would he remember them,--would he?

"Cat my dear," here cried Mr. Brock, alias Captain, alias Doctor Wood,
"here's the meat a-getting cold, and I am longing for my breakfast."

As they went in he looked her hard in the face. "What, still at it,
you silly girl? I've been watching you these five minutes, Cat; and be
hanged but I think a word from Galgenstein, and you would follow him as
a fly does a treacle-pot!"

They went in to breakfast; but though there was a hot shoulder of mutton
and onion-sauce--Mrs. Catherine's favourite dish--she never touched a
morsel of it.

In the meanwhile Mr. Thomas Billings, in his new clothes which his mamma
had given him, in his new riband which the fair Miss Beinkleider had
tied round his neck, and having his Excellency's breeches wrapped in
a silk handkerchief in his right hand, turned down in the direction of
Whitehall, where the Bavarian Envoy lodged. But, before he waited
on him, Mr. Billings, being excessively pleased with his personal
appearance, made an early visit to Mrs. Briggs, who lived in the
neighbourhood of Swallow Street; and who, after expressing herself with
much enthusiasm regarding her Tommy's good looks, immediately asked him
what he would stand to drink? Raspberry gin being suggested, a pint of
that liquor was sent for; and so great was the confidence and intimacy
subsisting between these two young people, that the reader will be glad
to hear that Mrs. Polly accepted every shilling of the money which Tom
Billings had received from his mamma the day before; nay, could with
difficulty be prevented from seizing upon the cut-velvet breeches which
he was carrying to the nobleman for whom they were made. Having paid his
adieux to Mrs. Polly, Mr. Billings departed to visit his father.



CHAPTER IX. INTERVIEW BETWEEN COUNT GALGENSTEIN AND MASTER THOMAS
BILLINGS, WHEN HE INFORMS THE COUNT OF HIS PARENTAGE.


I don't know in all this miserable world a more miserable spectacle than
that of a young fellow of five or six and forty. The British army, that
nursery of valour, turns out many of the young fellows I mean: who,
having flaunted in dragoon uniforms from seventeen to six-and-thirty;
having bought, sold, or swapped during that period some two hundred
horses; having played, say, fifteen thousand games at billiards; having
drunk some six thousand bottles of wine; having consumed a reasonable
number of Nugee coats, split many dozen pairs of high-heeled Hoby boots,
and read the newspaper and the army-list duly, retire from the service
when they have attained their eighth lustre, and saunter through the
world, trailing from London to Cheltenham, and from Boulogne to Paris,
and from Paris to Baden, their idleness, their ill-health, and their
ennui. "In the morning of youth," and when seen along with whole troops
of their companions, these flowers look gaudy and brilliant enough;
but there is no object more dismal than one of them alone, and in its
autumnal, or seedy state. My friend, Captain Popjoy, is one who has
arrived at this condition, and whom everybody knows by his title of
Father Pop. A kinder, simpler, more empty-headed fellow does not exist.
He is forty-seven years old, and appears a young, good-looking man
of sixty. At the time of the Army of Occupation he really was as
good-looking a man as any in the Dragoons. He now uses all sorts of
stratagems to cover the bald place on his head, by combing certain
thin grey sidelocks over it. He has, in revenge, a pair of enormous
moustaches, which he dyes of the richest blue-black. His nose is a good
deal larger and redder than it used to be; his eyelids have grown flat
and heavy; and a little pair of red, watery eyeballs float in the midst
of them: it seems as if the light which was once in those sickly green
pupils had extravasated into the white part of the eye. If Pop's legs
are not so firm and muscular as they used to be in those days when he
took such leaps into White's buckskins, in revenge his waist is much
larger. He wears a very good coat, however, and a waistband, which he
lets out after dinner. Before ladies he blushes, and is as silent as a
schoolboy. He calls them "modest women." His society is chiefly among
young lads belonging to his former profession. He knows the best wine
to be had at each tavern or cafe, and the waiters treat him with much
respectful familiarity. He knows the names of every one of them; and
shouts out, "Send Markwell here!" or, "Tell Cuttriss to give us a bottle
of the yellow seal!" or, "Dizzy voo, Monsure Borrel, noo donny shampang
frappy," etc. He always makes the salad or the punch, and dines
out three hundred days in the year: the other days you see him in a
two-franc eating-house at Paris, or prowling about Rupert Street, or St.
Martin's Court, where you get a capital cut of meat for eightpence. He
has decent lodgings and scrupulously clean linen; his animal functions
are still tolerably well preserved, his spiritual have evaporated long
since; he sleeps well, has no conscience, believes himself to be a
respectable fellow, and is tolerably happy on the days when he is asked
out to dinner.

Poor Pop is not very high in the scale of created beings; but, if you
fancy there is none lower, you are in egregious error. There was once
a man who had a mysterious exhibition of an animal, quite unknown to
naturalists, called "the wusser." Those curious individuals who desired
to see the wusser were introduced into an apartment where appeared
before them nothing more than a little lean shrivelled hideous
blear-eyed mangy pig. Everyone cried out "Swindle!" and "Shame!"
"Patience, gentlemen, be heasy," said the showman: "look at that there
hanimal; it's a perfect phenomaly of hugliness: I engage you never see
such a pig." Nobody ever had seen. "Now, gentlemen," said he, "I'll keep
my promise, has per bill; and bad as that there pig is, look at this
here" (he showed another). "Look at this here, and you'll see at once
that it's A WUSSER." In like manner the Popjoy breed is bad enough, but
it serves only to show off the Galgenstein race; which is WUSSER.

Galgenstein had led a very gay life, as the saying is, for the last
fifteen years; such a gay one, that he had lost all capacity of
enjoyment by this time, and only possessed inclinations without
powers of gratifying them. He had grown to be exquisitely curious and
fastidious about meat and drink, for instance, and all that he wanted
was an appetite. He carried about with him a French cook, who could not
make him eat; a doctor, who could not make him well; a mistress, of whom
he was heartily sick after two days; a priest, who had been a favourite
of the exemplary Dubois, and by turns used to tickle him by the
imposition of penance, or by the repetition of a tale from the recueil
of Noce, or La Fare. All his appetites were wasted and worn; only some
monstrosity would galvanise them into momentary action. He was in that
effete state to which many noblemen of his time had arrived; who were
ready to believe in ghost-raising or in gold-making, or to retire into
monasteries and wear hair-shirts, or to dabble in conspiracies, or to
die in love with little cook-maids of fifteen, or to pine for the smiles
or at the frowns of a prince of the blood, or to go mad at the refusal
of a chamberlain's key. The last gratification he remembered to have
enjoyed was that of riding bareheaded in a soaking rain for three hours
by the side of his Grand Duke's mistress's coach; taking the pas of
Count Krahwinkel, who challenged him, and was run through the body for
this very dispute. Galgenstein gained a rheumatic gout by it, which put
him to tortures for many months; and was further gratified with the post
of English Envoy. He had a fortune, he asked no salary, and could
look the envoy very well. Father O'Flaherty did all the duties, and
furthermore acted as a spy over the ambassador--a sinecure post, for the
man had no feelings, wishes, or opinions--absolutely none.

"Upon my life, father," said this worthy man, "I care for nothing. You
have been talking for an hour about the Regent's death, and the Duchess
of Phalaris, and sly old Fleury, and what not; and I care just as much
as if you told me that one of my bauers at Galgenstein had killed a pig;
or as if my lacquey, La Rose yonder, had made love to my mistress."

"He does!" said the reverend gentleman.

"Ah, Monsieur l'Abbe!" said La Rose, who was arranging his master's
enormous Court periwig, "you are, helas! wrong. Monsieur le Comte will
not be angry at my saying that I wish the accusation were true."

The Count did not take the slightest notice of La Rose's wit, but
continued his own complaints.

"I tell you, Abbe, I care for nothing. I lost a thousand guineas t'other
night at basset; I wish to my heart I could have been vexed about it.
Egad! I remember the day when to lose a hundred made me half mad for
a month. Well, next day I had my revenge at dice, and threw thirteen
mains. There was some delay; a call for fresh bones, I think; and would
you believe it?--I fell asleep with the box in my hand!"

"A desperate case, indeed," said the Abbe.

"If it had not been for Krahwinkel, I should have been a dead man,
that's positive. That pinking him saved me."

"I make no doubt of it," said the Abbe. "Had your Excellency not run him
through, he, without a doubt, would have done the same for you."

"Psha! you mistake my words, Monsieur l'Abbe" (yawning). "I mean--what
cursed chocolate!--that I was dying for want of excitement. Not that I
cared for dying; no, d---- me if I do!"

"WHEN you do, your Excellency means," said the Abbe, a fat grey-haired
Irishman, from the Irlandois College at Paris.

His Excellency did not laugh, nor understand jokes of any kind; he was
of an undeviating stupidity, and only replied, "Sir, I mean what I say.
I don't care for living: no, nor for dying either; but I can speak as
well as another, and I'll thank you not to be correcting my phrases as
if I were one of your cursed schoolboys, and not a gentleman of fortune
and blood."

Herewith the Count, who had uttered four sentences about himself (he
never spoke of anything else), sunk back on his pillows again, quite
exhausted by his eloquence. The Abbe, who had a seat and a table by the
bedside, resumed the labours which had brought him into the room in the
morning, and busied himself with papers, which occasionally he handed
over to his superior for approval.

Presently Monsieur la Rose appeared.

"Here is a person with clothes from Mr. Beinkleider's. Will your
Excellency see him, or shall I bid him leave the clothes?"

The Count was very much fatigued by this time; he had signed three
papers, and read the first half-a-dozen lines of a pair of them.

"Bid the fellow come in, La Rose; and, hark ye, give me my wig: one
must show one's self to be a gentleman before these scoundrels." And he
therefore mounted a large chestnut-coloured, orange-scented pyramid of
horsehair, which was to awe the new-comer.

He was a lad of about seventeen, in a smart waistcoat and a blue riband:
our friend Tom Billings, indeed. He carried under his arm the Count's
destined breeches. He did not seem in the least awed, however, by
his Excellency's appearance, but looked at him with a great degree of
curiosity and boldness. In the same manner he surveyed the chaplain, and
then nodded to him with a kind look of recognition.

"Where have I seen the lad?" said the father. "Oh, I have it! My good
friend, you were at the hanging yesterday, I think?"

Mr. Billings gave a very significant nod with his head. "I never miss,"
said he.

"What a young Turk! And pray, sir, do you go for pleasure, or for
business?"

"Business! what do you mean by business?"

"Oh, I did not know whether you might be brought up to the trade, or
your relations be undergoing the operation."

"My relations," said Mr. Billings, proudly, and staring the Count full
in the face, "was not made for no such thing. I'm a tailor now, but I'm
a gentleman's son: as good a man, ay, as his lordship there: for YOU
a'n't his lordship--you're the Popish priest you are; and we were very
near giving you a touch of a few Protestant stones, master."

The Count began to be a little amused: he was pleased to see the Abbe
look alarmed, or even foolish.

"Egad, Abbe," said he, "you turn as white as a sheet."

"I don't fancy being murdered, my Lord," said the Abbe, hastily;
"and murdered for a good work. It was but to be useful to yonder poor
Irishman, who saved me as a prisoner in Flanders, when Marlborough would
have hung me up like poor Macshane himself was yesterday."

"Ah!" said the Count, bursting out with some energy, "I was thinking who
the fellow could be, ever since he robbed me on the Heath. I recollect
the scoundrel now: he was a second in a duel I had here in the year
six."

"Along with Major Wood, behind Montague House," said Mr. Billings. "I'VE
heard on it." And here he looked more knowing than ever.

"YOU!" cried the Count, more and more surprised. "And pray who the devil
ARE you?"

"My name's Billings."

"Billings?" said the Count.

"I come out of Warwickshire," said Mr. Billings.

"Indeed!"

"I was born at Birmingham town."

"Were you, really!"

"My mother's name was Hayes," continued Billings, in a solemn voice. "I
was put out to a nurse along with John Billings, a blacksmith; and my
father run away. NOW do you know who I am?"

"Why, upon honour, now," said the Count, who was amused,--"upon honour,
Mr. Billings, I have not that advantage."

"Well, then, my Lord, YOU'RE MY FATHER!"

Mr. Billings when he said this came forward to the Count with a
theatrical air; and, flinging down the breeches of which he was the
bearer, held out his arms and stared, having very little doubt but that
his Lordship would forthwith spring out of bed and hug him to his heart.
A similar piece of naivete many fathers of families have, I have no
doubt, remarked in their children; who, not caring for their parents a
single doit, conceive, nevertheless, that the latter are bound to show
all sorts of affection for them. His lordship did move, but backwards
towards the wall, and began pulling at the bell-rope with an expression
of the most intense alarm.

"Keep back, sirrah!--keep back! Suppose I AM your father, do you want
to murder me? Good heavens! how the boy smells of gin and tobacco! Don't
turn away, my lad; sit down there at a proper distance. And, La Rose,
give him some eau-de-Cologne, and get a cup of coffee. Well, now, go on
with your story. Egad, my dear Abbe, I think it is very likely that what
the lad says is true."

"If it is a family conversation," said the Abbe, "I had better leave
you."

"Oh, for Heaven's sake, no! I could not stand the boy alone. Now, Mister
ah!--What's-your-name? Have the goodness to tell your story."

Mr. Billings was woefully disconcerted; for his mother and he had agreed
that as soon as his father saw him he would be recognised at once, and,
mayhap, made heir to the estates and title; in which being disappointed,
he very sulkily went on with his narrative, and detailed many of those
events with which the reader has already been made acquainted. The Count
asked the boy's mother's Christian name, and being told it, his memory
at once returned to him.

"What! are you little Cat's son?" said his Excellency. "By heavens, mon
cher Abbe, a charming creature, but a tigress--positively a tigress. I
recollect the whole affair now. She's a little fresh black-haired woman,
a'n't she? with a sharp nose and thick eyebrows, ay? Ah yes, yes!" went
on my Lord, "I recollect her, I recollect her. It was at Birmingham I
first met her: she was my Lady Trippet's woman, wasn't she?"

"She was no such thing," said Mr. Billings, hotly. "Her aunt kept the
'Bugle Inn' on Waltham Green, and your Lordship seduced her."

"Seduced her! Oh, 'gad, so I did. Stap me, now, I did. Yes, I made her
jump on my black horse, and bore her off like--like Aeneas bore his wife
away from the siege of Rome! hey, l'Abbe?"

"The events were precisely similar," said the Abbe. "It is wonderful
what a memory you have!"

"I was always remarkable for it," continued his Excellency. "Well, where
was I,--at the black horse? Yes, at the black horse. Well, I mounted
her on the black horse, and rode her en croupe, egad--ha, ha!--to
Birmingham; and there we billed and cooed together like a pair of
turtle-doves: yes--ha!--that we did!"

"And this, I suppose, is the end of some of the BILLINGS?" said the
Abbe, pointing to Mr. Tom.

"Billings! what do you mean? Yes--oh--ah--a pun, a calembourg. Fi
donc, M. l'Abbe." And then, after the wont of very stupid people, M. de
Galgenstein went on to explain to the Abbe his own pun. "Well, but to
proceed," cries he. "We lived together at Birmingham, and I was going to
be married to a rich heiress, egad! when what do you think this little
Cat does? She murders me, egad! and makes me manquer the marriage.
Twenty thousand, I think it was; and I wanted the money in those days.
Now, wasn't she an abominable monster, that mother of yours, hey, Mr.
a--What's-your-name?"

"She served you right!" said Mr. Billings, with a great oath, starting
up out of all patience.

"Fellow!" said his Excellency, quite aghast, "do you know to whom you
speak?--to a nobleman of seventy-eight descents; a count of the Holy
Roman Empire; a representative of a sovereign? Ha, egad! Don't stamp,
fellow, if you hope for my protection."

"D--n your protection!" said Mr. Billings, in a fury. "Curse you and
your protection too! I'm a free-born Briton, and no ---- French Papist!
And any man who insults my mother--ay, or calls me feller--had better
look to himself and the two eyes in his head, I can tell him!" And with
this Mr. Billings put himself into the most approved attitude of the
Cockpit, and invited his father, the reverend gentleman, and Monsieur
la Rose the valet, to engage with him in a pugilistic encounter. The two
latter, the Abbe especially, seemed dreadfully frightened; but the Count
now looked on with much interest; and, giving utterance to a feeble kind
of chuckle, which lasted for about half a minute, said,--

"Paws off, Pompey! You young hangdog, you--egad, yes, aha! 'pon honour,
you're a lad of spirit; some of your father's spunk in you, hey? I know
him by that oath. Why, sir, when I was sixteen, I used to swear--to
swear, egad, like a Thames waterman, and exactly in this fellow's way!
Buss me, my lad; no, kiss my hand. That will do"--and he held out a very
lean yellow hand, peering from a pair of yellow ruffles. It shook very
much, and the shaking made all the rings upon it shine only the more.

"Well," says Mr. Billings, "if you wasn't a-going to abuse me nor
mother, I don't care if I shake hands with you. I ain't proud!"

The Abbe laughed with great glee; and that very evening sent off to his
Court a most ludicrous spicy description of the whole scene of meeting
between this amiable father and child; in which he said that young
Billings was the eleve favori of M. Kitch, Ecuyer, le bourreau de
Londres, and which made the Duke's mistress laugh so much that she vowed
that the Abbe should have a bishopric on his return: for, with such
store of wisdom, look you, my son, was the world governed in those days.

The Count and his offspring meanwhile conversed with some cordiality.
The former informed the latter of all the diseases to which he
was subject, his manner of curing them, his great consideration as
chamberlain to the Duke of Bavaria; how he wore his Court suits, and of
a particular powder which he had invented for the hair; how, when he
was seventeen, he had run away with a canoness, egad! who was afterwards
locked up in a convent, and grew to be sixteen stone in weight; how
he remembered the time when ladies did not wear patches; and how the
Duchess of Marlborough boxed his ears when he was so high, because he
wanted to kiss her.

All these important anecdotes took some time in the telling, and were
accompanied by many profound moral remarks; such as, "I can't abide
garlic, nor white-wine, stap me! nor Sauerkraut, though his Highness
eats half a bushel per day. I ate it the first time at Court; but when
they brought it me a second time, I refused--refused, split me and grill
me if I didn't! Everybody stared; his Highness looked as fierce as
a Turk; and that infernal Krahwinkel (my dear, I did for him
afterwards)--that cursed Krahwinkel, I say, looked as pleased as
possible, and whispered to Countess Fritsch, 'Blitzchen, Frau Grafinn,'
says he, 'it's all over with Galgenstein.' What did I do? I had the
entree, and demanded it. 'Altesse,' says I, falling on one knee, 'I ate
no kraut at dinner to-day. You remarked it: I saw your Highness remark
it.'

"'I did, M. le Comte,' said his Highness, gravely.

"I had almost tears in my eyes; but it was necessary to come to a
resolution, you know. 'Sir,' said I, 'I speak with deep grief to your
Highness, who are my benefactor, my friend, my father; but of this I
am resolved, I WILL NEVER EAT SAUERKRAUT MORE: it don't agree with me.
After being laid up for four weeks by the last dish of Sauerkraut of
which I partook, I may say with confidence--IT DON'T agree with me. By
impairing my health, it impairs my intellect, and weakens my strength;
and both I would keep for your Highness's service.'

"'Tut, tut!' said his Highness. 'Tut, tut, tut!' Those were his very
words.

"'Give me my sword or my pen,' said I. 'Give me my sword or my pen,
and with these Maximilian de Galgenstein is ready to serve you; but
sure,--sure, a great prince will pity the weak health of a faithful
subject, who does not know how to eat Sauerkraut?' His Highness was
walking about the room: I was still on my knees, and stretched forward
my hand to seize his coat.

"'GEHT ZUM TEUFEL, Sir!' said he, in a loud voice (it means 'Go to the
deuce,' my dear),--'Geht zum Teufel, and eat what you like!' With this
he went out of the room abruptly; leaving in my hand one of his buttons,
which I keep to this day. As soon as I was alone, amazed by his great
goodness and bounty, I sobbed aloud--cried like a child" (the Count's
eyes filled and winked at the very recollection), "and when I went back
into the card-room, stepping up to Krahwinkel, 'Count,' says I, 'who
looks foolish now?'--Hey there, La Rose, give me the diamond--Yes, that
was the very pun I made, and very good it was thought. 'Krahwinkel,'
says I, 'WHO LOOKS FOOLISH NOW?' and from that day to this I was never
at a Court-day asked to eat Sauerkraut--NEVER!"

"Hey there, La Rose! Bring me that diamond snuff-box in the drawer of my
secretaire;" and the snuff-box was brought. "Look at it, my dear," said
the Count, "for I saw you seemed to doubt. There is the button--the very
one that came off his Grace's coat."

Mr. Billings received it, and twisted it about with a stupid air. The
story had quite mystified him; for he did not dare yet to think his
father was a fool--his respect for the aristocracy prevented him.

When the Count's communications had ceased, which they did as soon as
the story of the Sauerkraut was finished, a silence of some minutes
ensued. Mr. Billings was trying to comprehend the circumstances above
narrated; his Lordship was exhausted; the chaplain had quitted the room
directly the word Sauerkraut was mentioned--he knew what was coming. His
Lordship looked for some time at his son; who returned the gaze with
his mouth wide open. "Well," said the Count--"well, sir? What are you
sitting there for? If you have nothing to say, sir, you had better go. I
had you here to amuse me--split me--and not to sit there staring!"

Mr. Billings rose in a fury.

"Hark ye, my lad," said the Count, "tell La Rose to give thee five
guineas, and, ah--come again some morning. A nice well-grown young lad,"
mused the Count, as Master Tommy walked wondering out of the apartment;
"a pretty fellow enough, and intelligent too."

"Well, he IS an odd fellow, my father," thought Mr. Billings, as he
walked out, having received the sum offered to him. And he immediately
went to call upon his friend Polly Briggs, from whom he had separated in
the morning.

What was the result of their interview is not at all necessary to the
progress of this history. Having made her, however, acquainted with the
particulars of his visit to his father, he went to his mother's, and
related to her all that had occurred.

Poor thing, she was very differently interested in the issue of it!



CHAPTER X. SHOWING HOW GALGENSTEIN AND MRS. CAT RECOGNISE EACH OTHER IN
MARYLEBONE GARDENS--AND HOW THE COUNT DRIVES HER HOME IN HIS CARRIAGE.


About a month after the touching conversation above related, there was
given, at Marylebone Gardens, a grand concert and entertainment, at
which the celebrated Madame Amenaide, a dancer of the theatre at Paris,
was to perform, under the patronage of several English and foreign
noblemen; among whom was his Excellency the Bavarian Envoy. Madame
Amenaide was, in fact, no other than the maitresse en titre of the
Monsieur de Galgenstein, who had her a great bargain from the Duke de
Rohan-Chabot at Paris.

It is not our purpose to make a great and learned display here,
otherwise the costumes of the company assembled at this fete might
afford scope for at least half-a-dozen pages of fine writing; and we
might give, if need were, specimens of the very songs and music sung on
the occasion. Does not the Burney collection of music, at the British
Museum, afford one an ample store of songs from which to choose?
Are there not the memoirs of Colley Cibber? those of Mrs. Clark, the
daughter of Colley? Is there not Congreve, and Farquhar--nay, and at a
pinch, the "Dramatic Biography," or even the Spectator, from which the
observant genius might borrow passages, and construct pretty antiquarian
figments? Leave we these trifles to meaner souls! Our business is not
with the breeches and periwigs, with the hoops and patches, but with the
divine hearts of men, and the passions which agitate them. What need,
therefore, have we to say that on this evening, after the dancing, the
music, and the fireworks, Monsieur de Galgenstein felt the strange and
welcome pangs of appetite, and was picking a cold chicken, along with
some other friends in an arbour--a cold chicken, with an accompaniment
of a bottle of champagne--when he was led to remark that a very handsome
plump little person, in a gorgeous stiff damask gown and petticoat, was
sauntering up and down the walk running opposite his supping-place, and
bestowing continual glances towards his Excellency. The lady, whoever
she was, was in a mask, such as ladies of high and low fashion wore at
public places in those days, and had a male companion. He was a lad of
only seventeen, marvellously well dressed--indeed, no other than the
Count's own son, Mr. Thomas Billings; who had at length received from
his mother the silver-hilted sword, and the wig, which that affectionate
parent had promised to him.

In the course of the month which had elapsed since the interview that
has been described in the former chapter, Mr. Billings had several times
had occasion to wait on his father; but though he had, according to her
wishes, frequently alluded to the existence of his mother, the Count had
never at any time expressed the slightest wish to renew his acquaintance
with that lady; who, if she had seen him, had only seen him by stealth.

The fact is, that after Billings had related to her the particulars of
his first meeting with his Excellency; which ended, like many of the
latter visits, in nothing at all; Mrs. Hayes had found some pressing
business, which continually took her to Whitehall, and had been prowling
from day to day about Monsieur de Galgenstein's lodgings. Four or five
times in the week, as his Excellency stepped into his coach, he might
have remarked, had he chosen, a woman in a black hood, who was looking
most eagerly into his eyes: but those eyes had long since left off the
practice of observing; and Madam Catherine's visits had so far gone for
nothing.

On this night, however, inspired by gaiety and drink, the Count had been
amazingly stricken by the gait and ogling of the lady in the mask. The
Reverend O'Flaherty, who was with him, and had observed the figure in
the black cloak, recognised, or thought he recognised, her. "It is the
woman who dogs your Excellency every day," said he. "She is with that
tailor lad who loves to see people hanged--your Excellency's son, I
mean." And he was just about to warn the Count of a conspiracy evidently
made against him, and that the son had brought, most likely, the mother
to play her arts upon him--he was just about, I say, to show to the
Count the folly and danger of renewing an old liaison with a woman such
as he had described Mrs. Cat to be, when his Excellency, starting
up, and interrupting his ghostly adviser at the very beginning of his
sentence, said, "Egad, l'Abbe, you are right--it IS my son, and a mighty
smart-looking creature with him. Hey! Mr. What's-your-name--Tom, you
rogue, don't you know your own father?" And so saying, and cocking his
beaver on one side, Monsieur de Galgenstein strutted jauntily after Mr.
Billings and the lady.

It was the first time that the Count had formally recognised his son.

"Tom, you rogue," stopped at this, and the Count came up. He had a white
velvet suit, covered over with stars and orders, a neat modest wig and
bag, and peach-coloured silk-stockings with silver clasps. The lady
in the mask gave a start as his Excellency came forward. "Law, mother,
don't squeege so," said Tom. The poor woman was trembling in every limb,
but she had presence of mind to "squeege" Tom a great deal harder; and
the latter took the hint, I suppose, and was silent.

The splendid Count came up. Ye gods, how his embroidery glittered in the
lamps! What a royal exhalation of musk and bergamot came from his wig,
his handkerchief, and his grand lace ruffles and frills! A broad yellow
riband passed across his breast, and ended at his hip in a shining
diamond cross--a diamond cross, and a diamond sword-hilt! Was anything
ever seen so beautiful? And might not a poor woman tremble when such
a noble creature drew near to her, and deigned, from the height of his
rank and splendour, to look down upon her? As Jove came down to Semele
in state, in his habits of ceremony, with all the grand cordons of his
orders blazing about his imperial person--thus dazzling, magnificent,
triumphant, the great Galgenstein descended towards Mrs. Catherine.
Her cheeks glowed red-hot under her coy velvet mask, her heart thumped
against the whalebone prison of her stays. What a delicious storm of
vanity was raging in her bosom! What a rush of long-pent recollections
burst forth at the sound of that enchanting voice!

As you wind up a hundred-guinea chronometer with a twopenny
watch-key--as by means of a dirty wooden plug you set all the waters of
Versailles a-raging, and splashing, and storming--in like manner, and by
like humble agents, were Mrs. Catherine's tumultuous passions set going.
The Count, we have said, slipped up to his son, and merely saying, "How
do, Tom?" cut the young gentleman altogether, and passing round to the
lady's side, said, "Madam, 'tis a charming evening--egad it is!" She
almost fainted: it was the old voice. There he was, after seventeen
years, once more at her side!

Now I know what I could have done. I can turn out a quotation from
Sophocles (by looking to the index) as well as another: I can throw off
a bit of fine writing too, with passion, similes, and a moral at the
end. What, pray, is the last sentence but one but the very finest
writing? Suppose, for example, I had made Maximilian, as he stood by the
side of Catherine, look up towards the clouds, and exclaim, in the words
of the voluptuous Cornelius Nepos,

     'Aenaoi nephelai
     'Arthoomen phanerai
      Droseran phusin euageetoi, k.t.l. [*]

     * Anglicised version of the author's original Greek text.

Or suppose, again, I had said, in a style still more popular:--

The Count advanced towards the maiden. They both were mute for a
while; and only the beating of her heart interrupted that thrilling and
passionate silence. Ah, what years of buried joys and fears, hopes and
disappointments, arose from their graves in the far past, and in those
brief moments flitted before the united ones! How sad was that delicious
retrospect, and oh, how sweet! The tears that rolled down the cheek of
each were bubbles from the choked and moss-grown wells of youth; the
sigh that heaved each bosom had some lurking odours in it--memories of
the fragrance of boyhood, echoes of the hymns of the young heart! Thus
is it ever--for these blessed recollections the soul always has a place;
and while crime perishes, and sorrow is forgotten, the beautiful alone
is eternal.

"O golden legends, written in the skies!" mused De Galgenstein, "ye
shine as ye did in the olden days! WE change, but YE speak ever the same
language. Gazing in your abysmal depths, the feeble ratioci--"

                           *****

There, now, are six columns[*] of the best writing to be found in this
or any other book. Galgenstein has quoted Euripides thrice, Plato once,
Lycophron nine times, besides extracts from the Latin syntax and the
minor Greek poets. Catherine's passionate embreathings are of the most
fashionable order; and I call upon the ingenious critic of the X----
newspaper to say whether they do not possess the real impress of the
giants of the olden time--the real Platonic smack, in a word? Not that I
want in the least to show off; but it is as well, every now and then, to
show the public what one CAN do.

     (* There WERE six columns, as mentioned by the accurate Mr.
     Solomons; but we have withdrawn two pages and three-
     quarters, because, although our correspondent has been
     excessively eloquent, according to custom, we were anxious
     to come to the facts of the story.

     Mr. Solomons, by sending to our office, may have the
     cancelled passages.--O.Y.)

Instead, however, of all this rant and nonsense, how much finer is the
speech that the Count really did make! "It is a very fine evening,--egad
it is!" The "egad" did the whole business: Mrs. Cat was as much in love
with him now as ever she had been; and, gathering up all her energies,
she said, "It is dreadful hot too, I think;" and with this she made a
curtsey.

"Stifling, split me!" added his Excellency. "What do you say, madam, to
a rest in an arbour, and a drink of something cool?"

"Sir!" said the lady, drawing back.

"Oh, a drink--a drink by all means," exclaimed Mr. Billings, who was
troubled with a perpetual thirst. "Come, mo--, Mrs. Jones, I mean.
you're fond of a glass of cold punch, you know; and the rum here is
prime, I can tell you."

The lady in the mask consented with some difficulty to the proposal of
Mr. Billings, and was led by the two gentlemen into an arbour, where she
was seated between them; and some wax-candles being lighted, punch was
brought.

She drank one or two glasses very eagerly, and so did her two
companions; although it was evident to see, from the flushed looks of
both of them, that they had little need of any such stimulus. The Count,
in the midst of his champagne, it must be said, had been amazingly
stricken and scandalised by the appearance of such a youth as Billings
in a public place with a lady under his arm. He was, the reader will
therefore understand, in the moral stage of liquor; and when he issued
out, it was not merely with the intention of examining Mr. Billings's
female companion, but of administering to him some sound correction for
venturing, at his early period of life, to form any such acquaintances.
On joining Billings, his Excellency's first step was naturally to
examine the lady. After they had been sitting for a while over their
punch, he bethought him of his original purpose, and began to address a
number of moral remarks to his son.

We have already given some specimens of Monsieur de Galgenstein's sober
conversation; and it is hardly necessary to trouble the reader with any
further reports of his speeches. They were intolerably stupid and dull;
as egotistical as his morning lecture had been, and a hundred times
more rambling and prosy. If Cat had been in the possession of her sober
senses, she would have seen in five minutes that her ancient lover was a
ninny, and have left him with scorn; but she was under the charm of old
recollections, and the sound of that silly voice was to her magical.
As for Mr. Billings, he allowed his Excellency to continue his prattle;
only frowning, yawning, cursing occasionally, but drinking continually.

So the Count descanted at length upon the enormity of young Billings's
early liaisons; and then he told his own, in the year four, with a
burgomaster's daughter at Ratisbon, when he was in the Elector of
Bavaria's service--then, after Blenheim, when he had come over to the
Duke of Marlborough, when a physician's wife at Bonn poisoned herself
for him, etc. etc.; of a piece with the story of the canoness, which has
been recorded before. All the tales were true. A clever, ugly man every
now and then is successful with the ladies; but a handsome fool is
irresistible. Mrs. Cat listened and listened. Good heavens! she
had heard all these tales before, and recollected the place and the
time--how she was hemming a handkerchief for Max; who came round and
kissed her, vowing that the physician's wife was nothing compared
to her--how he was tired, and lying on the sofa, just come home from
shooting. How handsome he looked! Cat thought he was only the handsomer
now; and looked more grave and thoughtful, the dear fellow!

The garden was filled with a vast deal of company of all kinds, and
parties were passing every moment before the arbour where our trio sat.
About half-an-hour after his Excellency had quitted his own box and
party, the Rev. Mr. O'Flaherty came discreetly round, to examine the
proceedings of his diplomatical chef. The lady in the mask was listening
with all her might; Mr. Billings was drawing figures on the table with
punch; and the Count talking incessantly. The Father Confessor listened
for a moment; and then, with something resembling an oath, walked away
to the entry of the gardens, where his Excellency's gilt coach, with
three footmen, was waiting to carry him back to London. "Get me a chair,
Joseph," said his Reverence, who infinitely preferred a seat gratis in
the coach. "That fool," muttered he, "will not move for this hour." The
reverend gentleman knew that, when the Count was on the subject of the
physician's wife, his discourses were intolerably long; and took upon
himself, therefore, to disappear, along with the rest of the Count's
party; who procured other conveyances, and returned to their homes.

After this quiet shadow had passed before the Count's box, many groups
of persons passed and repassed; and among them was no other than Mrs.
Polly Briggs, to whom we have been already introduced. Mrs. Polly was
in company with one or two other ladies, and leaning on the arm of a
gentleman with large shoulders and calves, a fierce cock to his hat,
and a shabby genteel air. His name was Mr. Moffat, and his present
occupation was that of doorkeeper at a gambling-house in Covent Garden;
where, though he saw many thousands pass daily under his eyes, his own
salary amounted to no more than four-and-sixpence weekly,--a sum quite
insufficient to maintain him in the rank which he held.

Mr. Moffat had, however, received some funds--amounting indeed, to a
matter of twelve guineas--within the last month, and was treating Mrs.
Briggs very generously to the concert. It may be as well to say that
every one of the twelve guineas had come out of Mrs. Polly's own pocket;
who, in return, had received them from Mr. Billings. And as the reader
may remember that, on the day of Tommy's first interview with his
father, he had previously paid a visit to Mrs. Briggs, having under
his arm a pair of breeches, which Mrs. Briggs coveted--he should now be
informed that she desired these breeches, not for pincushions, but for
Mr. Moffat, who had long been in want of a pair.

Having thus episodically narrated Mr. Moffat's history, let us state
that he, his lady, and their friends, passed before the Count's arbour,
joining in a melodious chorus to a song which one of the society, an
actor of Betterton's, was singing:

     "'Tis my will, when I'm dead, that no tear shall be shed,
        No 'Hic jacet' be graved on my stone;
      But pour o'er my ashes a bottle of red,
        And say a good fellow is gone,
            My brave boys!
        And say a good fellow is gone."

"My brave boys" was given with vast emphasis by the party; Mr. Moffat
growling it in a rich bass, and Mrs. Briggs in a soaring treble. As to
the notes, when quavering up to the skies, they excited various emotions
among the people in the gardens. "Silence them blackguards!" shouted a
barber, who was taking a pint of small beer along with his lady. "Stop
that there infernal screeching!" said a couple of ladies, who were
sipping ratafia in company with two pretty fellows.

"Dang it, it's Polly!" said Mr. Tom Billings, bolting out of the box,
and rushing towards the sweet-voiced Mrs. Briggs. When he reached her,
which he did quickly, and made his arrival known by tipping Mrs. Briggs
slightly on the waist, and suddenly bouncing down before her and her
friend, both of the latter drew back somewhat startled.

"Law, Mr. Billings!" says Mrs. Polly, rather coolly, "is it you? Who
thought of seeing you here?"

"Who's this here young feller?" says towering Mr. Moffat, with his bass
voice.

"It's Mr. Billings, cousin, a friend of mine," said Mrs. Polly,
beseechingly.

"Oh, cousin, if it's a friend of yours, he should know better how to
conduct himself, that's all. Har you a dancing-master, young feller,
that you cut them there capers before gentlemen?" growled Mr. Moffat;
who hated Mr. Billings, for the excellent reason that he lived upon him.

"Dancing-master be hanged!" said Mr. Billings, with becoming spirit: "if
you call me dancing-master, I'll pull your nose."

"What!" roared Mr. Moffat, "pull my nose? MY NOSE! I'll tell you what,
my lad, if you durst move me, I'll cut your throat, curse me!"

"Oh, Moffy--cousin, I mean--'tis a shame to treat the poor boy so. Go
away, Tommy; do go away; my cousin's in liquor," whimpered Madam Briggs,
who really thought that the great doorkeeper would put his threat into
execution.

"Tommy!" said Mr. Moffat, frowning horribly; "Tommy to me too? Dog,
get out of my ssss---" SIGHT was the word which Mr. Moffat intended to
utter; but he was interrupted; for, to the astonishment of his friends
and himself, Mr. Billings did actually make a spring at the monster's
nose, and caught it so firmly, that the latter could not finish his
sentence.

The operation was performed with amazing celerity; and, having concluded
it, Mr. Billings sprang back, and whisked from out its sheath that new
silver-hilted sword which his mamma had given him. "Now," said he, with
a fierce kind of calmness, "now for the throat-cutting, cousin: I'm your
man!"

How the brawl might have ended, no one can say, had the two gentlemen
actually crossed swords; but Mrs. Polly, with a wonderful presence of
mind, restored peace by exclaiming, "Hush, hush! the beaks, the beaks!"
Upon which, with one common instinct, the whole party made a rush for
the garden gates, and disappeared into the fields. Mrs. Briggs knew her
company: there was something in the very name of a constable which sent
them all a-flying.

After running a reasonable time, Mr. Billings stopped. But the great
Moffat was nowhere to be seen, and Polly Briggs had likewise vanished.
Then Tom bethought him that he would go back to his mother; but,
arriving at the gate of the gardens, was refused admittance, as he had
not a shilling in his pocket. "I've left," says Tommy, giving himself
the airs of a gentleman, "some friends in the gardens. I'm with his
Excellency the Bavarian henvy."

"Then you had better go away with him," said the gate people.

"But I tell you I left him there, in the grand circle, with a lady; and,
what's more, in the dark walk, I have left a silver-hilted sword."

"Oh, my Lord, I'll go and tell him then," cried one of the porters, "if
you will wait."

Mr. Billings seated himself on a post near the gate, and there consented
to remain until the return of his messenger. The latter went straight
to the dark walk, and found the sword, sure enough. But, instead of
returning it to its owner this discourteous knight broke the trenchant
blade at the hilt; and flinging the steel away, pocketed the baser
silver metal, and lurked off by the private door consecrated to the
waiters and fiddlers.

In the meantime, Mr. Billings waited and waited. And what was the
conversation of his worthy parents inside the garden? I cannot say; but
one of the waiters declared that he had served the great foreign Count
with two bowls of rack-punch, and some biscuits, in No. 3: that in the
box with him were first a young gentleman, who went away, and a lady,
splendidly dressed and masked: that when the lady and his Lordship were
alone, she edged away to the further end of the table, and they had much
talk: that at last, when his Grace had pressed her very much, she took
off her mask and said, "Don't you know me now, Max?" that he cried out,
"My own Catherine, thou art more beautiful than ever!" and wanted to
kneel down and vow eternal love to her; but she begged him not to do so
in a place where all the world would see: that then his Highness paid,
and they left the gardens, the lady putting on her mask again.

When they issued from the gardens, "Ho! Joseph la Rose, my coach!"
shouted his Excellency, in rather a husky voice; and the men who had
been waiting came up with the carriage. A young gentleman, who was
dosing on one of the posts at the entry, woke up suddenly at the blaze
of the torches and the noise of the footmen. The Count gave his arm to
the lady in the mask, who slipped in; and he was whispering La Rose,
when the lad who had been sleeping hit his Excellency on the shoulder,
and said, "I say, Count, you can give ME a cast home too," and jumped
into the coach.

When Catherine saw her son, she threw herself into his arms, and kissed
him with a burst of hysterical tears; of which Mr. Billings was at a
loss to understand the meaning. The Count joined them, looking not a
little disconcerted; and the pair were landed at their own door, where
stood Mr. Hayes, in his nightcap, ready to receive them, and astounded
at the splendour of the equipage in which his wife returned to him.



CHAPTER XI. OF SOME DOMESTIC QUARRELS, AND THE CONSEQUENCE THEREOF.


An ingenious magazine-writer, who lived in the time of Mr. Brock and the
Duke of Marlborough, compared the latter gentleman's conduct in battle,
when he

      "In peaceful thought the field of death surveyed,
       To fainting squadrons lent the timely aid;
       Inspired repulsed battalions to engage,
       And taught the doubtful battle where to rage"--

Mr. Joseph Addison, I say, compared the Duke of Marlborough to an angel,
who is sent by Divine command to chastise a guilty people--

      "And pleased his Master's orders to perform,
       Rides on the whirlwind, and directs the storm."

The first four of these novel lines touch off the Duke's disposition
and genius to a tittle. He had a love for such scenes of strife: in the
midst of them his spirit rose calm and supreme, soaring (like an
angel or not, but anyway the compliment is a very pretty one) on the
battle-clouds majestic, and causing to ebb or to flow the mighty tide of
war.

But as this famous simile might apply with equal propriety--to a bad
angel as to a good one, it may in like manner be employed to illustrate
small quarrels as well as great--a little family squabble, in which two
or three people are engaged, as well as a vast national dispute, argued
on each side by the roaring throats of five hundred angry cannon. The
poet means, in fact, that the Duke of Marlborough had an immense genius
for mischief.

Our friend Brock, or Wood (whose actions we love to illustrate by the
very handsomest similes), possessed this genius in common with his
Grace; and was never so happy, or seen to so much advantage, as when he
was employed in setting people by the ears. His spirits, usually dull,
then rose into the utmost gaiety and good-humour. When the doubtful
battle flagged, he by his art would instantly restore it. When, for
instance, Tom's repulsed battalions of rhetoric fled from his mamma's
fire, a few words of apt sneer or encouragement on Wood's part would
bring the fight round again; or when Mr. Hayes's fainting squadrons of
abuse broke upon the stubborn squares of Tom's bristling obstinacy, it
was Wood's delight to rally the former, and bring him once more to the
charge. A great share had this man in making those bad people worse.
Many fierce words and bad passions, many falsehoods and knaveries on
Tom's part, much bitterness, scorn, and jealousy on the part of Hayes
and Catherine, might be attributed to this hoary old tempter, whose
joy and occupation it was to raise and direct the domestic storms and
whirlwinds of the family of which he was a member. And do not let us be
accused of an undue propensity to use sounding words, because we compare
three scoundrels in the Tyburn Road to so many armies, and Mr. Wood to
a mighty field-marshal. My dear sir, when you have well studied the
world--how supremely great the meanest thing in this world is, and how
infinitely mean the greatest--I am mistaken if you do not make a strange
and proper jumble of the sublime and the ridiculous, the lofty and the
low. I have looked at the world, for my part, and come to the conclusion
that I know not which is which.

Well, then, on the night when Mrs Hayes, as recorded by us, had been to
the Marylebone Gardens, Mr. Wood had found the sincerest enjoyment in
plying her husband with drink; so that, when Catherine arrived at home,
Mr. Hayes came forward to meet her in a manner which showed he was not
only surly, but drunk. Tom stepped out of the coach first; and Hayes
asked him, with an oath, where he had been? The oath Mr. Billings
sternly flung back again (with another in its company), and at the same
time refused to give his stepfather any sort of answer to his query.

"The old man is drunk, mother," said he to Mrs. Hayes, as he handed that
lady out of the coach (before leaving which she had to withdraw her hand
rather violently from the grasp of the Count, who was inside). Hayes
instantly showed the correctness of his surmise by slamming the door
courageously in Tom's face, when he attempted to enter the house with
his mother. And when Mrs. Catherine remonstrated, according to her wont,
in a very angry and supercilious tone, Mr. Hayes replied with equal
haughtiness, and a regular quarrel ensued.

People were accustomed in those days to use much more simple and
expressive terms of language than are now thought polite; and it would
be dangerous to give, in this present year 1840, the exact words of
reproach which passed between Hayes and his wife in 1726. Mr. Wood sat
near, laughing his sides out. Mr. Hayes swore that his wife should not
go abroad to tea-gardens in search of vile Popish noblemen; to which
Mrs. Hayes replied, that Mr. Hayes was a pitiful, lying, sneaking cur,
and that she would go where she pleased. Mr. Hayes rejoined that if she
said much more he would take a stick to her. Mr. Wood whispered, "And
serve her right." Mrs. Hayes thereupon swore she had stood his cowardly
blows once or twice before, but that if ever he did so again, as sure as
she was born, she would stab him. Mr. Wood said, "Curse me, but I like
her spirit."

Mr. Hayes took another line of argument, and said, "The neighbours would
talk, madam."

"Ay, that they will, no doubt," said Mr. Wood.

"Then let them," said Catherine. "What do we care about the neighbours?
Didn't the neighbours talk when you sent Widow Wilkins to gaol? Didn't
the neighbours talk when you levied on poor old Thomson? You didn't mind
THEN, Mr. Hayes."

"Business, ma'am, is business; and if I did distrain on Thomson, and
lock up Wilkins, I think you knew about it as much as I."

"I'faith, I believe you're a pair," said Mr. Wood.

"Pray, sir, keep your tongue to yourself. Your opinion isn't asked
anyhow--no, nor your company wanted neither," cried Mrs. Catherine, with
proper spirit.

At which remark Mr. Wood only whistled.

"I have asked this here gentleman to pass this evening along with me.
We've been drinking together, ma'am."

"That we have", said Mr. Wood, looking at Mrs. Cat with the most perfect
good-humour.

"I say, ma'am, that we've been a-drinking together; and when we've been
a-drinking together, I say that a man is my friend. Doctor Wood is my
friend, madam--the Reverend Doctor Wood. We've passed the evening in
company, talking about politics, madam--politics and riddle-iddle-igion.
We've not been flaunting in tea-gardens, and ogling the men."

"It's a lie!" shrieked Mrs. Hayes. "I went with Tom--you know I did: the
boy wouldn't let me rest till I promised to go."

"Hang him, I hate him," said Mr. Hayes: "he's always in my way."

"He's the only friend I have in the world, and the only being I care a
pin for," said Catherine.

"He's an impudent idle good-for-nothing scoundrel, and I hope to see him
hanged!" shouted Mr. Hayes. "And pray, madam, whose carriage was that as
you came home in? I warrant you paid something for the ride--ha, ha!"

"Another lie!" screamed Cat, and clutched hold of a supper-knife. "Say
it again, John Hayes, and, by ------ I'll do for you."

"Do for me? Hang me," said Mr. Hayes, flourishing a stick, and perfectly
pot-valiant, "do you think I care for a bastard and a--?"

He did not finish the sentence, for the woman ran at him like a savage,
knife in hand. He bounded back, flinging his arms about wildly, and
struck her with his staff sharply across the forehead. The woman went
down instantly. A lucky blow was it for Hayes and her: it saved him from
death, perhaps, and her from murder.

All this scene--a very important one of our drama--might have been
described at much greater length; but, in truth, the author has a
natural horror of dwelling too long upon such hideous spectacles: nor
would the reader be much edified by a full and accurate knowledge of
what took place. The quarrel, however, though not more violent than many
that had previously taken place between Hayes and his wife, was about to
cause vast changes in the condition of this unhappy pair.

Hayes was at the first moment of his victory very much alarmed;
he feared that he had killed the woman; and Wood started up rather
anxiously too, with the same fancy. But she soon began to recover. Water
was brought; her head was raised and bound up; and in a short time
Mrs. Catherine gave vent to a copious fit of tears, which relieved her
somewhat. These did not affect Hayes much--they rather pleased him, for
he saw he had got the better; and although Cat fiercely turned upon him
when he made some small attempt towards reconciliation, he did not heed
her anger, but smiled and winked in a self-satisfied way at Wood. The
coward was quite proud of his victory; and finding Catherine asleep, or
apparently so, when he followed her to bed, speedily gave himself up to
slumber too, and had some pleasant dreams to his portion.

Mr. Wood also went sniggering and happy upstairs to his chamber. The
quarrel had been a real treat to him; it excited the old man--tickled
him into good-humour; and he promised himself a rare continuation of
the fun when Tom should be made acquainted with the circumstances of
the dispute. As for his Excellency the Count, the ride from Marylebone
Gardens, and a tender squeeze of the hand, which Catherine permitted
to him on parting, had so inflamed the passions of the nobleman, that,
after sleeping for nine hours, and taking his chocolate as usual the
next morning, he actually delayed to read the newspaper, and kept
waiting a toy-shop lady from Cornhill (with the sweetest bargain of
Mechlin lace), in order to discourse to his chaplain on the charms of
Mrs. Hayes.

She, poor thing, never closed her lids, except when she would have had
Mr. Hayes imagine that she slumbered; but lay beside him, tossing and
tumbling, with hot eyes wide open and heart thumping, and pulse of a
hundred and ten, and heard the heavy hours tolling; and at last the day
came peering, haggard, through the window-curtains, and found her still
wakeful and wretched.

Mrs. Hayes had never been, as we have seen, especially fond of her
lord; but now, as the day made visible to her the sleeping figure and
countenance of that gentleman, she looked at him with a contempt and
loathing such as she had never felt even in all the years of her wedded
life. Mr. Hayes was snoring profoundly: by his bedside, on his ledger,
stood a large greasy tin candlestick, containing a lank tallow-candle,
turned down in the shaft; and in the lower part, his keys, purse, and
tobacco-pipe; his feet were huddled up in his greasy threadbare clothes;
his head and half his sallow face muffled up in a red woollen nightcap;
his beard was of several days' growth; his mouth was wide open, and he
was snoring profoundly: on a more despicable little creature the sun
never shone. And to this sordid wretch was Catherine united for ever.
What a pretty rascal history might be read in yonder greasy day-book,
which never left the miser!--he never read in any other. Of what a
treasure were yonder keys and purse the keepers! not a shilling they
guarded but was picked from the pocket of necessity, plundered from
needy wantonness, or pitilessly squeezed from starvation. "A fool, a
miser, and a coward! Why was I bound to this wretch?" thought Catherine:
"I, who am high-spirited and beautiful (did not HE tell me so?); I
who, born a beggar, have raised myself to competence, and might have
mounted--who knows whither?--if cursed Fortune had not baulked me!"

As Mrs. Cat did not utter these sentiments, but only thought them, we
have a right to clothe her thoughts in the genteelest possible language;
and, to the best of our power, have done so. If the reader examines
Mrs. Hayes's train of reasoning, he will not, we should think, fail
to perceive how ingeniously she managed to fix all the wrong upon her
husband, and yet to twist out some consolatory arguments for her
own vanity. This perverse argumentation we have all of us, no doubt,
employed in our time. How often have we,--we poets, politicians,
philosophers, family-men,--found charming excuses for our own
rascalities in the monstrous wickedness of the world about us; how
loudly have we abused the times and our neighbours! All this devil's
logic did Mrs. Catherine, lying wakeful in her bed on the night of the
Marylebone fete, exert in gloomy triumph.

It must, however, be confessed, that nothing could be more just than
Mrs. Hayes's sense of her husband's scoundrelism and meanness; for if
we have not proved these in the course of this history, we have proved
nothing. Mrs. Cat had a shrewd observing mind; and if she wanted for
proofs against Hayes, she had but to look before and about her to find
them. This amiable pair were lying in a large walnut-bed, with faded
silk furniture, which had been taken from under a respectable old
invalid widow, who had become security for a prodigal son; the room was
hung round with an antique tapestry (representing Rebecca at the Well,
Bathsheba Bathing, Judith and Holofernes, and other subjects from Holy
Writ), which had been many score times sold for fifty pounds, and bought
back by Mr. Hayes for two, in those accommodating bargains which he made
with young gentlemen, who received fifty pounds of money and fifty of
tapestry in consideration of their hundred-pound bills. Against this
tapestry, and just cutting off Holofernes's head, stood an enormous
ominous black clock, the spoil of some other usurious transaction. Some
chairs, and a dismal old black cabinet, completed the furniture of this
apartment: it wanted but a ghost to render its gloom complete.

Mrs. Hayes sat up in the bed sternly regarding her husband. There is,
be sure, a strong magnetic influence in wakeful eyes so examining a
sleeping person (do not you, as a boy, remember waking of bright summer
mornings and finding your mother looking over you? had not the gaze of
her tender eyes stolen into your senses long before you woke, and cast
over your slumbering spirit a sweet spell of peace, and love, and fresh
springing joy?) Some such influence had Catherine's looks upon her
husband: for, as he slept under them, the man began to writhe about
uneasily, and to burrow his head in the pillow, and to utter quick,
strange moans and cries, such as have often jarred one's ear while
watching at the bed of the feverish sleeper. It was just upon six, and
presently the clock began to utter those dismal grinding sounds, which
issue from clocks at such periods, and which sound like the death-rattle
of the departing hour. Then the bell struck the knell of it; and with
this Mr. Hayes awoke, and looked up, and saw Catherine gazing at him.

Their eyes met for an instant, and Catherine turned away, burning red,
and looking as if she had been caught in the commission of a crime.

A kind of blank terror seized upon old Hayes's soul: a horrible icy
fear, and presentiment of coming evil; and yet the woman had but looked
at him. He thought rapidly over the occurrences of the last night, the
quarrel, and the end of it. He had often struck her before when angry,
and heaped all kinds of bitter words upon her; but, in the morning, she
bore no malice, and the previous quarrel was forgotten, or, at least,
passed over. Why should the last night's dispute not have the same end?
Hayes calculated all this, and tried to smile.

"I hope we're friends, Cat?" said he. "You know I was in liquor last
night, and sadly put out by the loss of that fifty pound. They'll ruin
me, dear--I know they will."

Mrs. Hayes did not answer.

"I should like to see the country again, dear," said he, in his most
wheedling way. "I've a mind, do you know, to call in all our money? It's
you who've made every farthing of it, that's sure; and it's a matter of
two thousand pound by this time. Suppose we go into Warwickshire, Cat,
and buy a farm, and live genteel. Shouldn't you like to live a lady in
your own county again? How they'd stare at Birmingham! hey, Cat?"

And with this Mr. Hayes made a motion as if he would seize his wife's
hand, but she flung his back again.

"Coward!" said she, "you want liquor to give you courage, and then
you've only heart enough to strike women."

"It was only in self-defence, my dear," said Hayes, whose courage had
all gone. "You tried, you know, to--to--"

"To STAB you, and I wish I had!" said Mrs. Hayes, setting her teeth, and
glaring at him like a demon; and so saying she sprung out of bed. There
was a great stain of blood on her pillow. "Look at it," said she. "That
blood's of your shedding!" and at this Hayes fairly began to weep, so
utterly downcast and frightened was the miserable man. The wretch's
tears only inspired his wife with a still greater rage and loathing; she
cared not so much for the blow, but she hated the man: the man to
whom she was tied for ever--for ever! The bar between her and wealth,
happiness, love, rank perhaps. "If I were free," thought Mrs. Hayes
(the thought had been sitting at her pillow all night, and whispering
ceaselessly into her ear)--, "If I were free, Max would marry me; I know
he would:--he said so yesterday!"

                    *****

As if by a kind of intuition, old Wood seemed to read all this woman's
thoughts; for he said that day with a sneer, that he would wager she was
thinking how much better it would be to be a Count's lady than a poor
miser's wife. "And faith," said he, "a Count and a chariot-and-six is
better than an old skinflint with a cudgel." And then he asked her if
her head was better, and supposed that she was used to beating; and cut
sundry other jokes, which made the poor wretch's wounds of mind and body
feel a thousand times sorer.

Tom, too, was made acquainted with the dispute, and swore his accustomed
vengeance against his stepfather. Such feelings, Wood, with a dexterous
malice, would never let rest; it was his joy, at first quite a
disinterested one, to goad Catherine and to frighten Hayes: though, in
truth, that unfortunate creature had no occasion for incitements from
without to keep up the dreadful state of terror and depression into
which he had fallen.

For, from the morning after the quarrel, the horrible words and looks
of Catherine never left Hayes's memory; but a cold fear followed
him--a dreadful prescience. He strove to overcome this fate as a coward
would--to kneel to it for compassion--to coax and wheedle it into
forgiveness. He was slavishly gentle to Catherine, and bore her fierce
taunts with mean resignation. He trembled before young Billings, who was
now established in the house (his mother said, to protect her against
the violence of her husband), and suffered his brutal language and
conduct without venturing to resist.

The young man and his mother lorded over the house: Hayes hardly dared
to speak in their presence; seldom sat with the family except at meals;
but slipped away to his chamber (he slept apart now from his wife) or
passed the evening at the public-house, where he was constrained to
drink--to spend some of his beloved sixpences for drink!

And, of course, the neighbours began to say, "John Hayes neglects
his wife." "He tyrannises over her, and beats her." "Always at the
public-house, leaving an honest woman alone at home!"

The unfortunate wretch did NOT hate his wife. He was used to her--fond
of her as much as he could be fond--sighed to be friends with her
again--repeatedly would creep, whimpering, to Wood's room, when the
latter was alone, and begged him to bring about a reconciliation. They
WERE reconciled, as much as ever they could be. The woman looked at him,
thought what she might be but for him, and scorned and loathed him with
a feeling that almost amounted to insanity. What nights she lay awake,
weeping, and cursing herself and him! His humility and beseeching looks
only made him more despicable and hateful to her.

If Hayes did not hate the mother, however, he hated the boy--hated and
feared him dreadfully. He would have poisoned him if he had had the
courage; but he dared not: he dared not even look at him as he sat
there, the master of the house, in insolent triumph. O God! how the
lad's brutal laughter rung in Hayes's ears; and how the stare of his
fierce bold black eyes pursued him! Of a truth, if Mr. Wood loved
mischief, as he did, honestly and purely for mischief's sake, he had
enough here. There was mean malice, and fierce scorn, and black revenge,
and sinful desire, boiling up in the hearts of these wretched people,
enough to content Mr. Wood's great master himself.

Hayes's business, as we have said, was nominally that of a carpenter;
but since, for the last few years, he had added to it that of a lender
of money, the carpenter's trade had been neglected altogether for one so
much more profitable. Mrs. Hayes had exerted herself, with much
benefit to her husband, in his usurious business. She was a resolute,
clear-sighted, keen woman, that did not love money, but loved to be rich
and push her way in the world. She would have nothing to do with the
trade now, however, and told her husband to manage it himself. She felt
that she was separated from him for ever, and could no more be brought
to consider her interests as connected with his own.

The man was well fitted for the creeping and niggling of his dastardly
trade; and gathered his moneys, and busied himself with his lawyer, and
acted as his own bookkeeper and clerk, not without satisfaction. His
wife's speculations, when they worked in concert, used often to frighten
him. He never sent out his capital without a pang, and only because he
dared not question her superior judgment and will. He began now to lend
no more: he could not let the money out of his sight. His sole pleasure
was to creep up into his room, and count and recount it. When Billings
came into the house, Hayes had taken a room next to that of Wood. It was
a protection to him; for Wood would often rebuke the lad for using Hayes
ill: and both Catherine and Tom treated the old man with deference.

At last--it was after he had collected a good deal of his money--Hayes
began to reason with himself, "Why should I stay?--stay to be insulted
by that boy, or murdered by him? He is ready for any crime." He
determined to fly. He would send Catherine money every year. No--she had
the furniture; let her let lodgings--that would support her. He would
go, and live away, abroad in some cheap place--away from that boy and
his horrible threats. The idea of freedom was agreeable to the poor
wretch; and he began to wind up his affairs as quickly as he could.

Hayes would now allow no one to make his bed or enter his room; and
Wood could hear him through the panels fidgeting perpetually to and fro,
opening and shutting of chests, and clinking of coin. At the least sound
he would start up, and would go to Billings's door and listen. Wood used
to hear him creeping through the passages, and returning stealthily to
his own chamber.

One day the woman and her son had been angrily taunting him in the
presence of a neighbour. The neighbour retired soon; and Hayes, who had
gone with him to the door, heard, on returning, the voice of Wood in the
parlour. The old man laughed in his usual saturnine way, and said, "Have
a care, Mrs. Cat; for if Hayes were to die suddenly, by the laws, the
neighbours would accuse thee of his death."

Hayes started as if he had been shot. "He too is in the plot," thought
he. "They are all leagued against me: they WILL kill me: they are only
biding their time." Fear seized him, and he thought of flying that
instant and leaving all; and he stole into his room and gathered his
money together. But only a half of it was there: in a few weeks all
would have come in. He had not the heart to go. But that night Wood
heard Hayes pause at HIS door, before he went to listen at Mrs.
Catherine's. "What is the man thinking of?" said Wood. "He is gathering
his money together. Has he a hoard yonder unknown to us all?"

Wood thought he would watch him. There was a closet between the two
rooms: Wood bored a hole in the panel, and peeped through. Hayes had a
brace of pistols, and four or five little bags before him on the table.
One of these he opened, and placed, one by one, five-and-twenty guineas
into it. Such a sum had been due that day--Catherine spoke of it only in
the morning; for the debtor's name had by chance been mentioned in the
conversation. Hayes commonly kept but a few guineas in the house. For
what was he amassing all these? The next day, Wood asked for change
for a twenty-pound bill. Hayes said he had but three guineas. And, when
asked by Catherine where the money was that was paid the day before,
said that it was at the banker's. "The man is going to fly," said Wood;
"that is sure: if he does, I know him--he will leave his wife without a
shilling."

He watched him for several days regularly: two or three more bags were
added to the former number. "They are pretty things, guineas," thought
Wood, "and tell no tales, like bank-bills." And he thought over the days
when he and Macshane used to ride abroad in search of them.

I don't know what thoughts entered into Mr. Wood's brain; but the next
day, after seeing young Billings, to whom he actually made a present of
a guinea, that young man, in conversing with his mother, said, "Do you
know, mother, that if you were free, and married the Count, I should be
a lord? It's the German law, Mr. Wood says; and you know he was in them
countries with Marlborough."

"Ay, that he would," said Mr. Wood, "in Germany: but Germany isn't
England; and it's no use talking of such things."

"Hush, child!" said Mrs. Hayes, quite eagerly: "how can _I_ marry the
Count? Besides, a'n't I married, and isn't he too great a lord for me?"

"Too great a lord?--not a whit, mother. If it wasn't for Hayes, I might
be a lord now. He gave me five guineas only last week; but curse the
skinflint who never will part with a shilling."

"It's not so bad as his striking your mother, Tom. I had my stick up,
and was ready to fell him t'other night," added Mr. Wood. And herewith
he smiled, and looked steadily in Mrs. Catherine's face. She dared not
look again; but she felt that the old man knew a secret that she had
been trying to hide from herself. Fool! he knew it; and Hayes knew it
dimly: and never, never, since that day of the gala, had it left her,
sleeping or waking. When Hayes, in his fear, had proposed to sleep away
from her, she started with joy: she had been afraid that she might talk
in her sleep, and so let slip her horrible confession.

Old Wood knew all her history since the period of the Marylebone fete.
He had wormed it out of her, day by day; he had counselled her how to
act; warned her not to yield; to procure, at least, a certain provision
for her son, and a handsome settlement for herself, if she determined
on quitting her husband. The old man looked on the business in a proper
philosophical light, told her bluntly that he saw she was bent upon
going off with the Count, and bade her take precautions: else she might
be left as she had been before.

Catherine denied all these charges; but she saw the Count daily,
notwithstanding, and took all the measures which Wood had recommended to
her. They were very prudent ones. Galgenstein grew hourly more in love:
never had he felt such a flame; not in the best days of his youth; not
for the fairest princess, countess, or actress, from Vienna to Paris.

At length--it was the night after he had seen Hayes counting his
money-bags--old Wood spoke to Mrs. Hayes very seriously. "That husband
of yours, Cat," said he, "meditates some treason; ay, and fancies we are
about such. He listens nightly at your door and at mine: he is going to
leave you, be sure on't; and if he leaves you, he leaves you to starve."

"I can be rich elsewhere," said Mrs. Cat.

"What, with Max?"

"Ay, with Max: and why not?" said Mrs. Hayes.

"Why not, fool! Do you recollect Birmingham? Do you think that
Galgenstein, who is so tender now because he HASN'T won you, will be
faithful because he HAS? Psha, woman, men are not made so! Don't go to
him until you are sure: if you were a widow now, he would marry you; but
never leave yourself at his mercy: if you were to leave your husband to
go to him, he would desert you in a fortnight!"

She might have been a Countess! she knew she might, but for this cursed
barrier between her and her fortune. Wood knew what she was thinking of,
and smiled grimly.

"Besides," he continued, "remember Tom. As sure as you leave Hayes
without some security from Max, the boy's ruined: he who might be a
lord, if his mother had but--Psha! never mind: that boy will go on
the road, as sure as my name's Wood. He's a Turpin cock in his eye, my
dear,--a regular Tyburn look. He knows too many of that sort already;
and is too fond of a bottle and a girl to resist and be honest when it
comes to the pinch."

"It's all true," said Mrs. Hayes. "Tom's a high mettlesome fellow, and
would no more mind a ride on Hounslow Heath than he does a walk now in
the Mall."

"Do you want him hanged, my dear?" said Wood.

"Ah, Doctor!"

"It IS a pity, and that's sure," concluded Mr. Wood, knocking the ashes
out of his pipe, and closing this interesting conversation. "It is a
pity that that old skinflint should be in the way of both your fortunes;
and he about to fling you over, too!"

Mrs. Catherine retired musing, as Mr. Billings had previously done; a
sweet smile of contentment lighted up the venerable features of Doctor
Wood, and he walked abroad into the streets as happy a fellow as any in
London.



CHAPTER XII. TREATS OF LOVE, AND PREPARES FOR DEATH.


And to begin this chapter, we cannot do better than quote a part of
a letter from M. l'Abbe O'Flaherty to Madame la Comtesse de X-----at
Paris:

"MADAM,--The little Arouet de Voltaire, who hath come 'hither to take a
turn in England,' as I see by the Post of this morning, hath brought me
a charming pacquet from your Ladyship's hands, which ought to render a
reasonable man happy; but, alas! makes your slave miserable. I think of
dear Paris (and something more dear than all Paris, of which, Madam,
I may not venture to speak further)--I think of dear Paris, and find
myself in this dismal Vitehall, where, when the fog clears up, I can
catch a glimpse of muddy Thames, and of that fatal palace which the
kings of England have been obliged to exchange for your noble castle of
Saint Germains, that stands so stately by silver Seine. Truly, no bad
bargain. For my part, I would give my grand ambassadorial saloons,
hangings, gildings, feasts, valets, ambassadors and all, for a bicoque
in sight of the Thuilleries' towers, or my little cell in the Irlandois.

"My last sheets have given you a pretty notion of our ambassador's
public doings; now for a pretty piece of private scandal respecting
that great man. Figure to yourself, Madam, his Excellency is in love;
actually in love, talking day and night about a certain fair one whom he
hath picked out of a gutter; who is well nigh forty years old; who was
his mistress when he was in England a captain of dragoons, some sixty,
seventy, or a hundred years since; who hath had a son by him, moreover,
a sprightly lad, apprentice to a tailor of eminence that has the honour
of making his Excellency's breeches.

"Since one fatal night when he met this fair creature at a certain place
of publique resort, called Marylebone Gardens, our Cyrus hath been an
altered creature. Love hath mastered this brainless ambassador, and his
antics afford me food for perpetual mirth. He sits now opposite to me at
a table inditing a letter to his Catherine, and copying it from--what do
you think?--from the 'Grand Cyrus.' 'I swear, madam, that my happiness
would be to offer you this hand, as I have my heart long ago, and I beg
you to bear in mind this declaration.' I have just dictated to him the
above tender words; for our Envoy, I need not tell you, is not strong at
writing or thinking.

"The fair Catherine, I must tell you, is no less than a carpenter's
wife, a well-to-do bourgeois, living at the Tyburn, or Gallows Road.
She found out her ancient lover very soon after our arrival, and hath a
marvellous hankering to be a Count's lady. A pretty little creature is
this Madam Catherine. Billets, breakfasts, pretty walks, presents of
silks and satins, pass daily between the pair; but, strange to say,
the lady is as virtuous as Diana, and hath resisted all my Count's
cajoleries hitherto. The poor fellow told me, with tears in his eyes,
that he believed he should have carried her by storm on the very first
night of their meeting, but that her son stepped into the way; and he or
somebody else hath been in the way ever since. Madam will never appear
alone. I believe it is this wondrous chastity of the lady that has
elicited this wondrous constancy of the gentleman. She is holding out
for a settlement; who knows if not for a marriage? Her husband, she
says, is ailing; her lover is fool enough, and she herself conducts
her negotiations, as I must honestly own, with a pretty notion of
diplomacy."

                    *****

This is the only part of the reverend gentleman's letter that directly
affects this history. The rest contains some scandal concerning greater
personages about the Court, a great share of abuse of the Elector
of Hanover, and a pretty description of a boxing-match at Mr. Figg's
amphitheatre in Oxford Road, where John Wells, of Edmund Bury (as by the
papers may be seen), master of the noble science of self-defence, did
engage with Edward Sutton, of Gravesend, master of the said science; and
the issue of the combat.

"N. B."--adds the Father, in a postscript--"Monsieur Figue gives a
hat to be cudgelled for before the Master mount; and the whole of
this fashionable information hath been given me by Monseigneur's son,
Monsieur Billings, garcon-tailleur, Chevalier de Galgenstein."

Mr. Billings was, in fact, a frequent visitor at the Ambassador's house;
to whose presence he, by a general order, was always admitted. As for
the connection between Mrs. Catherine and her former admirer, the
Abbe's history of it is perfectly correct; nor can it be said that this
wretched woman, whose tale now begins to wear a darker hue, was, in
anything but SOUL, faithless to her husband. But she hated him, longed
to leave him, and loved another: the end was coming quickly, and every
one of our unknowing actors and actresses were to be implicated, more or
less, in the catastrophe.

It will be seen that Mrs. Cat had followed pretty closely the
injunctions of Mr. Wood in regard to her dealings with the Count; who
grew more heart-stricken and tender daily, as the completion of his
wishes was delayed, and his desires goaded by contradiction. The Abbe
has quoted one portion of a letter written by him; here is the entire
performance, extracted, as the holy father said, chiefly from the
romance of the "Grand Cyrus".

           "Unhappy Maximilian unto unjust Catherina.

"MADAM,--It must needs be that I love you better than any ever did,
since, notwithstanding your injustice in calling me perfidious, I
love you no less than I did before. On the contrary, my passion is so
violent, and your unjust accusation makes me so sensible of it, that
if you did but know the resentments of my soule, you would confess your
selfe the most cruell and unjust woman in the world. You shall, ere
long, Madam, see me at your feete; and as you were my first passion, so
you will be my last.

"On my knees I will tell you, at the first handsom opportunity, that
the grandure of my passion can only be equalled by your beauty; it hath
driven me to such a fatall necessity, as that I cannot hide the misery
which you have caused. Sure, the hostil goddes have, to plague me,
ordayned that fatal marridge, by which you are bound to one so infinitly
below you in degree. Were that bond of ill-omind Hymen cut in twayn
witch binds you, I swear, Madam, that my happiniss woulde be to offer
you this hande, as I have my harte long agoe. And I praye you to beare
in minde this declaracion, which I here sign with my hande, and witch I
pray you may one day be called upon to prove the truth on. Beleave
me, Madam, that there is none in the World who doth more honor to your
vertue than myselfe, nor who wishes your happinesse with more zeal
than--MAXIMILIAN.

"From my lodgings in Whitehall, this 25th of February.

"To the incomparable Catherina, these, with a scarlet satten petticoat."

The Count had debated about the sentence promising marriage in event
of Hayes's death; but the honest Abbe cut these scruples very short, by
saying, justly, that, because he wrote in that manner, there was no need
for him to act so; that he had better not sign and address the note in
full; and that he presumed his Excellency was not quite so timid as to
fancy that the woman would follow him all the way to Germany, when his
diplomatic duties would be ended; as they would soon.

The receipt of this billet caused such a flush of joy and exultation to
unhappy happy Mrs. Catherine, that Wood did not fail to remark it, and
speedily learned the contents of the letter. Wood had no need to bid the
poor wretch guard it very carefully: it never from that day forth left
her; it was her title of nobility,--her pass to rank, wealth, happiness.
She began to look down on her neighbours; her manner to her husband grew
more than ordinarily scornful; the poor vain wretch longed to tell her
secret, and to take her place openly in the world. She a Countess, and
Tom a Count's son! She felt that she should royally become the title!

About this time--and Hayes was very much frightened at the prevalence
of the rumour--it suddenly began to be about in his quarter that he was
going to quit the country. The story was in everybody's mouth; people
used to sneer when he turned pale, and wept, and passionately denied it.

It was said, too, that Mrs. Hayes was not his wife, but his
mistress--everybody had this story--his mistress, whom he treated most
cruelly, and was about to desert. The tale of the blow which had felled
her to the ground was known in all quarters. When he declared that the
woman tried to stab him, nobody believed him: the women said he would
have been served right if she had done so. How had these stories gone
abroad? "Three days more, and I WILL fly," thought Hayes; "and the world
may say what it pleases."

Ay, fool, fly--away so swiftly that Fate cannot overtake thee: hide so
cunningly that Death shall not find thy place of refuge!



CHAPTER XIII. BEING A PREPARATION FOR THE END.


The reader, doubtless, doth now partly understand what dark acts of
conspiracy are beginning to gather around Mr. Hayes; and possibly hath
comprehended--

1. That if the rumour was universally credited which declared that Mrs.
Catherine was only Hayes's mistress, and not his wife,

She might, if she so inclined, marry another person; and thereby
not injure her fame and excite wonderment, but actually add to her
reputation.

2. That if all the world did steadfastly believe that Mr. Hayes intended
to desert this woman, after having cruelly maltreated her,

The direction which his journey might take would be of no consequence;
and he might go to Highgate, to Edinburgh, to Constantinople, nay, down
a well, and no soul would care to ask whither he had gone.

These points Mr. Hayes had not considered duly. The latter case had been
put to him, and annoyed him, as we have seen; the former had actually
been pressed upon him by Mrs. Hayes herself; who, in almost the only
communication she had had with him since their last quarrel, had asked
him, angrily, in the presence of Wood and her son, whether he had dared
to utter such lies, and how it came to pass that the neighbours looked
scornfully at her, and avoided her?

To this charge Mr. Hayes pleaded, very meekly, that he was not guilty;
and young Billings, taking him by the collar, and clinching his fist in
his face, swore a dreadful oath that he would have the life of him if
he dared abuse his mother. Mrs. Hayes then spoke of the general report
abroad, that he was going to desert her; which, if he attempted to do,
Mr. Billings vowed that he would follow him to Jerusalem and have his
blood. These threats, and the insolent language of young Billings,
rather calmed Hayes than agitated him: he longed to be on his journey;
but he began to hope that no obstacle would be placed in the way of
it. For the first time since many days, he began to enjoy a feeling
something akin to security, and could look with tolerable confidence
towards a comfortable completion of his own schemes of treason.

These points being duly settled, we are now arrived, O public, at a
point for which the author's soul hath been yearning ever since this
history commenced. We are now come, O critic, to a stage of the work
when this tale begins to assume an appearance so interestingly horrific,
that you must have a heart of stone if you are not interested by it.
O candid and discerning reader, who art sick of the hideous scenes of
brutal bloodshed which have of late come forth from pens of certain
eminent wits,[*] if you turn away disgusted from the book, remember that
this passage hath not been written for you, or such as you, who have
taste to know and hate the style in which it hath been composed; but
for the public, which hath no such taste:--for the public, which can
patronise four different representations of Jack Sheppard,--for the
public whom its literary providers have gorged with blood and foul
Newgate garbage,--and to whom we poor creatures, humbly following at
the tail of our great high-priests and prophets of the press, may, as in
duty bound, offer some small gift of our own: a little mite truly,
but given with good-will. Come up, then, fair Catherine and brave
Count;--appear, gallant Brock, and faultless Billings;--hasten hither,
honest John Hayes: the former chapters are but flowers in which we have
been decking you for the sacrifice. Ascend to the altar, ye innocent
lambs, and prepare for the final act: lo! the knife is sharpened, and
the sacrificer ready! Stretch your throats, sweet ones,--for the public
is thirsty, and must have blood!

     * This was written in 1840.



CHAPTER THE LAST.


That Mr. Hayes had some notion of the attachment of Monsieur de
Galgenstein for his wife is very certain: the man could not but perceive
that she was more gaily dressed, and more frequently absent than usual;
and must have been quite aware that from the day of the quarrel until
the present period, Catherine had never asked him for a shilling for the
house expenses. He had not the heart to offer, however; nor, in truth,
did she seem to remember that money was due.

She received, in fact, many sums from the tender Count. Tom was likewise
liberally provided by the same personage; who was, moreover, continually
sending presents of various kinds to the person on whom his affections
were centred.

One of these gifts was a hamper of choice mountain-wine, which had been
some weeks in the house, and excited the longing of Mr. Hayes, who loved
wine very much. This liquor was generally drunk by Wood and Billings,
who applauded it greatly; and many times, in passing through the
back-parlour,--which he had to traverse in order to reach the stair,
Hayes had cast a tender eye towards the drink; of which, had he dared,
he would have partaken.

On the 1st of March, in the year 1726, Mr. Hayes had gathered together
almost the whole sum with which he intended to decamp; and having on
that very day recovered the amount of a bill which he thought almost
hopeless, he returned home in tolerable good-humour; and feeling, so
near was his period of departure, something like security. Nobody had
attempted the least violence on him: besides, he was armed with pistols,
had his money in bills in a belt about his person, and really reasoned
with himself that there was no danger for him to apprehend.

He entered the house about dusk, at five o'clock. Mrs. Hayes was absent
with Mr. Billings; only Mr. Wood was smoking, according to his wont,
in the little back-parlour; and as Mr. Hayes passed, the old gentleman
addressed him in a friendly voice, and, wondering that he had been such
a stranger, invited him to sit and take a glass of wine. There was a
light and a foreman in the shop; Mr. Hayes gave his injunctions to that
person, and saw no objection to Mr. Wood's invitation.

The conversation, at first a little stiff between the two gentlemen,
began speedily to grow more easy and confidential: and so particularly
bland and good-humoured was Mr., or Doctor Wood, that his companion
was quite caught, and softened by the charm of his manner; and the pair
became as good friends as in the former days of their intercourse.

"I wish you would come down sometimes of evenings," quoth Doctor Wood;
"for, though no book-learned man, Mr. Hayes, look you, you are a man
of the world, and I can't abide the society of boys. There's Tom, now,
since this tiff with Mrs. Cat, the scoundrel plays the Grank Turk here!
The pair of 'em, betwixt them, have completely gotten the upper hand of
you. Confess that you are beaten, Master Hayes, and don't like the boy?"

"No more I do," said Hayes; "and that's the truth on't. A man doth not
like to have his wife's sins flung in his face, nor to be perpetually
bullied in his own house by such a fiery sprig as that."

"Mischief, sir,--mischief only," said Wood: "'tis the fun of youth, sir,
and will go off as age comes to the lad. Bad as you may think him--and
he is as skittish and fierce, sure enough, as a young colt---there is
good stuff in him; and though he hath, or fancies he hath, the right to
abuse every one, by the Lord he will let none others do so! Last week,
now, didn't he tell Mrs. Cat that you served her right in the last
beating matter? and weren't they coming to knives, just as in your case?
By my faith, they were. Ay, and at the "Braund's Head," when some fellow
said that you were a bloody Bluebeard, and would murder your wife,
stab me if Tom wasn't up in an instant and knocked the fellow down for
abusing of you!"

The first of these stories was quite true; the second was only a
charitable invention of Mr. Wood, and employed, doubtless, for the
amiable purpose of bringing the old and young men together. The scheme
partially succeeded; for, though Hayes was not so far mollified towards
Tom as to entertain any affection for a young man whom he had cordially
detested ever since he knew him, yet he felt more at ease and cheerful
regarding himself: and surely not without reason. While indulging in
these benevolent sentiments, Mrs. Catherine and her son arrived,
and found, somewhat to their astonishment, Mr. Hayes seated in the
back-parlour, as in former times; and they were invited by Mr. Wood to
sit down and drink.

We have said that certain bottles of mountain-wine were presented by the
Count to Mrs. Catherine: these were, at Mr. Wood's suggestion, produced;
and Hayes, who had long been coveting them, was charmed to have an
opportunity to drink his fill. He forthwith began bragging of his
great powers as a drinker, and vowed that he could manage eight bottles
without becoming intoxicated.

Mr. Wood grinned strangely, and looked in a peculiar way at Tom
Billings, who grinned too. Mrs. Cat's eyes were turned towards the
ground: but her face was deadly pale.

The party began drinking. Hayes kept up his reputation as a toper, and
swallowed one, two, three bottles without wincing. He grew talkative and
merry, and began to sing songs and to cut jokes; at which Wood laughed
hugely, and Billings after him. Mrs. Cat could not laugh; but sat
silent.

What ailed her? Was she thinking of the Count? She had been with Max
that day, and had promised him, for the next night at ten, an interview
near his lodgings at Whitehall. It was the first time that she would
see him alone. They were to meet (not a very cheerful place for a
love-tryst) at St. Margaret's churchyard, near Westminster Abbey. Of
this, no doubt, Cat was thinking; but what could she mean by whispering
to Wood, "No, no! for God's sake, not tonight!"

"She means we are to have no more liquor," said Wood to Mr. Hayes; who
heard this sentence, and seemed rather alarmed.

"That's it,--no more liquor," said Catherine eagerly; "you have had
enough to-night. Go to bed, and lock your door, and sleep, Mr. Hayes."

"But I say I've NOT had enough drink!" screamed Hayes; "I'm good for
five bottles more, and wager I will drink them too."

"Done, for a guinea!" said Wood.

"Done, and done!" said Billings.

"Be YOU quiet!" growled Hayes, scowling at the lad. "I will drink what
I please, and ask no counsel of yours." And he muttered some more curses
against young Billings, which showed what his feelings were towards his
wife's son; and which the latter, for a wonder, only received with a
scornful smile, and a knowing look at Wood.

Well! the five extra bottles were brought, and drunk by Mr. Hayes;
and seasoned by many songs from the recueil of Mr. Thomas d'Urfey and
others. The chief part of the talk and merriment was on Hayes's part;
as, indeed, was natural,--for, while he drank bottle after bottle of
wine, the other two gentlemen confined themselves to small beer,--both
pleading illness as an excuse for their sobriety.

And now might we depict, with much accuracy, the course of Mr. Hayes's
intoxication, as it rose from the merriment of the three-bottle point
to the madness of the four--from the uproarious quarrelsomeness of the
sixth bottle to the sickly stupidity of the seventh; but we are
desirous of bringing this tale to a conclusion, and must pretermit
all consideration of a subject so curious, so instructive, and so
delightful. Suffice it to say, as a matter of history, that Mr. Hayes
did actually drink seven bottles of mountain-wine; and that Mr. Thomas
Billings went to the "Braund's Head," in Bond Street, and purchased
another, which Hayes likewise drank.

"That'll do," said Mr. Wood to young Billings; and they led Hayes up to
bed, whither, in truth, he was unable to walk himself.

                    *****

Mrs. Springatt, the lodger, came down to ask what the noise was. "'Tis
only Tom Billings making merry with some friends from the country,"
answered Mrs. Hayes; whereupon Springatt retired, and the house was
quiet.

                    *****

Some scuffling and stamping was heard about eleven o'clock.

                    *****

After they had seen Mr. Hayes to bed, Billings remembered that he had a
parcel to carry to some person in the neighbourhood of the Strand;
and, as the night was remarkably fine, he and Mr. Wood agreed to walk
together, and set forth accordingly.

(Here follows a description of the THAMES AT MIDNIGHT, in a fine
historical style; with an account of Lambeth, Westminster, the Savoy,
Baynard's Castle, Arundel House, the Temple; of Old London Bridge,
with its twenty arches, "on which be houses builded, so that it seemeth
rather a continuall street than a bridge;"--of Bankside, and the "Globe"
and the "Fortune" Theatres; of the ferries across the river, and of the
pirates who infest the same--namely, tinklermen, petermen, hebbermen,
trawlermen; of the fleet of barges that lay at the Savoy steps; and of
the long lines of slim wherries sleeping on the river banks and basking
and shining in the moonbeams. A combat on the river is described,
that takes place between the crews of a tinklerman's boat and the
water-bailiffs. Shouting his war-cry, "St. Mary Overy a la rescousse!"
the water-bailiff sprung at the throat of the tinklerman captain. The
crews of both vessels, as if aware that the struggle of their chiefs
would decide the contest, ceased hostilities, and awaited on their
respective poops the issue of the death-shock. It was not long
coming. "Yield, dog!" said the water-bailiff. The tinklerman could not
answer--for his throat was grasped too tight in the iron clench of the
city champion; but drawing his snickersnee, he plunged it seven times in
the bailiff's chest: still the latter fell not. The death-rattle gurgled
in the throat of his opponent; his arms fell heavily to his side.
Foot to foot, each standing at the side of his boat, stood the brave
men--THEY WERE BOTH DEAD! "In the name of St. Clement Danes," said the
master, "give way, my men!" and, thrusting forward his halberd (seven
feet long, richly decorated with velvet and brass nails, and having
the city arms, argent, a cross gules, and in the first quarter a dagger
displayed of the second), he thrust the tinklerman's boat away from his
own; and at once the bodies of the captains plunged down, down, down,
down in the unfathomable waters.

After this follows another episode. Two masked ladies quarrel at the
door of a tavern overlooking the Thames: they turn out to be Stella and
Vanessa, who have followed Swift thither; who is in the act of reading
"Gulliver's Travels" to Gay, Arbuthnot, Bolingbroke, and Pope. Two
fellows are sitting shuddering under a doorway; to one of them Tom
Billings flung a sixpence. He little knew that the names of those two
young men were--Samuel Johnson and Richard Savage.)




ANOTHER LAST CHAPTER.


Mr. Hayes did not join the family the next day; and it appears that
the previous night's reconciliation was not very durable; for when Mrs.
Springatt asked Wood for Hayes, Mr. Wood stated that Hayes had gone away
without saying whither he was bound, or how long he might be absent.
He only said, in rather a sulky tone, that he should probably pass the
night at a friend's house. "For my part, I know of no friend he hath,"
added Mr. Wood; "and pray Heaven that he may not think of deserting his
poor wife, whom he hath beaten and ill-used so already!" In this prayer
Mrs. Springatt joined; and so these two worthy people parted.

What business Billings was about cannot be said; but he was this night
bound towards Marylebone Fields, as he was the night before for the
Strand and Westminster; and, although the night was very stormy and
rainy, as the previous evening had been fine, old Wood good-naturedly
resolved upon accompanying him; and forth they sallied together.

Mrs. Catherine, too, had HER business, as we have seen; but this was of
a very delicate nature. At nine o'clock, she had an appointment with
the Count; and faithfully, by that hour, had found her way to Saint
Margaret's churchyard, near Westminster Abbey, where she awaited
Monsieur de Galgenstein.

The spot was convenient, being very lonely, and at the same time close
to the Count's lodgings at Whitehall. His Excellency came, but somewhat
after the hour; for, to say the truth, being a freethinker, he had
the most firm belief in ghosts and demons, and did not care to pace
a churchyard alone. He was comforted, therefore, when he saw a woman
muffled in a cloak, who held out her hand to him at the gate, and said,
"Is that you?" He took her hand,--it was very clammy and cold; and at
her desire he bade his confidential footman, who had attended him with a
torch, to retire, and leave him to himself.

The torch-bearer retired, and left them quite in darkness; and the pair
entered the little cemetery, cautiously threading their way among the
tombs. They sat down on one, underneath a tree it seemed to be; the wind
was very cold, and its piteous howling was the only noise that broke
the silence of the place. Catherine's teeth were chattering, for all her
wraps; and when Max drew her close to him, and encircled her waist with
one arm, and pressed her hand, she did not repulse him, but rather
came close to him, and with her own damp fingers feebly returned his
pressure.

The poor thing was very wretched and weeping. She confided to Max the
cause of her grief. She was alone in the world,--alone and penniless.
Her husband had left her; she had that very day received a letter from
him which confirmed all that she had suspected so long. He had left her,
carried away all his property, and would not return!

If we say that a selfish joy filled the breast of Monsieur de
Galgenstein, the reader will not be astonished. A heartless libertine,
he felt glad at the prospect of Catherine's ruin; for he hoped that
necessity would make her his own. He clasped the poor thing to his
heart, and vowed that he would replace the husband she had lost, and
that his fortune should be hers.

"Will you replace him?" said she.

"Yes, truly, in everything but the name, dear Catherine; and when he
dies, I swear you shall be Countess of Galgenstein."

"Will you swear?" she cried, eagerly.

"By everything that is most sacred: were you free now, I would" (and
here he swore a terrific oath) "at once make you mine."

We have seen before that it cost Monsieur de Galgenstein nothing to
make these vows. Hayes was likely, too, to live as long as Catherine--as
long, at least, as the Count's connection with her; but he was caught in
his own snare.

She took his hand and kissed it repeatedly, and bathed it in her tears,
and pressed it to her bosom. "Max," she said, "I AM FREE! Be mine, and I
will love you as I have done for years and years."

Max started back. "What, is he dead?" he said.

"No, no, not dead: but he never was my husband."

He let go her hand, and, interrupting her, said sharply, "Indeed, madam,
if this carpenter never was your husband, I see no cause why _I_
should be. If a lady, who hath been for twenty years the mistress of a
miserable country boor, cannot find it in her heart to put up with the
protection of a nobleman--a sovereign's representative--she may seek a
husband elsewhere!"

"I was no man's mistress except yours," sobbed Catherine, wringing her
hands and sobbing wildly; "but, O Heaven! I deserved this. Because I was
a child, and you saw, and ruined, and left me--because, in my sorrow and
repentance, I wished to repair my crime, and was touched by that man's
love, and married him--because he too deceives and leaves me--because,
after loving you--madly loving you for twenty years--I will not now
forfeit your respect, and degrade myself by yielding to your will, you
too must scorn me! It is too much--too much--O Heaven!" And the wretched
woman fell back almost fainting.

Max was almost frightened by this burst of sorrow on her part, and was
coming forward to support her; but she motioned him away, and, taking
from her bosom a letter, said, "If it were light, you could see, Max,
how cruelly I have been betrayed by that man who called himself my
husband. Long before he married me, he was married to another. This
woman is still living, he says; and he says he leaves me for ever."

At this moment the moon, which had been hidden behind Westminster Abbey,
rose above the vast black mass of that edifice, and poured a flood of
silver light upon the little church of St. Margaret's, and the spot
where the lovers stood. Max was at a little distance from Catherine,
pacing gloomily up and down the flags. She remained at her old position
at the tombstone under the tree, or pillar, as it seemed to be, as the
moon got up. She was leaning against the pillar, and holding out to Max,
with an arm beautifully white and rounded, the letter she had received
from her husband: "Read it, Max," she said: "I asked for light, and here
is Heaven's own, by which you may read."

But Max did not come forward to receive it. On a sudden his face assumed
a look of the most dreadful surprise and agony. He stood still, and
stared with wild eyes starting from their sockets; he stared upwards,
at a point seemingly above Catherine's head. At last he raised up his
finger slowly and said, "Look, Cat--THE HEAD--THE HEAD!" Then uttering a
horrible laugh, he fell down grovelling among the stones, gibbering and
writhing in a fit of epilepsy.

Catherine started forward and looked up. She had been standing against a
post, not a tree--the moon was shining full on it now; and on the summit
strangely distinct, and smiling ghastly, was a livid human head.

The wretched woman fled--she dared look no more. And some hours
afterwards, when, alarmed by the Count's continued absence, his
confidential servant came back to seek for him in the churchyard, he was
found sitting on the flags, staring full at the head, and laughing,
and talking to it wildly, and nodding at it. He was taken up a hopeless
idiot, and so lived for years and years; clanking the chain, and moaning
under the lash, and howling through long nights when the moon peered
through the bars of his solitary cell, and he buried his face in the
straw.

                    *****

There--the murder is out! And having indulged himself in a chapter of
the very finest writing, the author begs the attention of the British
public towards it; humbly conceiving that it possesses some of those
peculiar merits which have rendered the fine writing in other chapters
of the works of other authors so famous.

Without bragging at all, let us just point out the chief claims of the
above pleasing piece of composition. In the first place, it is perfectly
stilted and unnatural; the dialogue and the sentiments being artfully
arranged, so as to be as strong and majestic as possible. Our dear Cat
is but a poor illiterate country wench, who has come from cutting her
husband's throat; and yet, see! she talks and looks like a tragedy
princess, who is suffering in the most virtuous blank verse. This is the
proper end of fiction, and one of the greatest triumphs that a novelist
can achieve: for to make people sympathise with virtue is a vulgar trick
that any common fellow can do; but it is not everybody who can take a
scoundrel, and cause us to weep and whimper over him as though he were
a very saint. Give a young lady of five years old a skein of silk and
a brace of netting-needles, and she will in a short time turn you out
a decent silk purse--anybody can; but try her with a sow's ear, and see
whether she can make a silk purse out of THAT. That is the work for your
real great artist; and pleasant it is to see how many have succeeded in
these latter days.

The subject is strictly historical, as anyone may see by referring to
the Daily Post of March 3, 1726, which contains the following paragraph:

"Yesterday morning, early, a man's head, that by the freshness of it
seemed to have been newly cut off from the body, having its own hair
on, was found by the river's side, near Millbank, Westminster, and was
afterwards exposed to public view in St. Margaret's churchyard, where
thousands of people have seen it; but none could tell who the unhappy
person was, much less who committed such a horrid and barbarous action.
There are various conjectures relating to the deceased; but there being
nothing certain, we omit them. The head was much hacked and mangled in
the cutting off."

The head which caused such an impression upon Monsieur de Galgenstein
was, indeed, once on the shoulders of Mr. John Hayes, who lost it under
the following circumstances. We have seen how Mr. Hayes was induced
to drink. Mr. Hayes having been encouraged in drinking the wine, and
growing very merry therewith, he sang and danced about the room; but his
wife, fearing the quantity he had drunk would not have the wished-for
effect on him, she sent away for another bottle, of which he drank
also. This effectually answered their expectations; and Mr. Hayes became
thereby intoxicated, and deprived of his understanding.

He, however, made shift to get into the other room, and, throwing
himself upon the bed, fell asleep; upon which Mrs. Hayes reminded them
of the affair in hand, and told them that was the most proper juncture
to finish the business. [*]

                    *****

     * The description of the murder and the execution of the
     culprits, which here follows in the original, was taken from
     the newspapers of the day.  Coming from such a source they
     have, as may be imagined, no literary merit whatever.  The
     details of the crime are simply horrible, without one touch
     of even that sort of romance which sometimes gives a little
     dignity to murder.  As such they precisely suited Mr.
     Thackeray's purpose at the time--which was to show the real
     manners and customs of the Sheppards and Turpins who were
     then the popular heroes of fiction.  But nowadays there is
     no such purpose to serve, and therefore these too literal
     details are omitted.

                    *****


Ring, ding, ding! the gloomy green curtain drops, the dramatis personae
are duly disposed of, the nimble candle snuffers put out the lights, and
the audience goeth pondering home. If the critic take the pains to ask
why the author, who hath been so diffuse in describing the early and
fabulous acts of Mrs. Catherine's existence, should so hurry off the
catastrophe where a deal of the very finest writing might have been
employed, Solomons replies that the "ordinary" narrative is far
more emphatic than any composition of his own could be, with all the
rhetorical graces which he might employ. Mr. Aram's trial, as taken by
the penny-a-liners of those days, had always interested him more than
the lengthened and poetical report which an eminent novelist has given
of the same. Mr. Turpin's adventures are more instructive and agreeable
to him in the account of the Newgate Plutarch, than in the learned
Ainsworth's Biographical Dictionary. And as he believes that the
professional gentlemen who are employed to invest such heroes with the
rewards that their great actions merit, will go through the ceremony of
the grand cordon with much more accuracy and despatch than can be shown
by the most distinguished amateur; in like manner he thinks that the
history of such investitures should be written by people directly
concerned, and not by admiring persons without, who must be ignorant of
many of the secrets of Ketchcraft. We very much doubt if Milton himself
could make a description of an execution half so horrible as the simple
lines in the Daily Post of a hundred and ten years since, that now lies
before us--"herrlich wie am ersten Tag,"--as bright and clean as on
the day of publication. Think of it! it has been read by Belinda at her
toilet, scanned at "Button's" and "Will's," sneered at by wits, talked
of in palaces and cottages, by a busy race in wigs, red heels, hoops,
patches, and rags of all variety--a busy race that hath long since
plunged and vanished in the unfathomable gulf towards which we march so
briskly.

Where are they? "Afflavit Deus"--and they are gone! Hark! is not the
same wind roaring still that shall sweep us down? and yonder stands the
compositor at his types who shall put up a pretty paragraph some day to
say how, "Yesterday, at his house in Grosvenor Square," or "At Botany
Bay, universally regretted," died So-and-So. Into what profound
moralities is the paragraph concerning Mrs. Catherine's burning leading
us!

Ay, truly, and to that very point have we wished to come; for, having
finished our delectable meal, it behoves us to say a word or two by way
of grace at its conclusion, and be heartily thankful that it is over. It
has been the writer's object carefully to exclude from his drama (except
in two very insignificant instances--mere walking-gentlemen parts), any
characters but those of scoundrels of the very highest degree. That he
has not altogether failed in the object he had in view, is evident from
some newspaper critiques which he has had the good fortune to see; and
which abuse the tale of "Catherine" as one of the dullest, most vulgar,
and immoral works extant. It is highly gratifying to the author to find
that such opinions are abroad, as they convince him that the taste for
Newgate literature is on the wane, and that when the public critic has
right down undisguised immorality set before him, the honest creature is
shocked at it, as he should be, and can declare his indignation in good
round terms of abuse. The characters of the tale ARE immoral, and no
doubt of it; but the writer humbly hopes the end is not so. The public
was, in our notion, dosed and poisoned by the prevailing style of
literary practice, and it was necessary to administer some medicine
that would produce a wholesome nausea, and afterwards bring about a more
healthy habit.

And, thank Heaven, this effect HAS been produced in very many instances,
and that the "Catherine" cathartic has acted most efficaciously. The
author has been pleased at the disgust which his work has excited, and
has watched with benevolent carefulness the wry faces that have been
made by many of the patients who have swallowed the dose. Solomons
remembers, at the establishment in Birchin Lane where he had the honour
of receiving his education, there used to be administered to the boys a
certain cough-medicine, which was so excessively agreeable that all the
lads longed to have colds in order to partake of the remedy. Some of our
popular novelists have compounded their drugs in a similar way, and
made them so palatable that a public, once healthy and honest, has been
well-nigh poisoned by their wares. Solomons defies anyone to say the
like of himself--that his doses have been as pleasant as champagne, and
his pills as sweet as barley-sugar;--it has been his attempt to make
vice to appear entirely vicious; and in those instances where he hath
occasionally introduced something like virtue, to make the sham as
evident as possible, and not allow the meanest capacity a single chance
to mistake it.

And what has been the consequence? That wholesome nausea which it has
been his good fortune to create wherever he has been allowed to practise
in his humble circle.

Has anyone thrown away a halfpennyworth of sympathy upon any person
mentioned in this history? Surely no. But abler and more famous men than
Solomons have taken a different plan; and it becomes every man in his
vocation to cry out against such, and expose their errors as best he
may.

Labouring under such ideas, Mr. Isaac Solomons, junior, produced the
romance of Mrs. Cat, and confesses himself completely happy to have
brought it to a conclusion. His poem may be dull--ay, and probably
is. The great Blackmore, the great Dennis, the great Sprat, the great
Pomfret, not to mention great men of our own time--have they not also
been dull, and had pretty reputations too? Be it granted Solomons IS
dull; but don't attack his morality; he humbly submits that, in his
poem, no man shall mistake virtue for vice, no man shall allow a single
sentiment of pity or admiration to enter his bosom for any character of
the piece: it being, from beginning to end, a scene of unmixed rascality
performed by persons who never deviate into good feeling. And although
he doth not pretend to equal the great modern authors, whom he hath
mentioned, in wit or descriptive power; yet, in the point of moral, he
meekly believes that he has been their superior; feeling the greatest
disgust for the characters he describes, and using his humble endeavour
to cause the public also to hate them.

Horsemonger Lane: January 1840.

========================================
========================================

from the 1911 John Murray edition.





THE TREMENDOUS ADVENTURES OF MAJOR GAHAGAN




CHAPTER I



"Truth is strange,
Stranger than fiction."

I think it but right that in making my appearance before the public
I should at once acquaint them with my titles and name.  My card,
as I leave it at the houses of the nobility, my friends, is as
follows:-


MAJOR GOLIAH O'GRADY GAHAGAN, H.E.I.C.S.,
Commanding Battalion of
Irregular Horse,
AHMEDNUGGAR.


Seeing, I say, this simple visiting ticket, the world will avoid
any of those awkward mistakes as to my person, which have been so
frequent of late.  There has been no end to the blunders regarding
this humble title of mine, and the confusion thereby created.  When
I published my volume of poems, for instance, the Morning Post
newspaper remarked "that the Lyrics of the Heart, by Miss Gahagan,
may be ranked among the sweetest flowrets of the present spring
season."  The Quarterly Review, commenting upon my "Observations on
the Pons Asinorum" (4to, London, 1836), called me "Doctor Gahagan,"
and so on.  It was time to put an end to these mistakes, and I have
taken the above simple remedy.

I was urged to it by a very exalted personage.  Dining in August
last at the palace of the T-l-r-es at Paris, the lovely young Duch-
ss of Orl-ns (who, though she does not speak English, understands
it as well as I do), said to me in the softest Teutonic, "Lieber
Herr Major, haben sie den Ahmednuggarischen-jager-battalion
gelassen?"  "Warum denn?" said I, quite astonished at her R-l H-
ss's question.  The P-cess then spoke of some trifle from my pen,
which was simply signed Goliah Gahagan.

There was, unluckily, a dead silence as H.R.H. put this question.

"Comment donc?" said H.M. Lo-is Ph-l-ppe, looking gravely at Count
Mole; "le cher Major a quitte l'armee!  Nicolas donc sera maitre de
l'Inde!"  H. M- and the Pr. M-n-ster pursued their conversation in
a low tone, and left me, as may be imagined, in a dreadful state of
confusion.  I blushed and stuttered, and murmured out a few
incoherent words to explain--but it would not do--I could not
recover my equanimity during the course of the dinner; and while
endeavouring to help an English duke, my neighbour, to poulet a
l'Austerlitz, fairly sent seven mushrooms and three large greasy
croutes over his whiskers and shirt-frill.  Another laugh at my
expense.  "Ah! M. le Major," said the Q- of the B-lg-ns, archly,
"vous n'aurez jamais votre brevet de Colonel."  Her M-y's joke will
be better understood when I state that his Grace is the brother of
a Minister.

I am not at liberty to violate the sanctity of private life, by
mentioning the names of the parties concerned in this little
anecdote.  I only wish to have it understood that I am a gentleman,
and live at least in DECENT society.  Verbum sat.

But to be serious.  I am obliged always to write the name of Goliah
in full, to distinguish me from my brother, Gregory Gahagan, who
was also a Major (in the King's service), and whom I killed in a
duel, as the public most likely knows.  Poor Greg! a very trivial
dispute was the cause of our quarrel, which never would have
originated but for the similarity of our names.  The circumstance
was this:  I had been lucky enough to render the Nawaub of Lucknow
some trifling service (in the notorious affair of Choprasjee
Muckjee), and his Highness sent down a gold toothpick-case directed
to Captain G. Gahagan, which I of course thought was for me:  my
brother madly claimed it; we fought, and the consequence was, that
in about three minutes he received a slash in the right side (cut
6), which effectually did his business:- he was a good swordsman
enough--I was THE BEST in the universe.  The most ridiculous part
of the affair is, that the toothpick-case was his, after all--he
had left it on the Nawaub's table at tiffin.  I can't conceive what
madness prompted him to fight about such a paltry bauble; he had
much better have yielded it at once, when he saw I was determined
to have it.  From this slight specimen of my adventures, the reader
will perceive that my life has been one of no ordinary interest;
and, in fact, I may say that I have led a more remarkable life than
any man in the service--I have been at more pitched battles, led
more forlorn hopes, had more success among the fair sex, drunk
harder, read more, been a handsomer man than any officer now
serving Her Majesty.

When I first went to India in 1802, I was a raw cornet of
seventeen, with blazing red hair, six feet four in height, athletic
at all kinds of exercises, owing money to my tailor and everybody
else who would trust me, possessing an Irish brogue, and my full
pay of 120l. a year.  I need not say that with all these advantages
I did that which a number of clever fellows have done before me--I
fell in love, and proposed to marry immediately.

But how to overcome the difficulty?--It is true that I loved Julia
Jowler--loved her to madness; but her father intended her for a
Member of Council at least, and not for a beggarly Irish ensign.
It was, however, my fate to make the passage to India (on board of
the "Samuel Snob" East Indiaman, Captain Duffy) with this lovely
creature, and my misfortune instantaneously to fall in love with
her.  We were not out of the Channel before I adored her,
worshipped the deck which she trod upon, kissed a thousand times
the cuddy-chair on which she used to sit.  The same madness fell on
every man in the ship.  The two mates fought about her at the Cape;
the surgeon, a sober pious Scotchman, from disappointed affection,
took so dreadfully to drinking as to threaten spontaneous
combustion; and old Colonel Lilywhite, carrying his wife and seven
daughters to Bengal, swore that he would have a divorce from Mrs.
L., and made an attempt at suicide; the captain himself told me,
with tears in his eyes, that he hated his hitherto-adored Mrs.
Duffy, although he had had nineteen children by her.

We used to call her the witch--there was magic in her beauty and in
her voice.  I was spell-bound when I looked at her, and stark
staring mad when she looked at me!  O lustrous black eyes!--O
glossy night-black ringlets!--O lips!--O dainty frocks of white
muslin!--O tiny kid slippers!--though old and gouty, Gahagan sees
you still!  I recollect, off Ascension, she looked at me in her
particular way one day at dinner, just as I happened to be blowing
on a piece of scalding hot green fat.  I was stupefied at once--I
thrust the entire morsel (about half a pound) into my mouth.  I
made no attempt to swallow, or to masticate it, but left it there
for many minutes, burning, burning!  I had no skin to my palate for
seven weeks after, and lived on rice-water during the rest of the
voyage.  The anecdote is trivial, but it shows the power of Julia
Jowler over me.

The writers of marine novels have so exhausted the subject of
storms, shipwrecks, mutinies, engagements, sea-sickness, and so
forth, that (although I have experienced each of these in many
varieties) I think it quite unnecessary to recount such trifling
adventures; suffice it to say, that during our five months' trajet,
my mad passion for Julia daily increased; so did the captain's and
the surgeon's; so did Colonel Lilywhite's; so did the doctor's, the
mate's--that of most part of the passengers, and a considerable
number of the crew.  For myself, I swore--ensign as I was--I would
win her for my wife; I vowed that I would make her glorious with my
sword--that as soon as I had made a favourable impression on my
commanding officer (which I did not doubt to create), I would lay
open to him the state of my affections, and demand his daughter's
hand.  With such sentimental outpourings did our voyage continue
and conclude.

We landed at the Sunderbunds on a grilling hot day in December
1802, and then for the moment Julia and I separated.  She was
carried off to her papa's arms in a palankeen, surrounded by at
least forty hookahbadars; whilst the poor cornet, attended but by
two dandies and a solitary beasty (by which unnatural name these
blackamoors are called), made his way humbly to join the regiment
at headquarters.

The -'th Regiment of Bengal Cavalry, then under the command of
Lieut.-Colonel Julius Jowler, C.B., was known throughout Asia and
Europe by the proud title of the Bundelcund Invincibles--so great
was its character for bravery, so remarkable were its services in
that delightful district of India.  Major Sir George Gutch was next
in command, and Tom Thrupp, as kind a fellow as ever ran a Mahratta
through the body, was second Major.  We were on the eve of that
remarkable war which was speedily to spread throughout the whole of
India, to call forth the valour of a Wellesley, and the indomitable
gallantry of a Gahagan; which was illustrated by our victories at
Ahmednuggar (where I was the first over the barricade at the
storming of the Pettah); at Argaum, where I slew with my own sword
twenty-three matchlock-men, and cut a dromedary in two; and by that
terrible day of Assaye, where Wellesley would have been beaten but
for me--me alone:  I headed nineteen charges of cavalry, took
(aided by only four men of my own troop) seventeen field-pieces,
killing the scoundrelly French artillerymen; on that day I had
eleven elephants shot under me, and carried away Scindiah's nose-
ring with a pistol-ball.  Wellesley is a Duke and a Marshal, I but
a simple Major of Irregulars.  Such is fortune and war!  But my
feelings carry me away from my narrative, which had better proceed
with more order.

On arriving, I say, at our barracks at Dum Dum, I for the first
time put on the beautiful uniform of the Invincibles:  a light blue
swallow-tailed jacket with silver lace and wings, ornamented with
about 3,000 sugar-loaf buttons, rhubarb-coloured leather
inexpressibles (tights), and red morocco boots with silver spurs
and tassels, set off to admiration the handsome persons of the
officers of our corps.  We wore powder in those days; and a
regulation pigtail of seventeen inches, a brass helmet surrounded
by leopard skin, with a bearskin top and a horsetail feather, gave
the head a fierce and chivalrous appearance, which is far more
easily imagined than described.

Attired in this magnificent costume, I first presented myself
before Colonel Jowler.  He was habited in a manner precisely
similar, but not being more than five feet in height, and weighing
at least fifteen stone, the dress he wore did not become him quite
so much as slimmer and taller men.  Flanked by his tall Majors,
Thrupp and Gutch, he looked like a stumpy skittle-ball between two
attenuated skittles.  The plump little Colonel received me with
vast cordiality, and I speedily became a prime favourite with
himself and the other officers of the corps.  Jowler was the most
hospitable of men; and gratifying my appetite and my love together,
I continually partook of his dinners, and feasted on the sweet
presence of Julia.

I can see now, what I would not and could not perceive in those
early days, that this Miss Jowler--on whom I had lavished my first
and warmest love, whom I had endowed with all perfection and
purity--was no better than a little impudent flirt, who played with
my feelings, because during the monotony of a sea voyage she had no
other toy to play with; and who deserted others for me, and me for
others, just as her whim or her interest might guide her.  She had
not been three weeks at headquarters when half the regiment was in
love with her.  Each and all of the candidates had some favour to
boast of, or some encouraging hopes on which to build.  It was the
scene of the "Samuel Snob" over again, only heightened in interest
by a number of duels.  The following list will give the reader a
notion of some of them:-


1.  Cornet Gahagan . . . Ensign Hicks, of the Sappers and Miners.
Hicks received a ball in his jaw, and was half choked by a quantity
of carroty whisker forced down his throat with the ball.

2.  Captain Macgillicuddy, B.N.I. Cornet Gahagan.  I was run
through the body, but the sword passed between the ribs, and
injured me very slightly.

3.  Captain Macgillicuddy, B.N.I. Mr. Mulligatawny, B.C.S., Deputy-
Assistant Vice Sub-Controller of the Boggleywollah Indigo grounds,
Ramgolly branch.


Macgillicuddy should have stuck to sword's play, and he might have
come off in his second duel as well as in his first; as it was, the
civilian placed a ball and a part of Mac's gold repeater in his
stomach.  A remarkable circumstance attended this shot, an account
of which I sent home to the "Philosophical Transactions:" the
surgeon had extracted the ball, and was going off, thinking that
all was well, when the gold repeater struck thirteen in poor
Macgillicuddy's abdomen.  I suppose that the works must have been
disarranged in some way by the bullet, for the repeater was one of
Barraud's, never known to fail before, and the circumstance
occurred at seven o'clock. {1}

I could continue, almost ad infinitum, an account of the wars which
this Helen occasioned, but the above three specimens will, I should
think, satisfy the peaceful reader.  I delight not in scenes of
blood, Heaven knows, but I was compelled in the course of a few
weeks, and for the sake of this one woman, to fight nine duels
myself, and I know that four times as many more took place
concerning her.

I forgot to say that Jowler's wife was a half-caste woman, who had
been born and bred entirely in India, and whom the Colonel had
married from the house of her mother, a native.  There were some
singular rumours abroad regarding this latter lady's history:  it
was reported that she was the daughter of a native Rajah, and had
been carried off by a poor English subaltern in Lord Clive's time.
The young man was killed very soon after, and left his child with
its mother.  The black Prince forgave his daughter and bequeathed
to her a handsome sum of money.  I suppose that it was on this
account that Jowler married Mrs. J., a creature who had not, I do
believe, a Christian name, or a single Christian quality:  she was
a hideous, bloated, yellow creature, with a beard, black teeth, and
red eyes:  she was fat, lying, ugly, and stingy--she hated and was
hated by all the world, and by her jolly husband as devoutly as by
any other.  She did not pass a month in the year with him, but
spent most of her time with her native friends.  I wonder how she
could have given birth to so lovely a creature as her daughter.
This woman was of course with the Colonel when Julia arrived, and
the spice of the devil in her daughter's composition was most
carefully nourished and fed by her.  If Julia had been a flirt
before, she was a downright jilt now; she set the whole cantonment
by the ears; she made wives jealous and husbands miserable; she
caused all those duels of which I have discoursed already, and yet
such was the fascination of THE WITCH that I still thought her an
angel.  I made court to the nasty mother in order to be near the
daughter; and I listened untiringly to Jowler's interminable dull
stories, because I was occupied all the time in watching the
graceful movements of Miss Julia.

But the trumpet of war was soon ringing in our ears; and on the
battle-field Gahagan is a man!  The Bundelcund Invincibles received
orders to march, and Jowler, Hector-like, donned his helmet and
prepared to part from his Andromache.  And now arose his
perplexity:  what must be done with his daughter, his Julia?  He
knew his wife's peculiarities of living, and did not much care to
trust his daughter to her keeping; but in vain he tried to find her
an asylum among the respectable ladies of his regiment.  Lady Gutch
offered to receive her, but would have nothing to do with Mrs.
Jowler; the surgeon's wife, Mrs. Sawbone, would have neither mother
nor daughter:  there was no help for it, Julia and her mother must
have a house together, and Jowler knew that his wife would fill it
with her odious blackamoor friends.

I could not, however, go forth satisfied to the campaign until I
learned from Julia my fate.  I watched twenty opportunities to see
her alone, and wandered about the Colonel's bungalow as an informer
does about a public-house, marking the incomings and the outgoings
of the family, and longing to seize the moment when Miss Jowler,
unbiassed by her mother or her papa, might listen, perhaps, to my
eloquence, and melt at the tale of my love.

But it would not do--old Jowler seemed to have taken all of a
sudden to such a fit of domesticity, that there was no finding him
out of doors, and his rhubarb-coloured wife (I believe that her
skin gave the first idea of our regimental breeches), who before
had been gadding ceaselessly abroad, and poking her broad nose into
every menage in the cantonment, stopped faithfully at home with her
spouse.  My only chance was to beard the old couple in their den,
and ask them at once for their cub.

So I called one day at tiffin:- old Jowler was always happy to have
my company at this meal; it amused him, he said, to see me drink
Hodgson's pale ale (I drank two hundred and thirty-four dozen the
first year I was in Bengal)--and it was no small piece of fun,
certainly, to see old Mrs. Jowler attack the currie-bhaut;--she was
exactly the colour of it, as I have had already the honour to
remark, and she swallowed the mixture with a gusto which was never
equalled, except by my poor friend Dando a propos d'huitres.  She
consumed the first three platefuls with a fork and spoon, like a
Christian; but as she warmed to her work, the old hag would throw
away her silver implements, and dragging the dishes towards her, go
to work with her hands, flip the rice into her mouth with her
fingers, and stow away a quantity of eatables sufficient for a
sepoy company.  But why do I diverge from the main point of my
story?

Julia, then, Jowler, and Mrs. J., were at luncheon; the dear girl
was in the act to sabler a glass of Hodgson as I entered.  "How do
you do, Mr. Gagin?" said the old hag, leeringly.  "Eat a bit o'
currie-bhaut,"--and she thrust the dish towards me, securing a heap
as it passed.  "What!  Gagy my boy, how do, how do?" said the fat
Colonel.  "What! run through the body?--got well again--have some
Hodgson--run through your body too!"--and at this, I may say,
coarse joke (alluding to the fact that in these hot climates the
ale oozes out as it were from the pores of the skin) old Jowler
laughed:  a host of swarthy chobdars, kitmatgars, sices, consomahs,
and bobbychies laughed too, as they provided me, unasked, with the
grateful fluid.  Swallowing six tumblers of it, I paused nervously
for a moment, and then said -

"Bobbachy, consomah, ballybaloo hoga."

The black ruffians took the hint, and retired.

"Colonel and Mrs. Jowler," said I solemnly, "we are alone; and you,
Miss Jowler, you are alone too; that is--I mean--I take this
opportunity to--(another glass of ale, if you please)--to express,
once for all, before departing on a dangerous campaign"--(Julia
turned pale)--"before entering, I say, upon a war which may stretch
in the dust my high-raised hopes and me, to express my hopes while
life still remains to me, and to declare in the face of heaven,
earth, and Colonel Jowler, that I love you, Julia!"  The Colonel,
astonished, let fall a steel fork, which stuck quivering for some
minutes in the calf of my leg; but I heeded not the paltry
interruption.  "Yes, by yon bright heaven," continued I, "I love
you, Julia!  I respect my commander, I esteem your excellent and
beauteous mother:  tell me, before I leave you, if I may hope for a
return of my affection.  Say that you love me, and I will do such
deeds in this coming war, as shall make you proud of the name of
your Gahagan."

The old woman, as I delivered these touching words, stared,
snapped, and ground her teeth, like an enraged monkey.  Julia was
now red, now white; the Colonel stretched forward, took the fork
out of the calf of my leg, wiped it, and then seized a bundle of
letters which I had remarked by his side.

"A cornet!" said he, in a voice choking with emotion; "a pitiful
beggarly Irish cornet aspire to the hand of Julia Jowler!  Gag--
Gahagan, are you mad, or laughing at us?  Look at these letters,
young man--at these letters, I say--one hundred and twenty-four
epistles from every part of India (not including one from the
Governor-General, and six from his brother, Colonel Wellesley)--one
hundred and twenty-four proposals for the hand of Miss Jowler!
Cornet Gahagan," he continued, "I wish to think well of you:  you
are the bravest, the most modest, and, perhaps, the handsomest man
in our corps; but you have not got a single rupee.  You ask me for
Julia, and you do not possess even an anna!"--(Here the old rogue
grinned, as if he had made a capital pun.)--"No, no," said he,
waxing good-natured; "Gagy my boy, it is nonsense!  Julia love,
retire with your mamma; this silly young gentleman will remain and
smoke a pipe with me."

I took one:  it was the bitterest chillum I ever smoked in my life.

* * *

I am not going to give here an account of my military services;
they will appear in my great national autobiography, in forty
volumes, which I am now preparing for the press.  I was with my
regiment in all Wellesley's brilliant campaigns; then taking dawk,
I travelled across the country north-eastward, and had the honour
of fighting by the side of Lord Lake at Laswaree, Degg,
Furruckabad, Futtyghur, and Bhurtpore:  but I will not boast of my
actions--the military man knows them, MY SOVEREIGN appreciates
them.  If asked who was the bravest man of the Indian army, there
is not an officer belonging to it who would not cry at once,
GAHAGAN.  The fact is, I was desperate:  I cared not for life,
deprived of Julia Jowler.

With Julia's stony looks ever before my eyes, her father's stern
refusal in my ears, I did not care, at the close of the campaign,
again to seek her company or to press my suit.  We were eighteen
months on service, marching and counter-marching, and fighting
almost every other day:  to the world I did not seem altered; but
the world only saw the face, and not the seared and blighted heart
within me.  My valour, always desperate, now reached to a pitch of
cruelty; I tortured my grooms and grass-cutters for the most
trifling offence or error,--I never in action spared a man,--I
sheared off three hundred and nine heads in the course of that
single campaign.

Some influence, equally melancholy, seemed to have fallen upon poor
old Jowler.  About six months after we had left Dum Dum, he
received a parcel of letters from Benares (whither his wife had
retired with her daughter), and so deeply did they seem to weigh
upon his spirits, that he ordered eleven men of his regiment to be
flogged within two days; but it was against the blacks that he
chiefly turned his wrath.  Our fellows, in the heat and hurry of
the campaign, were in the habit of dealing rather roughly with
their prisoners, to extract treasure from them:  they used to pull
their nails out by the root, to boil them in kedgeree pots, to flog
them and dress their wounds with cayenne pepper, and so on.
Jowler, when he heard of these proceedings, which before had always
justly exasperated him (he was a humane and kind little man), used
now to smile fiercely and say, "D- the black scoundrels!  Serve
them right, serve them right!"

One day, about a couple of miles in advance of the column, I had
been on a foraging-party with a few dragoons, and was returning
peaceably to camp, when of a sudden a troop of Mahrattas burst on
us from a neighbouring mango-tope, in which they had been hidden:
in an instant three of my men's saddles were empty, and I was left
with but seven more to make head against at least thirty of these
vagabond black horsemen.  I never saw in my life a nobler figure
than the leader of the troop--mounted on a splendid black Arab; he
was as tall, very nearly, as myself; he wore a steel cap and a
shirt of mail, and carried a beautiful French carbine, which had
already done execution upon two of my men.  I saw that our only
chance of safety lay in the destruction of this man.  I shouted to
him in a voice of thunder (in the Hindustanee tongue of course),
"Stop, dog, if you dare, and encounter a man!"

In reply his lance came whirling in the air over my head, and
mortally transfixed poor Foggarty of ours, who was behind me.
Grinding my teeth and swearing horribly, I drew that scimitar which
never yet failed its blow, {2} and rushed at the Indian.  He came
down at full gallop, his own sword making ten thousand gleaming
circles in the air, shrieking his cry of battle.

The contest did not last an instant.  With my first blow I cut off
his sword-arm at the wrist; my second I levelled at his head.  I
said that he wore a steel cap, with a gilt iron spike of six
inches, and a hood of chain mail.  I rose in my stirrups and
delivered "St. George;" my sword caught the spike exactly on the
point, split it sheer in two, cut crashing through the steel cap
and hood, and was only stopped by a ruby which he wore in his back-
plate.  His head, cut clean in two between the eyebrows and
nostrils, even between the two front teeth, fell one side on each
shoulder, and he galloped on till his horse was stopped by my men,
who were not a little amused at the feat.

As I had expected, the remaining ruffians fled on seeing their
leader's fate.  I took home his helmet by way of curiosity, and we
made a single prisoner, who was instantly carried before old
Jowler.

We asked the prisoner the name of the leader of the troop:  he said
it was Chowder Loll.

"Chowder Loll!" shrieked Colonel Jowler.  "O Fate! thy hand is
here!"  He rushed wildly into his tent--the next day applied for
leave of absence.  Gutch took the command of the regiment, and I
saw him no more for some time.

* * *

As I had distinguished myself not a little during the war, General
Lake sent me up with despatches to Calcutta, where Lord Wellesley
received me with the greatest distinction.  Fancy my surprise, on
going to a ball at Government House, to meet my old friend Jowler;
my trembling, blushing, thrilling delight, when I saw Julia by his
side!

Jowler seemed to blush too when he beheld me.  I thought of my
former passages with his daughter.  "Gagy my boy," says he, shaking
hands, "glad to see you.  Old friend, Julia--come to tiffin--
Hodgson's pale--brave fellow Gagy."  Julia did not speak, but she
turned ashy pale, and fixed upon me her awful eyes!  I fainted
almost, and uttered some incoherent words.  Julia took my hand,
gazed at me still, and said, "Come!"  Need I say I went?

I will not go over the pale ale and currie-bhaut again! but this I
know, that in half-an-hour I was as much in love as I ever had
been:  and that in three weeks I--yes, I--was the accepted lover of
Julia!  I did not pause to ask where were the one hundred and
twenty-four offers? why I, refused before, should be accepted now?
I only felt that I loved her, and was happy!

* * *

One night, one memorable night, I could not sleep, and, with a
lover's pardonable passion, wandered solitary through the City of
Palaces until I came to the house which contained my Julia.  I
peeped into the compound--all was still; I looked into the
verandah--all was dark, except a light--yes, one light--and it was
in Julia's chamber!  My heart throbbed almost to stifling.  I
would--I WOULD advance, if but to gaze upon her for a moment, and
to bless her as she slept.  I DID look, I DID advance; and, O
Heaven!  I saw a lamp burning, Mrs. Jow. in a night-dress, with a
very dark baby in her arms, and Julia looking tenderly at an ayah,
who was nursing another.

"Oh, Mamma," said Julia, "what would that fool Gahagan say if he
knew all?"

"HE DOES KNOW ALL!" shouted I, springing forward, and tearing down
the tatties from the window.  Mrs. Jow. ran shrieking out of the
room, Julia fainted, the cursed black children squalled, and their
d-d nurse fell on her knees, gabbling some infernal jargon of
Hindustanee.  Old Jowler at this juncture entered with a candle and
a drawn sword.

"Liar! scoundrel! deceiver!" shouted I.  "Turn, ruffian, and defend
yourself!"  But old Jowler, when he saw me, only whistled, looked
at his lifeless daughter, and slowly left the room.

Why continue the tale?  I need not now account for Jowler's gloom
on receiving his letters from Benares--for his exclamation upon the
death of the Indian chief--for his desire to marry his daughter:
the woman I was wooing was no longer Miss Julia Jowler, she was
Mrs. Chowder Loll!



CHAPTER II:  ALLYGHUR AND LASWAREE



I sat down to write gravely and sadly, for (since the appearance of
some of my adventures in a monthly magazine) unprincipled men have
endeavoured to rob me of the only good I possess, to question the
statements that I make, and, themselves without a spark of honour
or good feeling, to steal from me that which is my sole wealth--my
character as a teller of THE TRUTH.

The reader will understand that it is to the illiberal strictures
of a profligate press I now allude; among the London journalists,
none (luckily for themselves) have dared to question the veracity
of my statements:  they know me, and they know that I am IN LONDON.
If I can use the pen, I can also wield a more manly and terrible
weapon, and would answer their contradictions with my sword!  No
gold or gems adorn the hilt of that war-worn scimitar; but there is
blood upon the blade--the blood of the enemies of my country, and
the maligners of my honest fame.  There are others, however--the
disgrace of a disgraceful trade--who, borrowing from distance a
despicable courage, have ventured to assail me.  The infamous
editors of the Kelso Champion, the Bungay Beacon, the Tipperary
Argus, and the Stoke Pogis Sentinel, and other dastardly organs of
the provincial press, have, although differing in politics, agreed
upon this one point, and, with a scoundrelly unanimity, vented a
flood of abuse upon the revelations made by me.

They say that I have assailed private characters, and wilfully
perverted history to blacken the reputation of public men.  I ask,
was any one of these men in Bengal in the year 1803?  Was any
single conductor of any one of these paltry prints ever in
Bundelcund or the Rohilla country?  Does this EXQUISITE Tipperary
scribe know the difference between Hurrygurrybang and Burrumtollah?
Not he! and because, forsooth, in those strange and distant lands
strange circumstances have taken place, it is insinuated that the
relater is a liar:  nay, that the very places themselves have no
existence but in my imagination.  Fools!--but I will not waste my
anger upon them, and proceed to recount some other portions of my
personal history.

It is, I presume, a fact which even THESE scribbling assassins will
not venture to deny, that before the commencement of the campaign
against Scindiah, the English General formed a camp at Kanouge on
the Jumna, where he exercised that brilliant little army which was
speedily to perform such wonders in the Dooab.  It will be as well
to give a slight account of the causes of a war which was speedily
to rage through some of the fairest portions of the Indian
continent.

Shah Allum, the son of Shah Lollum, the descendant by the female
line of Nadir Shah (that celebrated Toorkomaun adventurer, who had
well-nigh hurled Bajazet and Selim the Second from the throne of
Bagdad)--Shah Allum, I say, although nominally the Emperor of
Delhi, was in reality the slave of the various warlike chieftains
who lorded it by turns over the country and the sovereign, until
conquered and slain by some more successful rebel.  Chowder Loll
Masolgee, Zubberdust Khan, Dowsunt Row Scindiah, and the celebrated
Bobbachy Jung Bahawder, had held for a time complete mastery in
Delhi.  The second of these, a ruthless Afghan soldier, had
abruptly entered the capital; nor was he ejected from it until he
had seized upon the principal jewels, and likewise put out the eyes
of the last of the unfortunate family of Afrasiab.  Scindiah came
to the rescue of the sightless Shah Allum, and though he destroyed
his oppressor, only increased his slavery; holding him in as
painful a bondage as he had suffered under the tyrannous Afghan.

As long as these heroes were battling among themselves, or as long
rather as it appeared that they had any strength to fight a battle,
the British Government, ever anxious to see its enemies by the
ears, by no means interfered in the contest.  But the French
Revolution broke out, and a host of starving sans-culottes appeared
among the various Indian States, seeking for military service, and
inflaming the minds of the various native princes against the
British East India Company.  A number of these entered into
Scindiah's ranks:  one of them, Perron, was commander of his army;
and though that chief was as yet quite engaged in his hereditary
quarrel with Jeswunt Row Holkar, and never thought of an invasion
of the British territory, the Company all of a sudden discovered
that Shah Allum, his sovereign, was shamefully ill-used, and
determined to re-establish the ancient splendour of his throne.

Of course it was sheer benevolence for poor Shah Allum that
prompted our governors to take these kindly measures in his favour.
I don't know how it happened that, at the end of the war, the poor
Shah was not a whit better off than at the beginning; and that
though Holkar was beaten, and Scindiah annihilated, Shah Allum was
much such a puppet as before.  Somehow, in the hurry and confusion
of this struggle, the oyster remained with the British Government,
who had so kindly offered to dress it for the Emperor, while His
Majesty was obliged to be contented with the shell.

The force encamped at Kanouge bore the title of the Grand Army of
the Ganges and the Jumna; it consisted of eleven regiments of
cavalry and twelve battalions of infantry, and was commanded by
General Lake in person.

Well, on the 1st of September we stormed Perron's camp at Allyghur;
on the fourth we took that fortress by assault; and as my name was
mentioned in general orders, I may as well quote the Commander-in-
Chief's words regarding me--they will spare me the trouble of
composing my own eulogium:-


"The Commander-in-Chief is proud thus publicly to declare his high
sense of the gallantry of Lieutenant Gahagan, of the -- Cavalry.
In the storming of the fortress, although unprovided with a single
ladder, and accompanied but by a few brave men, Lieutenant Gahagan
succeeded in escalading the inner and fourteenth wall of the place.
Fourteen ditches lined with sword-blades and poisoned chevaux-de-
frise, fourteen walls bristling with innumerable artillery and as
smooth as looking-glasses, were in turn triumphantly passed by that
enterprising officer.  His course was to be traced by the heaps of
slaughtered enemies lying thick upon the platforms; and alas! by
the corpses of most of the gallant men who followed him!  When at
length he effected his lodgment, and the dastardly enemy, who dared
not to confront him with arms, let loose upon him the tigers and
lions of Scindiah's menagerie, this meritorious officer destroyed,
with his own hand, four of the largest and most ferocious animals,
and the rest, awed by the indomitable majesty of BRITISH VALOUR,
shrank back to their dens.  Thomas Higgory, a private, and Runty
Goss, havildar, were the only two who remained out of the nine
hundred who followed Lieutenant Gahagan.  Honour to them!  Honour
and tears for the brave men who perished on that awful day!"


* * *

I have copied this, word for word, from the Bengal Hurkaru of
September 24, 1803:  and anybody who has the slightest doubt as to
the statement, may refer to the paper itself.

And here I must pause to give thanks to Fortune, which so
marvellously preserved me, Sergeant-Major Higgory, and Runty Goss.
Were I to say that any valour of ours had carried us unhurt through
this tremendous combat, the reader would laugh me to scorn.  No:
though my narrative is extraordinary, it is nevertheless authentic:
and never never would I sacrifice truth for the mere sake of
effect.  The fact is this:- the citadel of Allyghur is situated
upon a rock, about a thousand feet above the level of the sea, and
is surrounded by fourteen walls, as his Excellency was good enough
to remark in his despatch.  A man who would mount these without
scaling-ladders, is an ass; he who would SAY he mounted them
without such assistance, is a liar and a knave.  We HAD scaling-
ladders at the commencement of the assault, although it was quite
impossible to carry them beyond the first line of batteries.
Mounted on them, however, as our troops were falling thick about
me, I saw that we must ignominiously retreat, unless some other
help could be found for our brave fellows to escalade the next
wall.  It was about seventy feet high.  I instantly turned the guns
of wall A on wall B, and peppered the latter so as to make, not a
breach, but a scaling place; the men mounting in the holes made by
the shot.  By this simple stratagem, I managed to pass each
successive barrier--for to ascend a wall which the General was
pleased to call "as smooth as glass" is an absurd impossibility:  I
seek to achieve none such:-


"I dare do all that may become a man;
Who dares do more, is neither more nor less."


Of course, had the enemy's guns been commonly well served, not one
of us would ever have been alive out of the three; but whether it
was owing to fright, or to the excessive smoke caused by so many
pieces of artillery, arrive we did.  On the platforms, too, our
work was not quite so difficult as might be imagined--killing these
fellows was sheer butchery.  As soon as we appeared, they all
turned and fled helter-skelter, and the reader may judge of their
courage by the fact that out of about seven hundred men killed by
us, only forty had wounds in front, the rest being bayoneted as
they ran.

And beyond all other pieces of good fortune was the very letting
out of these tigers; which was the dernier ressort of Bournonville,
the second commandant of the fort.  I had observed this man
(conspicuous for a tricoloured scarf which he wore) upon every one
of the walls as we stormed them, and running away the very first
among the fugitives.  He had all the keys of the gates; and in his
tremor, as he opened the menagerie portal, left the whole bunch in
the door, which I seized when the animals were overcome.  Runty
Goss then opened them one by one, our troops entered, and the
victorious standard of my country floated on the walls of Allyghur!

When the General, accompanied by his staff, entered the last line
of fortifications, the brave old man raised me from the dead
rhinoceros on which I was seated, and pressed me to his breast.
But the excitement which had borne me through the fatigues and
perils of that fearful day failed all of a sudden, and I wept like
a child upon his shoulder.

Promotion, in our army, goes unluckily by seniority; nor is it in
the power of the General-in-Chief to advance a Caesar, if he finds
him in the capacity of a subaltern:  MY reward for the above
exploit was, therefore, not very rich.  His Excellency had a
favourite horn snuff-box (for, though exalted in station, he was in
his habits most simple):  of this, and about a quarter of an ounce
of high-dried Welsh, which he always took, he made me a present,
saying, in front of the line, "Accept this, Mr. Gahagan, as a token
of respect from the first to the bravest officer in the army."

Calculating the snuff to be worth a halfpenny, I should say that
fourpence was about the value of this gift:  but it has at least
this good effect--it serves to convince any person who doubts my
story, that the facts of it are really true.  I have left it at the
office of my publisher, along with the extract from the Bengal
Hurkaru, and anybody may examine both by applying in the counting-
house of Mr. Cunningham. {3}  That once popular expression, or
proverb, "Are you up to snuff?" arose out of the above
circumstance; for the officers of my corps, none of whom, except
myself, had ventured on the storming party, used to twit me about
this modest reward for my labours.  Never mind! when they want me
to storm a fort AGAIN, I shall know better.

Well, immediately after the capture of this important fortress,
Perron, who had been the life and soul of Scindiah's army, came in
to us, with his family and treasure, and was passed over to the
French settlements at Chandernagur.  Bourquien took his command,
and against him we now moved.  The morning of the 11th of September
found us upon the plains of Delhi.

It was a burning hot day, and we were all refreshing ourselves
after the morning's march, when I, who was on the advanced picket
along with O'Gawler of the King's Dragoons, was made aware of the
enemy's neighbourhood in a very singular manner.  O'Gawler and I
were seated under a little canopy of horse-cloths, which we had
formed to shelter us from the intolerable heat of the sun, and were
discussing with great delight a few Manilla cheroots, and a stone
jar of the most exquisite, cool, weak, refreshing sangaree.  We had
been playing cards the night before, and O'Gawler had lost to me
seven hundred rupees.  I emptied the last of the sangaree into the
two pint tumblers out of which we were drinking, and holding mine
up, said, "Here's better luck to you next time, O'Gawler!"

As I spoke the words--whish!--a cannon-ball cut the tumbler clean
out of my hand, and plumped into poor O'Gawler's stomach.  It
settled him completely, and of course I never got my seven hundred
rupees.  Such are the uncertainties of war!

To strap on my sabre and my accoutrements--to mount my Arab
charger--to drink off what O'Gawler had left of the sangaree--and
to gallop to the General, was the work of a moment.  I found him as
comfortably at tiffin as if he were at his own house in London.

"General," said I, as soon as I got into his paijamahs (or tent),
"you must leave your lunch if you want to fight the enemy."

"The enemy--psha!  Mr. Gahagan, the enemy is on the other side of
the river."

"I can only tell your Excellency that the enemy's guns will hardly
carry five miles, and that Cornet O'Gawler was this moment shot
dead at my side with a cannon-ball."

"Ha! is it so?" said his Excellency, rising, and laying down the
drumstick of a grilled chicken.  "Gentlemen, remember that the eyes
of Europe are upon us, and follow me!"

Each aide-de-camp started from table and seized his cocked hat;
each British heart beat high at the thoughts of the coming melee.
We mounted our horses, and galloped swiftly after the brave old
General; I not the last in the train, upon my famous black charger.

It was perfectly true, the enemy were posted in force within three
miles of our camp, and from a hillock in the advance to which we
galloped, we were enabled with our telescopes to see the whole of
his imposing line.  Nothing can better describe it than this:-

    ___________________ A
  /....................
 /.
/.


- A is the enemy, and the dots represent the hundred and twenty
pieces of artillery which defended his line.  He was moreover,
entrenched; and a wide morass in his front gave him an additional
security.

His Excellency for a moment surveyed the line, and then said,
turning round to one of his aides-de-camp, "Order up Major-General
Tinkler and the cavalry."

"HERE, does your Excellency mean?" said the aide-de-camp,
surprised, for the enemy had perceived us, and the cannon-balls
were flying about as thick as peas.

"HERE, SIR!" said the old General, stamping with his foot in a
passion, and the A.D.C. shrugged his shoulders and galloped away.
In five minutes we heard the trumpets in our camp, and in twenty
more the greater part of the cavalry had joined us.

Up they came, five thousand men, their standards flapping in the
air, their long line of polished jack-boots gleaming in the golden
sunlight.  "And now we are here," said Major-General Sir Theophilus
Tinkler, "what next?"  "Oh, d- it," said the Commander-in-Chief,
"charge, charge--nothing like charging--galloping--guns--rascally
black scoundrels--charge, charge!"  And then turning round to me
(perhaps he was glad to change the conversation), he said,
"Lieutenant Gahagan, you will stay with me."

And well for him I did, for I do not hesitate to say that the
battle WAS GAINED BY ME.  I do not mean to insult the reader by
pretending that any personal exertions of mine turned the day,--
that I killed, for instance, a regiment of cavalry or swallowed a
battery of guns,--such absurd tales would disgrace both the hearer
and the teller.  I, as is well known, never say a single word which
cannot be proved, and hate more than all other vices the absurd sin
of egotism:  I simply mean that my ADVICE to the General, at a
quarter-past two o'clock in the afternoon of that day, won this
great triumph for the British army.

Gleig, Mill, and Thorn have all told the tale of this war, though
somehow they have omitted all mention of the hero of it.  General
Lake, for the victory of that day, became Lord Lake of Laswaree.
Laswaree! and who, forsooth, was the real conqueror of Laswaree?  I
can lay my hand upon my heart and say that I was.  If any proof is
wanting of the fact, let me give it at once, and from the highest
military testimony in the world--I mean that of the Emperor
Napoleon.

In the month of March, 1817, I was passenger on board the "Prince
Regent," Captain Harris, which touched at St. Helena on its passage
from Calcutta to England.  In company with the other officers on
board the ship, I paid my respects to the illustrious exile of
Longwood, who received us in his garden, where he was walking
about, in a nankeen dress and a large broad-brimmed straw hat, with
General Montholon, Count Las Casas, and his son Emanuel, then a
little boy; who I dare say does not recollect me, but who
nevertheless played with my sword-knot and the tassels of my
Hessian boots during the whole of our interview with his Imperial
Majesty.

Our names were read out (in a pretty accent, by the way!) by
General Montholon, and the Emperor, as each was pronounced, made a
bow to the owner of it, but did not vouchsafe a word.  At last
Montholon came to mine.  The Emperor looked me at once in the face,
took his hands out of his pockets, put them behind his back, and
coming up to me smiling, pronounced the following words:-

"Assaye, Delhi, Deeg, Futtyghur?"

I blushed, and, taking off my hat with a bow, said, "Sire, c'est
moi."

"Parbleu! je le savais bien," said the Emperor, holding out his
snuff-box.  "En usez-vous, Major?"  I took a large pinch (which,
with the honour of speaking to so great a man, brought the tears
into my eyes), and he continued as nearly as possible in the
following words:-

"Sir, you are known; you come of an heroic nation.  Your third
brother, the Chef de Bataillon, Count Godfrey Gahagan, was in my
Irish Brigade."

Gahagan.  "Sire, it is true.  He and my countrymen in your
Majesty's service stood under the green flag in the breach of
Burgos, and beat Wellington back.  It was the only time, as your
Majesty knows, that Irishmen and Englishmen were beaten in that
war."

Napoleon (looking as if he would say, "D- your candour, Major
Gahagan").  "Well, well; it was so.  Your brother was a Count, and
died a General in my service."

Gahagan.  "He was found lying upon the bodies of nine-and-twenty
Cossacks at Borodino.  They were all dead, and bore the Gahagan
mark."

Napoleon (to Montholon).  "C'est vrai, Montholon:  je vous donne ma
parole d'honneur la plus sacree, que c'est vrai.  Ils ne sont pas
d'autres, ces terribles Ga'gans.  You must know that Monsieur
gained the battle of Delhi as certainly as I did that of
Austerlitz.  In this way:- Ce belitre de Lor Lake, after calling up
his cavalry, and placing them in front of Holkar's batteries, qui
balayaient la plaine, was for charging the enemy's batteries with
his horse, who would have been ecrases, mitrailles, foudroyes to a
man but for the cunning of ce grand rogue que vous voyez."

Montholon.  "Coquin de Major, va!"

Napoleon.  "Montholon! tais-toi.  When Lord Lake, with his great
bull-headed English obstinacy, saw the facheuse position into which
he had brought his troops, he was for dying on the spot, and would
infallibly have done so--and the loss of his army would have been
the ruin of the East India Company--and the ruin of the English
East India Company would have established my Empire (bah! it was a
republic then!) in the East--but that the man before us, Lieutenant
Goliah Gahagan, was riding at the side of General Lake."

Montholon (with an accent of despair and fury).  "Gredin! cent
mille tonnerres de Dieu!"

Napoleon (benignantly).  "Calme-toi, mon fidele ami.  What will
you?  It was fate.  Gahagan, at the critical period of the battle,
or rather slaughter (for the English had not slain a man of the
enemy), advised a retreat."

Montholon.  "Le lache!  Un Francais meurt, mais il ne recule
jamais."

Napoleon.  "Stupide!  Don't you see why the retreat was ordered?--
don't you know that it was a feint on the part of Gahagan to draw
Holkar from his impregnable entrenchments?  Don't you know that the
ignorant Indian fell into the snare, and issuing from behind the
cover of his guns, came down with his cavalry on the plains in
pursuit of Lake and his dragoons?  Then it was that the Englishmen
turned upon him; the hardy children of the North swept down his
feeble horsemen, bore them back to their guns, which were useless,
entered Holkar's entrenchments along with his troops, sabred the
artillerymen at their pieces, and won the battle of Delhi!"

As the Emperor spoke, his pale cheek glowed red, his eye flashed
fire, his deep clear voice rung as of old when he pointed out the
enemy from beneath the shadow of the Pyramids, or rallied his
regiments to the charge upon the death-strewn plain of Wagram.  I
have had many a proud moment in my life, but never such a proud one
as this; and I would readily pardon the word "coward," as applied
to me by Montholon, in consideration of the testimony which his
master bore in my favour.

"Major," said the Emperor to me in conclusion, "why had I not such
a man as you in my service?  I would have made you a Prince and a
Marshal!" and here he fell into a reverie, of which I knew and
respected the purport.  He was thinking, doubtless, that I might
have retrieved his fortunes; and indeed I have very little doubt
that I might.

Very soon after, coffee was brought by Monsieur Marchand,
Napoleon's valet-de-chambre, and after partaking of that beverage,
and talking upon the politics of the day, the Emperor withdrew,
leaving me deeply impressed by the condescension he had shown in
this remarkable interview.



CHAPTER III:  A PEEP INTO SPAIN--ACCOUNT OF THE ORIGIN AND SERVICES
OF THE AHMEDNUGGAR IRREGULARS



HEADQUARTERS, MORELLA:  September 15, 1838

I have been here for some months, along with my young friend
Cabrera:  and in the hurry and bustle of war--daily on guard and in
the batteries for sixteen hours out of the twenty-four, with
fourteen severe wounds and seven musket-balls in my body--it may be
imagined that I have had little time to think about the publication
of my memoirs.  Inter arma silent leges--in the midst of fighting
be hanged to writing! as the poet says; and I never would have
bothered myself with a pen, had not common gratitude incited me to
throw off a few pages.

Along with Oraa's troops, who have of late been beleaguering this
place, there was a young Milesian gentleman, Mr. Toone O'Connor
Emmett Fitzgerald Sheeny by name, a law student, and a member of
Gray's Inn, and what he called Bay Ah of Trinity College, Dublin.
Mr. Sheeny was with the Queen's people, not in a military capacity,
but as representative of an English journal; to which, for a
trifling weekly remuneration, he was in the habit of transmitting
accounts of the movements of the belligerents, and his own opinion
of the politics of Spain.  Receiving, for the discharge of his
duty, a couple of guineas a week from the proprietors of the
journal in question, he was enabled, as I need scarcely say, to
make such a show in Oraa's camp as only a Christino general
officer, or at the very least a colonel of a regiment, can afford
to keep up.

In the famous sortie which we made upon the twenty-third, I was of
course among the foremost in the melee, and found myself, after a
good deal of slaughtering (which it would be as disagreeable as
useless to describe here), in the court of a small inn or podesta,
which had been made the headquarters of several Queenite officers
during the siege.  The pesatero or landlord of the inn had been
despatched by my brave chapel-churies, with his fine family of
children--the officers quartered in the podesta had of course
bolted; but one man remained, and my fellows were on the point of
cutting him into ten thousand pieces with their borachios, when I
arrived in the room time enough to prevent the catastrophe.  Seeing
before me an individual in the costume of a civilian--a white hat,
a light blue satin cravat, embroidered with butterflies and other
quadrupeds, a green coat and brass buttons, and a pair of blue
plaid trousers, I recognised at once a countryman, and interposed
to save his life.

In an agonised brogue the unhappy young man was saying all that he
could to induce the chapel-churies to give up their intention of
slaughtering him; but it is very little likely that his
protestations would have had any effect upon them, had not I
appeared in the room, and shouted to the ruffians to hold their
hand.

Seeing a general officer before them (I have the honour to hold
that rank in the service of His Catholic Majesty), and moreover one
six feet four in height, and armed with that terrible cabecilla (a
sword so called, because it is five feet long) which is so well
known among the Spanish armies--seeing, I say, this figure, the
fellows retired, exclaiming, "Adios, corpo di bacco nosotros," and
so on, clearly proving (by their words) that they would, if they
dared, have immolated the victim whom I had thus rescued from their
fury.  "Villains!" shouted I, hearing them grumble, "away! quit the
apartment!"  Each man, sulkily sheathing his sombrero, obeyed, and
quitted the camarilla.

It was then that Mr. Sheeny detailed to me the particulars to which
I have briefly adverted; and, informing me at the same time that he
had a family in England who would feel obliged to me for his
release, and that his most intimate friend the English Ambassador
would move heaven and earth to revenge his fall, he directed my
attention to a portmanteau passably well filled, which he hoped
would satisfy the cupidity of my troops.  I said, though with much
regret, that I must subject his person to a search; and hence arose
the circumstance which has called for what I fear you will consider
a somewhat tedious explanation.  I found upon Mr. Sheeny's person
three sovereigns in English money (which I have to this day), and
singularly enough a copy of the New Monthly Magazine, containing a
portion of my adventures.  It was a toss-up whether I should let
the poor young man be shot or no, but this little circumstance
saved his life.  The gratified vanity of authorship induced me to
accept his portmanteau and valuables, and to allow the poor wretch
to go free.  I put the Magazine in my coat-pocket, and left him and
the podesta.

The men, to my surprise, had quitted the building, and it was full
time for me to follow; for I found our sallying party, after
committing dreadful ravages in Oraa's lines, were in full retreat
upon the fort, hotly pressed by a superior force of the enemy.  I
am pretty well known and respected by the men of both parties in
Spain (indeed I served for some months on the Queen's side before I
came over to Don Carlos); and, as it is my maxim never to give
quarter, I never expect to receive it when taken myself.  On
issuing from the podesta with Sheeny's portmanteau and my sword in
my hand, I was a little disgusted and annoyed to see our own men in
a pretty good column retreating at double-quick, and about four
hundred yards beyond me, up the hill leading to the fort; while on
my left hand, and at only a hundred yards, a troop of the Queenite
lancers were clattering along the road.

I had got into the very middle of the road before I made this
discovery, so that the fellows had a full sight of me, and whizz!
came a bullet by my left whisker before I could say Jack Robinson.
I looked round--there were seventy of the accursed malvados at the
least, and within, as I said, a hundred yards.  Were I to say that
I stopped to fight seventy men, you would write me down a fool or a
liar:  no, sir, I did not fight, I ran away.

I am six feet four--my figure is as well known in the Spanish army
as that of the Count de Luchana, or my fierce little friend Cabrera
himself.  "GAHAGAN!" shouted out half-a-dozen scoundrelly voices,
and fifty more shots came rattling after me.  I was running--
running as the brave stag before the hounds--running as I have done
a great number of times before in my life, when there was no help
for it but a race.

After I had run about five hundred yards, I saw that I had gained
nearly three upon our column in front, and that likewise the
Christino horsemen were left behind some hundred yards more; with
the exception of three, who were fearfully near me.  The first was
an officer without a lance; he had fired both his pistols at me,
and was twenty yards in advance of his comrades; there was a
similar distance between the two lancers who rode behind him.  I
determined then to wait for No. 1, and as he came up delivered cut
3 at his horse's near leg--off it flew, and down, as I expected,
went horse and man.  I had hardly time to pass my sword through my
prostrate enemy, when No. 2 was upon me.  If I could but get that
fellow's horse, thought I, I am safe; and I executed at once the
plan which I hoped was to effect my rescue.

I had, as I said, left the podesta with Sheeny's portmanteau, and,
unwilling to part with some of the articles it contained--some
shirts, a bottle of whisky, a few cakes of Windsor soap, &c. &c.,--
I had carried it thus far on my shoulders, but now was compelled to
sacrifice it malgre moi.  As the lancer came up, I dropped my sword
from my right hand, and hurled the portmanteau at his head, with
aim so true, that he fell back on his saddle like a sack, and thus
when the horse galloped up to me, I had no difficulty in
dismounting the rider:  the whisky-bottle struck him over his right
eye, and he was completely stunned.  To dash him from the saddle
and spring myself into it, was the work of a moment; indeed, the
two combats had taken place in about a fifth part of the time which
it has taken the reader to peruse the description.  But in the
rapidity of the last encounter, and the mounting of my enemy's
horse, I had committed a very absurd oversight--I was scampering
away WITHOUT MY SWORD!  What was I to do?--to scamper on, to be
sure, and trust to the legs of my horse for safety!

The lancer behind me gained on me every moment, and I could hear
his horrid laugh as he neared me.  I leaned forward jockey-fashion
in my saddle, and kicked, and urged, and flogged with my hand, but
all in vain.  Closer--closer--the point of his lance was within two
feet of my back.  Ah! ah! he delivered the point, and fancy my
agony when I felt it enter--through exactly fifty-nine pages of the
New Monthly Magazine.  Had it not been for that Magazine, I should
have been impaled without a shadow of a doubt.  Was I wrong in
feeling gratitude?  Had I not cause to continue my contributions to
that periodical?

When I got safe into Morella, along with the tail of the sallying
party, I was for the first time made acquainted with the ridiculous
result of the lancer's thrust (as he delivered his lance, I must
tell you that a ball came whizz over my head from our fellows, and
entering at his nose, put a stop to his lancing for the future).  I
hastened to Cabrera's quarter, and related to him some of my
adventures during the day.

"But, General," said he, "you are standing.  I beg you chiudete
l'uscio (take a chair)."

I did so, and then for the first time was aware that there was some
foreign substance in the tail of my coat, which prevented my
sitting at ease.  I drew out the Magazine which I had seized, and
there, to my wonder, discovered the Christino lance twisted up like
a fish-hook or a pastoral crook.

"Ha! ha! ha!" said Cabrera (who is a notorious wag).

"Valdepenas madrilenos," growled out Tristany.

"By my cachuca di caballero (upon my honour as a gentleman),"
shrieked out Ros d'Eroles, convulsed with laughter, "I will send it
to the Bishop of Leon for a crozier."

"Gahagan has CONSECRATED it," giggled out Ramon Cabrera; and so
they went on with their muchacas for an hour or more.  But, when
they heard that the means of my salvation from the lance of the
scoundrelly Christino had been the Magazine containing my own
history, their laugh was changed into wonder.  I read them
(speaking Spanish more fluently than English) every word of my
story.  "But how is this?" said Cabrera.  "You surely have other
adventures to relate?"

"Excellent sir," said I, "I have;" and that very evening, as we sat
over our cups of tertullia (sangaree), I continued my narrative in
nearly the following words:-

"I left off in the very middle of the battle of Delhi, which ended,
as everybody knows, in the complete triumph of the British arms.
But who gained the battle?  Lord Lake is called Viscount Lake of
Delhi and Laswaree, while Major Gaha--nonsense, never mind HIM,
never mind the charge he executed when, sabre in hand, he leaped
the six-foot wall in the mouth of the roaring cannon, over the
heads of the gleaming pikes; when, with one hand seizing the sacred
peishcush, or fish--which was the banner always borne before
Scindiah,--he, with his good sword, cut off the trunk of the famous
white elephant, which, shrieking with agony, plunged madly into the
Mahratta ranks, followed by his giant brethren, tossing, like chaff
before the wind, the affrighted kitmatgars.  He, meanwhile, now
plunging into the midst of a battalion of consomahs, now cleaving
to the chine a screaming and ferocious bobbachee, {4} rushed on,
like the simoom across the red Zaharan plain, killing, with his own
hand, a hundred and forty-thr--but never mind--'ALONE HE DID IT;'
sufficient be it for him, however, that the victory was won:  he
cares not for the empty honours which were awarded to more
fortunate men!

"We marched after the battle to Delhi, where poor blind old Shah
Allum received us, and bestowed all kinds of honours and titles on
our General.  As each of the officers passed before him, the Shah
did not fail to remark my person, {5} and was told my name.

"Lord Lake whispered to him my exploits, and the old man was so
delighted with the account of my victory over the elephant (whose
trunk I use to this day), that he said, 'Let him be called
GUJPUTI,' or the lord of elephants; and Gujputi was the name by
which I was afterwards familiarly known among the natives,--the
men, that is.  The women had a softer appellation for me, and
called me 'Mushook,' or charmer.

"Well, I shall not describe Delhi, which is doubtless well known to
the reader; nor the siege of Agra, to which place we went from
Delhi; nor the terrible day at Laswaree, which went nigh to finish
the war.  Suffice it to say that we were victorious, and that I was
wounded; as I have invariably been in the two hundred and four
occasions when I have found myself in action.  One point, however,
became in the course of this campaign QUITE evident--THAT SOMETHING
MUST BE DONE FOR GAHAGAN.  The country cried shame, the King's
troops grumbled, the sepoys openly murmured that their Gujputi was
only a lieutenant, when he had performed such signal services.
What was to be done?  Lord Wellesley was in an evident quandary.
'Gahagan,' wrote he, 'to be a subaltern is evidently not your fate-
-YOU WERE BORN FOR COMMAND; but Lake and General Wellesley are good
officers, they cannot be turned out--I must make a post for you.
What say you, my dear fellow, to a corps of IRREGULAR HORSE?'

"It was thus that the famous corps of AHMEDNUGGAR IRREGULARS had
its origin; a guerilla force, it is true, but one which will long
be remembered in the annals of our Indian campaigns.

* * *

"As the commander of this regiment, I was allowed to settle the
uniform of the corps, as well as to select recruits.  These were
not wanting as soon as my appointment was made known, but came
flocking to my standard a great deal faster than to the regular
corps in the Company's service.  I had European officers, of
course, to command them, and a few of my countrymen as sergeants;
the rest were all natives, whom I chose of the strongest and
bravest men in India; chiefly Pitans, Afghans, Hurrumzadehs, and
Calliawns:  for these are well known to be the most warlike
districts of our Indian territory.

"When on parade and in full uniform we made a singular and noble
appearance.  I was always fond of dress; and, in this instance gave
a carte blanche to my taste, and invented the most splendid costume
that ever perhaps decorated a soldier.  I am, as I have stated
already, six feet four inches in height, and of matchless symmetry
and proportion.  My hair and beard are of the most brilliant
auburn, so bright as scarcely to be distinguished at a distance
from scarlet.  My eyes are bright blue, overshadowed by bushy
eyebrows of the colour of my hair, and a terrific gash of the
deepest purple, which goes over the forehead, the eyelid, and the
cheek, and finishes at the ear, gives my face a more strictly
military appearance than can be conceived.  When I have been
drinking (as is pretty often the case) this gash becomes ruby
bright, and as I have another which took off a piece of my under-
lip, and shows five of my front teeth, I leave you to imagine that
'seldom lighted on the earth' (as the monster Burke remarked of one
of his unhappy victims) 'a more extraordinary vision.'  I improved
these natural advantages; and, while in cantonment during the hot
winds at Chittybobbary, allowed my hair to grow very long, as did
my beard, which reached to my waist.  It took me two hours daily to
curl my hair in ten thousand little corkscrew ringlets, which waved
over my shoulders, and to get my moustaches well round to the
corners of my eyelids.  I dressed in loose scarlet trousers and red
morocco boots, a scarlet jacket, and a shawl of the same colour
round my waist; a scarlet turban three feet high, and decorated
with a tuft of the scarlet feathers of the flamingo, formed my
head-dress, and I did not allow myself a single ornament, except a
small silver skull and cross-bones in front of my turban.  Two
brace of pistols, a Malay creese, and a tulwar, sharp on both
sides, and very nearly six feet in length, completed this elegant
costume.  My two flags were each surmounted with a real skull and
cross-bones, and ornamented one with a black, and the other with a
red beard (of enormous length, taken from men slain in battle by
me).  On one flag were of course the arms of John Company; on the
other, an image of myself bestriding a prostrate elephant, with the
simple word 'GUJPUTI' written underneath in the Nagaree, Persian,
and Sanscrit characters.  I rode my black horse, and looked, by the
immortal gods, like Mars.  To me might be applied the words which
were written concerning handsome General Webb, in Marlborough's
time:-


"'To noble danger he conducts the way,
His great example all his troop obey,
Before the front the Major sternly rides,
With such an air as Mars to battle strides.
Propitious Heaven must sure a hero save
Like Paris handsome, and like Hector brave!'


"My officers (Captains Biggs and Mackanulty, Lieutenants Glogger,
Pappendick, Stuffle, &c. &c.) were dressed exactly in the same way,
but in yellow; and the men were similarly equipped, but in black.
I have seen many regiments since, and many ferocious-looking men,
but the Ahmednuggar Irregulars were more dreadful to the view than
any set of ruffians on which I ever set eyes.  I would to Heaven
that the Czar of Muscovy had passed through Cabool and Lahore, and
that I with my old Ahmednuggars stood on a fair field to meet him!
Bless you, bless you, my swart companions in victory! through the
mist of twenty years I hear the booming of your war-cry, and mark
the glitter of your scimitars as ye rage in the thickest of the
battle! {6}

"But away with melancholy reminiscences.  You may fancy what a
figure the Irregulars cut on a field-day--a line of five hundred
black-faced, black-dressed, black-horsed, black-bearded men--Biggs,
Glogger, and the other officers in yellow, galloping about the
field like flashes of lightning; myself enlightening them, red,
solitary, and majestic, like yon glorious orb in heaven.

"There are very few men, I presume, who have not heard of Holkar's
sudden and gallant incursion into the Dooab, in the year 1804, when
we thought that the victory of Laswaree and the brilliant success
at Deeg had completely finished him.  Taking ten thousand horse he
broke up his camp at Palimbang; and the first thing General Lake
heard of him was, that he was at Putna, then at Rumpooge, then at
Doncaradam--he was, in fact, in the very heart of our territory.

"The unfortunate part of the affair was this:- His Excellency,
despising the Mahratta chieftain, had allowed him to advance about
two thousand miles in his front, and knew not in the slightest
degree where to lay hold on him.  Was he at Hazarubaug? was he at
Bogly Gunge? nobody knew, and for a considerable period the
movements of Lake's cavalry were quite ambiguous, uncertain,
promiscuous, and undetermined.

"Such, briefly, was the state of affairs in October 1804.  At the
beginning of that month I had been wounded (a trifling scratch,
cutting off my left upper eyelid, a bit of my cheek, and my under-
lip), and I was obliged to leave Biggs in command of my Irregulars,
whilst I retired for my wounds to an English station at
Furruckabad, alias Futtyghur--it is, as every twopenny postman
knows, at the apex of the Dooab.  We have there a cantonment, and
thither I went for the mere sake of the surgeon and the sticking-
plaster.

"Furruckabad, then, is divided into two districts or towns:  the
lower Cotwal, inhabited by the natives, and the upper (which is
fortified slightly, and has all along been called Futtyghur,
meaning in Hindustanee 'the-favourite-resort-of-the-white-faced-
Feringhees-near-the-mango-tope-consecrated-to-Ram'), occupied by
Europeans.  (It is astonishing, by the way, how comprehensive that
language is, and how much can be conveyed in one or two of the
commonest phrases.)

"Biggs, then, and my men were playing all sorts of wondrous pranks
with Lord Lake's army, whilst I was detained an unwilling prisoner
of health at Futtyghur.

"An unwilling prisoner, however, I should not say.  The cantonment
at Futtyghur contained that which would have made any man a happy
slave.  Woman, lovely woman, was there in abundance and variety!
The fact is, that, when the campaign commenced in 1803, the ladies
of the army all congregated to this place, where they were left, as
it was supposed, in safety.  I might, like Homer, relate the names
and qualities of all.  I may at least mention SOME whose memory is
still most dear to me.  There was -

"Mrs. Major-General Bulcher, wife of Bulcher of the Infantry.

"Miss Bulcher.

"MISS BELINDA BULCHER (whose name I beg the printer to place in
large capitals).

"Mrs. Colonel Vandegobbleschroy.

"Mrs. Major Macan and the four Misses Macan.

"The Honourable Mrs. Burgoo, Mrs. Flix, Hicks, Wicks, and many more
too numerous to mention.  The flower of our camp was, however,
collected there, and the last words of Lord Lake to me, as I left
him, were, 'Gahagan, I commit those women to your charge.  Guard
them with your life, watch over them with your honour, defend them
with the matchless power of your indomitable arm.'

"Futtyghur is, as I have said, a European station, and the pretty
air of the bungalows, amid the clustering topes of mango-trees, has
often ere this excited the admiration of the tourist and sketcher.
On the brow of a hill--the Burrumpooter river rolls majestically at
its base; and no spot, in a word, can be conceived more exquisitely
arranged, both by art and nature, as a favourite residence of the
British fair.  Mrs. Bulcher, Mrs. Vandegobbleschroy, and the other
married ladies above mentioned, had each of them delightful
bungalows and gardens in the place, and between one cottage and
another my time passed as delightfully as can the hours of any man
who is away from his darling occupation of war.

"I was the commandant of the fort.  It is a little insignificant
pettah, defended simply by a couple of gabions, a very ordinary
counterscarp, and a bomb-proof embrasure.  On the top of this my
flag was planted, and the small garrison of forty men only were
comfortably barracked off in the casemates within.  A surgeon and
two chaplains (there were besides three reverend gentlemen of
amateur missions, who lived in the town), completed, as I may say,
the garrison of our little fortalice, which I was left to defend
and to command.

"On the night of the first of November, in the year 1804, I had
invited Mrs. Major-General Bulcher and her daughters, Mrs.
Vandegobbleschroy, and, indeed, all the ladies in the cantonment,
to a little festival in honour of the recovery of my health, of the
commencement of the shooting season, and indeed as a farewell
visit, for it was my intention to take dawk the very next morning
and return to my regiment.  The three amateur missionaries whom I
have mentioned, and some ladies in the cantonment of very rigid
religious principles, refused to appear at my little party.  They
had better never have been born than have done as they did:  as you
shall hear.

"We had been dancing merrily all night, and the supper (chiefly of
the delicate condor, the luscious adjutant, and other birds of a
similar kind, which I had shot in the course of the day) had been
duly feted by every lady and gentleman present; when I took an
opportunity to retire on the ramparts, with the interesting and
lovely Belinda Bulcher.  I was occupied, as the French say, in
CONTER-ing fleurettes to this sweet young creature, when, all of a
sudden, a rocket was seen whizzing through the air, and a strong
light was visible in the valley below the little fort.

"'What, fireworks!  Captain Gahagan,' said Belinda; 'this is too
gallant.'

"'Indeed, my dear Miss Bulcher,' said I, 'they are fireworks of
which I have no idea:  perhaps our friends the missionaries--'

"'Look, look!' said Belinda, trembling, and clutching tightly hold
of my arm:  'what do I see? yes--no--yes! it is--OUR BUNGALOW IS IN
FLAMES!'

"It was true, the spacious bungalow occupied by Mrs. Major-General
was at that moment seen a prey to the devouring element--another
and another succeeded it--seven bungalows, before I could almost
ejaculate the name of Jack Robinson, were seen blazing brightly in
the black midnight air!

"I seized my night-glass, and looking towards the spot where the
conflagration raged, what was my astonishment to see thousands of
black forms dancing round the fires; whilst by their lights I could
observe columns after columns of Indian horse, arriving and taking
up their ground in the very middle of the open square or tank,
round which the bungalows were built!

"'Ho, warder!' shouted I (while the frightened and trembling
Belinda clung closer to my side, and pressed the stalwart arm that
encircled her waist), 'down with the drawbridge! see that your
masolgees' (small tumbrels which are used in place of large
artillery) 'be well loaded:  you, sepoys, hasten and man the
ravelin! you, choprasees, put out the lights in the embrasures! we
shall have warm work of it to-night, or my name is not Goliah
Gahagan.'

"The ladies, the guests (to the number of eighty-three), the
sepoys, choprasees, masolgees, and so on, had all crowded on the
platform at the sound of my shouting, and dreadful was the
consternation, shrill the screaming, occasioned by my words.  The
men stood irresolute and mute with terror; the women, trembling,
knew scarcely whither to fly for refuge.  'Who are yonder
ruffians?' said I.  A hundred voices yelped in reply--some said the
Pindarees, some said the Mahrattas, some vowed it was Scindiah, and
others declared it was Holkar--no one knew.

"'Is there any one here,' said I, 'who will venture to reconnoitre
yonder troops?'  There was a dead pause.

"'A thousand tomauns to the man who will bring me news of yonder
army!' again I repeated.  Still a dead silence.  The fact was that
Scindiah and Holkar both were so notorious for their cruelty, that
no one dared venture to face the danger.  'Oh for fifty of my brave
Ahmednuggarees!' thought I.

"'Gentlemen,' said I, 'I see it--you are cowards--none of you dare
encounter the chance even of death.  It is an encouraging prospect:
know you not that the ruffian Holkar, if it be he, will with to-
morrow's dawn beleaguer our little fort, and throw thousands of men
against our walls? know you not that, if we are taken, there is no
quarter, no hope; death for us--and worse than death for these
lovely ones assembled here?'  Here the ladies shrieked and raised a
howl as I have heard the jackals on a summer's evening.  Belinda,
my dear Belinda! flung both her arms round me, and sobbed on my
shoulder (or in my waistcoat-pocket rather, for the little witch
could reach no higher).

"'Captain Gahagan,' sobbed she, 'Go-Go-Goggle-iah!'

"'My soul's adored!' replied I.

"'Swear to me one thing.'

"'I swear.'

"'That if--that if--the nasty, horrid, odious black Mah-ra-a-a-
attahs take the fort, you will put me out of their power.'

"I clasped the dear girl to my heart, and swore upon my sword that,
rather than she should incur the risk of dishonour, she should
perish by my own hand.  This comforted her; and her mother, Mrs.
Major-General Bulcher, and her elder sister, who had not until now
known a word of our attachment, (indeed, but for these
extraordinary circumstances, it is probable that we ourselves
should never have discovered it), were under these painful
circumstances made aware of my beloved Belinda's partiality for me.
Having communicated thus her wish of self-destruction, I thought
her example a touching and excellent one, and proposed to all the
ladies that they should follow it, and that at the entry of the
enemy into the fort, and at a signal given by me, they should one
and all make away with themselves.  Fancy my disgust when, after
making this proposition, not one of the ladies chose to accede to
it, and received it with the same chilling denial that my former
proposal to the garrison had met with.

"In the midst of this hurry and confusion, as if purposely to add
to it, a trumpet was heard at the gate of the fort, and one of the
sentinels came running to me, saying that a Mahratta soldier was
before the gate with a flag of truce!

"I went down, rightly conjecturing, as it turned out, that the
party, whoever they might be, had no artillery; and received at the
point of my sword a scroll of which the following is a translation.


"'To Goliah Gahagan Gujputi.

"'LORD OF ELEPHANTS, SIR,--I have the honour to inform you that I
arrived before this place at eight o'clock p.m. with ten thousand
cavalry under my orders.  I have burned, since my arrival,
seventeen bungalows in Furruckabad and Futtyghur, and have likewise
been under the painful necessity of putting to death three
clergymen (mollahs) and seven English officers, whom I found in the
village; the women have been transferred to safe keeping in the
harems of my officers and myself.

"'As I know your courage and talents, I shall be very happy if you
will surrender the fortress, and take service as a major-general
(hookahbadar) in my army.  Should my proposal not meet with your
assent, I beg leave to state that to-morrow I shall storm the fort,
and on taking it, shall put to death every male in the garrison,
and every female above twenty years of age.  For yourself I shall
reserve a punishment, which for novelty and exquisite torture has,
I flatter myself, hardly ever been exceeded.  Awaiting the favour
of a reply, I am, Sir,

"'Your very obedient servant,

"'JESWUNT ROW HOLKAR.
"'CAMP BEFORE FUTTYGHUR:  September 1, 1804.
"'R. S. V. P.'


"The officer who had brought this precious epistle (it is
astonishing how Holkar had aped the forms of English
correspondence), an enormous Pitan soldier, with a shirt of mail,
and a steel cap and cape, round which his turban wound, was leaning
against the gate on his matchlock, and whistling a national melody.
I read the letter, and saw at once there was no time to be lost.
That man, thought I, must never go back to Holkar.  Were he to
attack us now before we were prepared, the fort would be his in
half-an-hour.

"Tying my white pocket-handkerchief to a stick, I flung open the
gate and advanced to the officer:  he was standing, I said, on the
little bridge across the moat.  I made him a low salaam, after the
fashion of the country, and, as he bent forward to return the
compliment, I am sorry to say, I plunged forward, gave him a
violent blow on the head, which deprived him of all sensation, and
then dragged him within the wall, raising the drawbridge after me.

"I bore the body into my own apartment; there, swift as thought, I
stripped him of his turban, cammerbund, peijammahs, and papooshes,
and, putting them on myself, determined to go forth and reconnoitre
the enemy."

* * *

Here I was obliged to stop, for Cabrera, Ros d'Eroles, and the rest
of the staff, were sound asleep!  What I did in my reconnaissance,
and how I defended the fort of Futtyghur, I shall have the honour
of telling on another occasion.



CHAPTER IV:  THE INDIAN CAMP--THE SORTIE FROM THE FORT



HEADQUARTERS, MORELLA:  October 3, 1838

It is a balmy night.  I hear the merry jingle of the tambourine,
and the cheery voices of the girls and peasants, as they dance
beneath my casement, under the shadow of the clustering vines.  The
laugh and song pass gaily round, and even at this distance I can
distinguish the elegant form of Ramon Cabrera, as he whispers gay
nothings in the ears of the Andalusian girls, or joins in the
thrilling chorus of Riego's hymn, which is ever and anon
vociferated by the enthusiastic soldiery of Carlos Quinto.  I am
alone, in the most inaccessible and most bomb-proof tower of our
little fortalice; the large casements are open--the wind, as it
enters, whispers in my ear its odorous recollections of the orange
grove and the myrtle bower.  My torch (a branch of the fragrant
cedar-tree) flares and flickers in the midnight breeze, and
disperses its scent and burning splinters on my scroll and the desk
where I write--meet implements for a soldier's authorship!--it is
CARTRIDGE paper over which my pen runs so glibly, and a yawning
barrel of gunpowder forms my rough writing-table.  Around me, below
me, above me, all--all is peace!  I think, as I sit here so lonely,
on my country, England! and muse over the sweet and bitter
recollections of my early days!  Let me resume my narrative, at the
point where (interrupted by the authoritative summons of war) I
paused on the last occasion.

I left off, I think--(for I am a thousand miles away from proof-
sheets as I write, and, were I not writing the simple TRUTH, must
contradict myself a thousand times in the course of my tale)--I
think, I say, that I left off at that period of my story, when,
Holkar being before Futtyghur, and I in command of that fortress, I
had just been compelled to make away with his messenger:  and,
dressed in the fallen Indian's accoutrements, went forth to
reconnoitre the force, and, if possible, to learn the intentions of
the enemy.  However much my figure might have resembled that of the
Pitan, and, disguised in his armour, might have deceived the lynx-
eyed Mahrattas, into whose camp I was about to plunge, it was
evident that a single glance at my fair face and auburn beard would
have undeceived the dullest blockhead in Holkar's army.  Seizing,
then, a bottle of Burgess's walnut catsup, I dyed my face and my
hands, and, with the simple aid of a flask of Warren's jet, I made
my hair and beard as black as ebony.  The Indian's helmet and chain
hood covered likewise a great part of my face, and I hoped thus,
with luck, impudence, and a complete command of all the Eastern
dialects and languages, from Burmah to Afghanistan, to pass scot-
free through this somewhat dangerous ordeal.

I had not the word of the night, it is true--but I trusted to good
fortune for that, and passed boldly out of the fortress, bearing
the flag of truce as before; I had scarcely passed on a couple of
hundred yards, when lo! a party of Indian horsemen, armed like him
I had just overcome, trotted towards me.  One was leading a noble
white charger, and no sooner did he see me than, dismounting from
his own horse, and giving the rein to a companion, he advanced to
meet me with the charger; a second fellow likewise dismounted and
followed the first:  one held the bridle of the horse, while the
other (with a multitude of salaams, aleikums, and other
genuflexions) held the jewelled stirrup, and kneeling, waited until
I should mount.

I took the hint at once:  the Indian who had come up to the fort
was a great man--that was evident; I walked on with a majestic air,
gathered up the velvet reins, and sprung into the magnificent high-
peaked saddle.  "Buk, buk," said I.  "It is good.  In the name of
the forty-nine Imaums, let us ride on."  And the whole party set
off at a brisk trot, I keeping silence, and thinking with no little
trepidation of what I was about to encounter.

As we rode along, I heard two of the men commenting upon my unusual
silence (for I suppose, I--that is the Indian--was a talkative
officer).  "The lips of the Bahawder are closed," said one.  "Where
are those birds of Paradise, his long-tailed words? they are
imprisoned between the golden bars of his teeth!"

"Kush," said his companion, "be quiet!  Bobbachy Bahawder has seen
the dreadful Feringhee, Gahagan Khan Gujputi, the elephant-lord,
whose sword reaps the harvest of death; there is but one champion
who can wear the papooshes of the elephant-slayer--it is Bobbachy
Bahawder!"

"You speak truly, Puneeree Muckun, the Bahawder ruminates on the
words of the unbeliever:  he is an ostrich, and hatches the eggs of
his thoughts."

"Bekhusm! on my nose be it!  May the young birds, his actions, be
strong and swift in flight."

"May they DIGEST IRON!" said Puneeree Muckun, who was evidently a
wag in his way.

"O--ho!" thought I, as suddenly the light flashed upon me.  "It
was, then, the famous Bobbachy Bahawder whom I overcame just now!
and he is the man destined to stand in my slippers, is he?" and I
was at that very moment standing in his own!  Such are the chances
and changes that fall to the lot of the soldier!

I suppose everybody--everybody who has been in India, at least--has
heard the name of Bobbachy Bahawder:  it is derived from the two
Hindustanee words--bobbachy, general; bahawder, artilleryman.  He
had entered into Holkar's service in the latter capacity, and had,
by his merit and his undaunted bravery in action, attained the
dignity of the peacock's feather, which is only granted to noblemen
of the first class; he was married, moreover, to one of Holkar's
innumerable daughters; a match which, according to the Chronique
Scandaleuse, brought more of honour than of pleasure to the poor
Bobbachy.  Gallant as he was in the field, it was said that in the
harem he was the veriest craven alive, completely subjugated by his
ugly and odious wife.  In all matters of importance the late
Bahawder had been consulted by his prince, who had, as it appears
(knowing my character, and not caring to do anything rash in his
attack upon so formidable an enemy), sent forward the unfortunate
Pitan to reconnoitre the fort; he was to have done yet more, as I
learned from the attendant Puneeree Muckun, who was, I soon found
out, an old favourite with the Bobbachy--doubtless on account of
his honesty and love of repartee.

"The Bahawder's lips are closed," said he, at last, trotting up to
me; "has he not a word for old Puneeree Muckun?"

"Bismillah, mashallah, barikallah," said I; which means, "My good
friend, what I have seen is not worth the trouble of relation, and
fills my bosom with the darkest forebodings."

"You could not then see the Gujputi alone, and stab him with your
dagger?"

[Here was a pretty conspiracy!]  "No, I saw him, but not alone; his
people were always with him."

"Hurrumzadeh! it is a pity; we waited but the sound of your jogree
(whistle), and straightway would have galloped up and seized upon
every man, woman, and child in the fort:  however, there are but a
dozen men in the garrison, and they have not provision for two
days--they must yield; and then hurrah for the moon-faces!
Mashallah!  I am told the soldiers who first get in are to have
their pick.  How my old woman, Rotee Muckun, will be surprised when
I bring home a couple of Feringhee wives,--ha! ha!"

"Fool!" said I, "be still!--twelve men in the garrison there are
twelve hundred!  Gahagan himself is as good as a thousand men; and
as for food, I saw with my own eyes five hundred bullocks grazing
in the courtyard as I entered."  This WAS a bouncer, I confess; but
my object was to deceive Puneeree Muckun, and give him as high a
notion as possible of the capabilities of defence which the
besieged had.

"Pooch, pooch," murmured the men; "it is a wonder of a fortress:
we shall never be able to take it until our guns come up."

There was hope then! they had no battering-train.  Ere this arrived
I trusted that Lord Lake would hear of our plight, and march down
to rescue us.  Thus occupied in thought and conversation, we rode
on until the advanced sentinel challenged us, when old Puneeree
gave the word, and we passed on into the centre of Holkar's camp.

It was a strange--a stirring sight!  The camp-fires were lighted;
and round them--eating, reposing, talking, looking at the merry
steps of the dancing-girls, or listening to the stories of some
Dhol Baut (or Indian improvisatore)--were thousands of dusky
soldiery.  The camels and horses were picketed under the banyan-
trees, on which the ripe mango fruit was growing, and offered them
an excellent food.  Towards the spot which the golden fish and
royal purdahs, floating in the wind, designated as the tent of
Holkar, led an immense avenue--of elephants! the finest street,
indeed, I ever saw.  Each of the monstrous animals had a castle on
its back, armed with Mauritanian archers and the celebrated Persian
matchlock-men:  it was the feeding time of these royal brutes, and
the grooms were observed bringing immense toffungs, or baskets,
filled with pine-apples, plantains, bananas, Indian corn, and
cocoa-nuts, which grow luxuriantly at all seasons of the year.  We
passed down this extraordinary avenue--no less than three hundred
and eighty-eight tails did I count on each side--each tail
appertaining to an elephant twenty-five feet high--each elephant
having a two-storied castle on its back--each castle containing
sleeping and eating rooms for the twelve men that formed its
garrison, and were keeping watch on the roof--each roof bearing a
flagstaff twenty feet long on its top, the crescent glittering with
a thousand gems, and round it the imperial standard,--each standard
of silk velvet and cloth-of-gold, bearing the well-known device of
Holkar, argent an or gules, between a sinople of the first, a
chevron truncated, wavy.  I took nine of these myself in the course
of a very short time after, and shall be happy, when I come to
England, to show them to any gentleman who has a curiosity that
way.  Through this gorgeous scene our little cavalcade passed, and
at last we arrived at the quarters occupied by Holkar.

That celebrated chieftain's tents and followers were gathered round
one of the British bungalows which had escaped the flames, and
which he occupied during the siege.  When I entered the large room
where he sat, I found him in the midst of a council of war; his
chief generals and viziers seated round him, each smoking his
hookah, as is the common way with these black fellows, before, at,
and after breakfast, dinner, supper, and bedtime.  There was such a
cloud raised by their smoke you could hardly see a yard before you-
-another piece of good-luck for me--as it diminished the chances of
my detection.  When, with the ordinary ceremonies, the kitmatgars
and consomahs had explained to the prince that Bobbachy Bahawder,
the right eye of the Sun of the Universe (as the ignorant heathens
called me), had arrived from his mission, Holkar immediately
summoned me to the maidaun, or elevated platform, on which he was
seated in a luxurious easy-chair, and I, instantly taking off my
slippers, falling on my knees, and beating my head against the
ground ninety-nine times, proceeded, still on my knees, a hundred
and twenty feet through the room, and then up the twenty steps
which led to his maidaun--a silly, painful, and disgusting
ceremony, which can only be considered as a relic of barbarian
darkness, which tears the knees and shins to pieces, let alone the
pantaloons.  I recommend anybody who goes to India, with the
prospect of entering the service of the native rajahs, to recollect
my advice, and have them WELL WADDED.

Well, the right eye of the Sun of the Universe scrambled as well as
he could up the steps of the maidaun (on which, in rows, smoking,
as I have said, the musnuds or general officers were seated), and I
arrived within speaking distance of Holkar, who instantly asked me
the success of my mission.  The impetuous old man thereon poured
out a multitude of questions:  "How many men are there in the
fort?" said he; "how many women?  Is it victualled? have they
ammunition?  Did you see Gahagan Sahib, the commander? did you kill
him?"

All these questions Jeswunt Row Holkar puffed out with so many
whiffs of tobacco.

Taking a chillum myself, and raising about me such a cloud that,
upon my honour as a gentleman, no man at three yards' distance
could perceive anything of me except the pillar of smoke in which I
was encompassed, I told Holkar, in Oriental language of course, the
best tale I could with regard to the fort.

"Sir," said I, "to answer your last question first--that dreadful
Gujputi I have seen--and he is alive:  he is eight feet, nearly, in
height; he can eat a bullock daily (of which he has seven hundred
at present in the compound, and swears that during the siege he
will content himself with only three a week):  he has lost, in
battle, his left eye; and what is the consequence?  O Ram Gunge" (O
thou-with-the-eye-as-bright-as-morning and-with-beard-as-black-as-
night), "Goliah Gujputi--NEVER SLEEPS!"

"Ah, you Ghorumsaug (you thief of the world)," said the Prince
Vizier, Saadut Alee Beg Bimbukchee--"it's joking you are;"--and
there was a universal buzz through the room at the announcement of
this bouncer.

"By the hundred and eleven incarnations of Vishnu," said I,
solemnly (an oath which no Indian was ever known to break), "I
swear that so it is:  so at least he told me, and I have good cause
to know his power.  Gujputi is an enchanter:  he is leagued with
devils; he is invulnerable.  Look," said I, unsheathing my dagger--
and every eye turned instantly towards me--"thrice did I stab him
with this steel--in the back, once--twice right through the heart;
but he only laughed me to scorn, and bade me tell Holkar that the
steel was not yet forged which was to inflict an injury upon him."

I never saw a man in such a rage as Holkar was when I gave him this
somewhat imprudent message.

"Ah, lily-livered rogue!" shouted he out to me, "milk-blooded
unbeliever! pale-faced miscreant! lives he after insulting thy
master in thy presence?  In the name of the Prophet, I spit on
thee, defy thee, abhor thee, degrade thee!  Take that, thou liar of
the universe! and that--and that--and that!"

Such are the frightful excesses of barbaric minds! every time this
old man said, "Take that," he flung some article near him at the
head of the undaunted Gahagan--his dagger, his sword, his carbine,
his richly ornamented pistols, his turban covered with jewels,
worth a hundred thousand crores of rupees--finally, his hookah,
snake mouthpiece, silver-bell, chillum and all--which went hissing
over my head, and flattening into a jelly the nose of the Grand
Vizier.

"Yock muzzee! my nose is off," said the old man, mildly.  "Will you
have my life, O Holkar? it is thine likewise!" and no other word of
complaint escaped his lips.

Of all these missiles, though a pistol and carbine had gone off as
the ferocious Indian flung them at my head, and the naked scimitar,
fiercely but unadroitly thrown, had lopped off the limbs of one or
two of the musnuds as they sat trembling on their omrahs, yet,
strange to say, not a single weapon had hurt me.  When the hubbub
ceased, and the unlucky wretches who had been the victims of this
fit of rage had been removed, Holkar's good-humour somewhat
returned, and he allowed me to continue my account of the fort;
which I did, not taking the slightest notice of his burst of
impatience:  as indeed it would have been the height of
impoliteness to have done, for such accidents happened many times
in the day.

"It is well that the Bobbachy has returned," snuffled out the poor
Grand Vizier, after I had explained to the Council the
extraordinary means of defence possessed by the garrison.

"Your star is bright, O Bahawder! for this very night we had
resolved upon an escalade of the fort, and we had sworn to put
every one of the infidel garrison to the edge of the sword."

"But you have no battering train," said I.

"Bah! we have a couple of ninety-six pounders, quite sufficient to
blow the gates open; and then, hey for a charge!" said Loll
Mahommed, a general of cavalry, who was a rival of Bobbachy's, and
contradicted, therefore, every word I said.  "In the name of
Juggernaut, why wait for the heavy artillery?  Have we not swords?
Have we not hearts?  Mashallah!  Let cravens stay with Bobbachy,
all true men will follow Loll Mahommed!  Allahhumdillah, Bismillah,
Barikallah?" {7} and drawing his scimitar, he waved it over his
head, and shouted out his cry of battle.  It was repeated by many
of the other omrahs; the sound of their cheers was carried into the
camp, and caught up by the men; the camels began to cry, the horses
to prance and neigh, the eight hundred elephants set up a scream,
the trumpeters and drummers clanged away at their instruments.  I
never heard such a din before or after.  How I trembled for my
little garrison when I heard the enthusiastic cries of this
innumerable host!

There was but one way for it.  "Sir," said I, addressing Holkar,
"go out to-night, and you go to certain death.  Loll Mahommed has
not seen the fort as I have.  Pass the gate if you please, and for
what? to fall before the fire of a hundred pieces of artillery; to
storm another gate, and then another, and then to be blown up, with
Gahagan's garrison in the citadel.  Who talks of courage?  Were I
not in your august presence, O star of the faithful, I would crop
Loll Mahommed's nose from his face, and wear his ears as an
ornament in my own pugree!  Who is there here that knows not the
difference between yonder yellow-skinned coward and Gahagan Khan
Guj--I mean Bobbachy Bahawder?  I am ready to fight one, two,
three, or twenty of them, at broad-sword, small-sword, single-
stick, with fists if you please.  By the holy piper, fighting is
like mate and dthrink to Ga---to Bobbachy, I mane--whoop! come on,
you divvle, and I'll bate the skin off your ugly bones."

This speech had very nearly proved fatal to me, for, when I am
agitated, I involuntarily adopt some of the phraseology peculiar to
my own country; which is so un-eastern, that, had there been any
suspicion as to my real character, detection must indubitably have
ensued.  As it was, Holkar perceived nothing, but instantaneously
stopped the dispute.  Loll Mahommed, however, evidently suspected
something; for, as Holkar, with a voice of thunder, shouted out;
"Tomasha (silence)," Loll sprang forward and gasped out -

"My lord! my lord! this is not Bob--"

But he could say no more.  "Gag the slave!" screamed out Holkar,
stamping with fury; and a turban was instantly twisted round the
poor devil's jaws.  "Ho, furoshes! carry out Loll Mahommed Khan,
give him a hundred dozen on the soles of his feet, set him upon a
white donkey, and carry him round the camp, with an inscription
before him:  'This is the way that Holkar rewards the talkative.'"

I breathed again; and ever as I heard each whack of the bamboo
falling on Loll Mahommed's feet, I felt peace returning to my mind,
and thanked my stars that I was delivered of this danger.

"Vizier," said Holkar, who enjoyed Loll's roars amazingly, "I owe
you a reparation for your nose:  kiss the hand of your prince, O
Saadut Alee Beg Bimbukchee! be from this day forth Zoheir u
Dowlut!"

The good old man's eyes filled with tears.  "I can bear thy
severity, O Prince," said he; "I cannot bear thy love.  Was it not
an honour that your Highness did me just now when you condescended
to pass over the bridge of your slave's nose?"

The phrase was by all voices pronounced to be very poetical.  The
Vizier retired, crowned with his new honours, to bed.  Holkar was
in high good-humour.

"Bobbachy," said he, "thou, too, must pardon me.  A propos, I have
news for thee.  Your wife, the incomparable Puttee Rooge" (white
and red rose), "has arrived in camp."

"My WIFE, my lord!" said I, aghast.

"Our daughter, the light of thine eyes!  Go, my son; I see thou art
wild with joy.  The Princess's tents are set up close by mine, and
I know thou longest to join her."

My wife?  Here was a complication truly!



CHAPTER V:  THE ISSUE OF MY INTERVIEW WITH MY WIFE



I found Puneeree Muckun, with the rest of my attendants, waiting at
the gate, and they immediately conducted me to my own tents in the
neighbourhood.  I have been in many dangerous predicaments before
that time and since, but I don't care to deny that I felt in the
present instance such a throbbing of the heart as I never have
experienced when leading a forlorn hope, or marching up to a
battery.

As soon as I entered the tents a host of menials sprang forward,
some to ease me of my armour, some to offer me refreshments, some
with hookahs, attar of roses (in great quart bottles), and the
thousand delicacies of Eastern life.  I motioned them away.  "I
will wear my armour," said I; "I shall go forth to-night.  Carry my
duty to the princess, and say I grieve that to-night I have not the
time to see her.  Spread me a couch here, and bring me supper here:
a jar of Persian wine well cooled, a lamb stuffed with pistachio-
nuts, a pillaw of a couple of turkeys, a curried kid--anything.
Begone!  Give me a pipe; leave me alone, and tell me when the meal
is ready."

I thought by these means to put off the fair Puttee Rooge, and
hoped to be able to escape without subjecting myself to the
examination of her curious eyes.  After smoking for a while, an
attendant came to tell me that my supper was prepared in the inner
apartment of the tent (I suppose that the reader, if he be
possessed of the commonest intelligence, knows that the tents of
the Indian grandees are made of the finest Cashmere Shawls, and
contain a dozen rooms at least, with carpets, chimneys, and sash-
windows complete).  I entered, I say, into an inner chamber, and
there began with my fingers to devour my meal in the Oriental
fashion, taking, every now and then, a pull from the wine-jar,
which was cooling deliciously in another jar of snow.

I was just in the act of despatching the last morsel of a most
savoury stewed lamb and rice, which had formed my meal, when I
heard a scuffle of feet, a shrill clatter of female voices, and,
the curtain being flung open, in marched a lady accompanied by
twelve slaves, with moon faces and slim waists, lovely as the
houris in Paradise.

The lady herself, to do her justice, was as great a contrast to her
attendants as could possibly be:  she was crooked, old, of the
complexion of molasses, and rendered a thousand times more ugly by
the tawdry dress and the blazing jewels with which she was covered.
A line of yellow chalk drawn from her forehead to the tip of her
nose (which was further ornamented by an immense glittering nose-
ring), her eyelids painted bright red, and a large dab of the same
colour on her chin, showed she was not of the Mussulman, but the
Brahmin faith--and of a very high caste:  you could see that by her
eyes.  My mind was instantaneously made up as to my line of action.

The male attendants had of course quitted the apartment, as they
heard the well-known sound of her voice.  It would have been death
to them to have remained and looked in her face.  The females
ranged themselves round their mistress, as she squatted down
opposite to me.

"And is this," said she, "a welcome, O Khan! after six months'
absence, for the most unfortunate and loving wife in all the world?
Is this lamb, O glutton! half so tender as thy spouse?  Is this
wine, O sot! half so sweet as her looks?"

I saw the storm was brewing--her slaves, to whom she turned, kept
up a kind of chorus:-

"Oh, the faithless one!" cried they.  "Oh, the rascal, the false
one, who has no eye for beauty, and no heart for love, like the
Khanum's!"

"A lamb is not so sweet as love," said I gravely; "but a lamb has a
good temper:  a wine-cup is not so intoxicating as a woman--but a
wine-cup has NO TONGUE, O Khanum Gee!" and again I dipped my nose
in the soul-refreshing jar.

The sweet Puttee Rooge was not, however, to be put off by my
repartees; she and her maidens recommenced their chorus, and
chattered and stormed until I lost all patience.

"Retire, friends," said I, "and leave me in peace."

"Stir, on your peril!" cried the Khanum.

So, seeing there was no help for it but violence, I drew out my
pistols, cocked them, and said, "O houris! these pistols contain
each two balls:  the daughter of Holkar bears a sacred life for me-
-but for you!--by all the saints of Hindustan, four of ye shall die
if ye stay a moment longer in my presence!"  This was enough; the
ladies gave a shriek, and skurried out of the apartment like a
covey of partridges on the wing.

Now, then, was the time for action.  My wife, or rather Bobbachy's
wife, sat still, a little flurried by the unusual ferocity which
her lord had displayed in her presence.  I seized her hand and,
gripping it close, whispered in her ear, to which I put the other
pistol:- "O Khanum, listen and scream not; the moment you scream,
you die!"  She was completely beaten:  she turned as pale as a
woman could in her situation, and said, "Speak, Bobbachy Bahawder,
I am dumb."

"Woman," said I, taking off my helmet, and removing the chain cape
which had covered almost the whole of my face--"I AM NOT THY
HUSBAND--I am the slayer of elephants, the world-renowned GAHAGAN!"

As I said this, and as the long ringlets of red hair fell over my
shoulders (contrasting strangely with my dyed face and beard), I
formed one of the finest pictures that can possibly be conceived,
and I recommend it as a subject to Mr. Heath, for the next "Book of
Beauty."

"Wretch!" said she, "what wouldst thou?"

"You black-faced fiend," said I, "raise but your voice, and you are
dead!"

"And afterwards," said she, "do you suppose that YOU can escape?
The torments of hell are not so terrible as the tortures that
Holkar will invent for thee."

"Tortures, madam?" answered I, coolly.  "Fiddlesticks!  You will
neither betray me, nor will I be put to the torture:  on the
contrary, you will give me your best jewels and facilitate my
escape to the fort.  Don't grind your teeth and swear at me.
Listen, madam:  you know this dress and these arms;--they are the
arms of your husband, Bobbachy Bahawder--MY PRISONER.  He now lies
in yonder fort, and if I do not return before daylight, at sunrise
he dies:  and then, when they send his corpse back to Holkar, what
will you, his WIDOW, do?

"Oh!" said she, shuddering, "spare me, spare me!"

"I'll tell you what you will do.  You will have the pleasure of
dying along with him--of BEING ROASTED, madam:  an agonising death,
from which your father cannot save you, to which he will be the
first man to condemn and conduct you.  Ha!  I see we understand
each other, and you will give me over the cash-box and jewels."
And so saying I threw myself back with the calmest air imaginable,
flinging the pistols over to her.  "Light me a pipe, my love," said
I, "and then go and hand me over the dollars:  do you hear?"  You
see I had her in my power--up a tree, as the Americans say, and she
very humbly lighted my pipe for me, and then departed for the goods
I spoke about.

What a thing is luck!  If Loll Mahommed had not been made to take
that ride round the camp, I should infallibly have been lost.

My supper, my quarrel with the princess, and my pipe afterwards,
had occupied a couple of hours of my time.  The princess returned
from her quest, and brought with her the box, containing valuables
to the amount of about three millions sterling.  (I was cheated of
them afterwards, but have the box still, a plain deal one.)  I was
just about to take my departure, when a tremendous knocking,
shouting, and screaming was heard at the entrance of the tent.  It
was Holkar himself, accompanied by that cursed Loll Mahommed, who,
after his punishment, found his master restored to good-humour, and
had communicated to him his firm conviction that I was an impostor.

"Ho, Begum!" shouted he, in the ante-room (for he and his people
could not enter the women's apartments), "speak, O my daughter! is
your husband returned?"

"Speak, madam," said I, "or REMEMBER THE ROASTING."

"He is, Papa," said the Begum.

"Are you sure?  Ho! ho! ho!" (the old ruffian was laughing
outside)--"are you sure it is?--Ha! aha!--he-e-e!"

"Indeed it is he, and no other.  I pray you, father, to go, and to
pass no more such shameless jests on your daughter.  Have I ever
seen the face of any other man?"  And hereat she began to weep as
if her heart would break--the deceitful minx!

Holkar's laugh was instantly turned to fury.  "Oh, you liar and
eternal thief!" said he, turning round (as I presume, for I could
only hear) to Loll Mahommed, "to make your prince eat such
monstrous dirt as this!  Furoshes, seize this man.  I dismiss him
from my service, I degrade him from his rank, I appropriate to
myself all his property:  and hark ye, furoshes, GIVE HIM A HUNDRED
DOZEN MORE!"

Again I heard the whacks of the bamboos, and peace flowed into my
soul.

* * *

Just as morn began to break, two figures were seen to approach the
little fortress of Futtyghur:  one was a woman wrapped closely in a
veil; the other a warrior, remarkable for the size and manly beauty
of his form, who carried in his hand a deal box of considerable
size.  The warrior at the gate gave the word and was admitted; the
woman returned slowly to the Indian camp.  Her name was Puttee
Rooge; his was -

G. O'G. G., M.H.E.I.C.S.. C.I.H.A.



CHAPTER VI:  FAMINE IN THE GARRISON



Thus my dangers for the night being overcome, I hastened with my
precious box into my own apartment, which communicated with
another, where I had left my prisoner, with a guard to report if he
should recover, and to prevent his escape.  My servant, Ghorumsaug,
was one of the guard.  I called him, and the fellow came, looking
very much confused and frightened, as it seemed, at my appearance.

"Why, Ghorumsaug," said I, "what makes thee look so pale, fellow?"
(He was as white as a sheet.)  "It is thy master, dost thou not
remember him?"  The man had seen me dress myself in the Pitan's
clothes, but was not present when I had blacked my face and beard
in the manner I have described.

"O Bramah, Vishnu, and Mahomet!" cried the faithful fellow, "and do
I see my dear master disguised in this way?  For Heaven's sake let
me rid you of this odious black paint; for what will the ladies say
in the ballroom, if the beautiful Feringhee should appear amongst
them with his roses turned into coal?"

I am still one of the finest men in Europe, and at the time of
which I write, when only two-and-twenty, I confess I was a little
vain of my personal appearance, and not very willing to appear
before my dear Belinda disguised like a blackamoor.  I allowed
Ghorumsaug to divest me of the heathenish armour and habiliments
which I wore; and having, with a world of scrubbing and trouble,
divested my face and beard of their black tinge, I put on my own
becoming uniform, and hastened to wait on the ladies; hastened, I
say,--although delayed would have been the better word, for the
operation of bleaching lasted at least two hours.

"How is the prisoner, Ghorumsaug?" said I, before leaving my
apartment.

"He has recovered from the blow which the Lion dealt him; two men
and myself watch over him; and Macgillicuddy Sahib (the second in
command) has just been the rounds, and has seen that all was
secure."

I bade Ghorumsaug help me to put away my chest of treasure (my
exultation in taking it was so great that I could not help
informing him of its contents); and this done, I despatched him to
his post near the prisoner, while I prepared to sally forth and pay
my respects to the fair creatures under my protection.  "What good
after all have I done," thought I to myself, "in this expedition
which I had so rashly undertaken?"  I had seen the renowned Holkar;
I had been in the heart of his camp; I knew the disposition of his
troops, that there were eleven thousand of them, and that he only
waited for his guns to make a regular attack on the fort.  I had
seen Puttee Rooge; I had robbed her (I say ROBBED her, and I don't
care what the reader or any other man may think of the act) of a
deal box, containing jewels to the amount of three millions
sterling, the property of herself and husband.

Three millions in money and jewels!  And what the deuce were money
and jewels to me or to my poor garrison?  Could my adorable Miss
Bulcher eat a fricassee of diamonds, or, Cleopatra-like, melt down
pearls to her tea?  Could I, careless as I am about food, with a
stomach that would digest anything--(once, in Spain, I ate the leg
of a horse during a famine, and was so eager to swallow this morsel
that I bolted the shoe, as well as the hoof, and never felt the
slightest inconvenience from either)--could I, I say, expect to
live long and well upon a ragout of rupees, or a dish of stewed
emeralds and rubies?  With all the wealth of Croesus before me I
felt melancholy; and would have paid cheerfully its weight in
carats for a good honest round of boiled beef.  Wealth, wealth,
what art thou?  What is gold?--Soft metal.  What are diamonds?--
Shining tinsel.  The great wealth-winners, the only fame-achievers,
the sole objects worthy of a soldier's consideration, are
beefsteaks, gunpowder, and cold iron.

The two latter means of competency we possessed; I had in my own
apartments a small store of gunpowder (keeping it under my own bed,
with a candle burning for fear of accidents); I had 14 pieces of
artillery (4 long 48's and 4 carronades, 5 howitzers, and a long
brass mortar, for grape, which I had taken myself at the battle of
Assaye), and muskets for ten times my force.  My garrison, as I
have told the reader in a previous number, consisted of 40 men, two
chaplains, and a surgeon; add to these my guests, 83 in number, of
whom nine only were gentlemen (in tights, powder, pigtails, and
silk stockings, who had come out merely for a dance, and found
themselves in for a siege).  Such were our numbers:-


Troops and artillerymen        40
Ladies                         74
Other non-combatants           11
MAJOR-GENERAL O'G.GAHAGAN   1,000
                            1,125


I count myself good for a thousand, for so I was regularly rated in
the army:  with this great benefit to it, that I only consumed as
much as an ordinary mortal.  We were then, as far as the victuals
went, 126 mouths; as combatants we numbered 1,040 gallant men, with
12 guns and a fort, against Holkar and his 12,000.  No such
alarming odds, if -

IF!--ay, there was the rub--IF we had SHOT, as well as powder for
our guns; IF we had not only MEN but MEAT.  Of the former commodity
we had only three rounds for each piece.  Of the latter, upon my
sacred honour, to feed 126 souls, we had but


Two drumsticks of fowls, and a bone of ham.
Fourteen bottles of ginger-beer.
Of soda-water, four ditto.
Two bottles of fine Spanish olives.
Raspberry cream--the remainder of two dishes.
Seven macaroons, lying in the puddle of a demolished trifle.
Half a drum of best Turkey figs.
Some bits of broken bread; two Dutch cheeses (whole); the crust of
an old Stilton; and about an ounce of almonds and raisins.
Three ham-sandwiches, and a pot of currant-jelly, and 197 bottles
of brandy, rum, madeira, pale ale (my private stock); a couple of
hard eggs for a salad, and a flask of Florence oil.


This was the provision for the whole garrison!  The men after
supper had seized upon the relics of the repast, as they were
carried off from the table; and these were the miserable remnants I
found and counted on my return; taking good care to lock the door
of the supper-room, and treasure what little sustenance still
remained in it.

When I appeared in the saloon, now lighted up by the morning sun, I
not only caused a sensation myself, but felt one in my own bosom
which was of the most painful description.  Oh, my reader! may you
never behold such a sight as that which presented itself:  eighty-
three men and women in ball-dresses; the former with their lank
powdered locks streaming over their faces; the latter with faded
flowers, uncurled wigs, smudged rouge, blear eyes, draggling
feathers, rumpled satins--each more desperately melancholy and
hideous than the other--each, except my beloved Belinda Bulcher,
whose raven ringlets never having been in curl could of course
never go out of curl; whose cheek, pale as the lily, could, as it
may naturally be supposed, grow no paler; whose neck and beauteous
arms, dazzling as alabaster, needed no pearl-powder, and therefore,
as I need not state, did not suffer because the pearl-powder had
come off.  Joy (deft link-boy!) lit his lamps in each of her eyes
as I entered.  As if I had been her sun, her spring, lo! blushing
roses mantled in her cheek!  Seventy-three ladies, as I entered,
opened their fire upon me, and stunned me with cross-questions,
regarding my adventures in the camp--SHE, as she saw me, gave a
faint scream (the sweetest, sure, that ever gurgled through the
throat of a woman!) then started up--then made as if she would sit
down--then moved backwards--then tottered forwards--then tumbled
into my--Psha! why recall, why attempt to describe that delicious--
that passionate greeting of two young hearts?  What was the
surrounding crowd to us?  What cared we for the sneers of the men,
the titters of the jealous women, the shrill "Upon my word!" of the
elder Miss Bulcher, and the loud expostulations of Belinda's mamma?
The brave girl loved me, and wept in my arms.  "Goliah! my Goliah!"
said she, "my brave, my beautiful, THOU art returned, and hope
comes back with thee.  Oh! who can tell the anguish of my soul,
during this dreadful dreadful night!"  Other similar ejaculations
of love and joy she uttered; and if I HAD perilled life in her
service, if I DID believe that hope of escape there was none, so
exquisite was the moment of our meeting, that I forgot all else in
this overwhelming joy!

* * *

[The Major's description of this meeting, which lasted at the very
most not ten seconds, occupies thirteen pages of writing.  We have
been compelled to dock off twelve-and-a-half; for the whole
passage, though highly creditable to his feelings, might possibly
be tedious to the reader.]

* * *

As I said, the ladies and gentlemen were inclined to sneer, and
were giggling audibly.  I led the dear girl to a chair, and,
scowling round with a tremendous fierceness, which those who know
me know I can sometimes put on, I shouted out, "Hark ye! men and
women--I am this lady's truest knight--her husband I hope one day
to be.  I am commander, too, in this fort--the enemy is without it;
another word of mockery--another glance of scorn--and, by Heaven, I
will hurl every man and woman from the battlements, a prey to the
ruffianly Holkar!"  This quieted them.  I am a man of my word, and
none of them stirred or looked disrespectfully from that moment.

It was now my turn to make them look foolish.  Mrs.
Vandegobbleschroy (whose unfailing appetite is pretty well known to
every person who has been in India) cried, "Well, Captain Gahagan,
your ball has been so pleasant, and the supper was despatched so
long ago, that myself and the ladies would be very glad of a little
breakfast."  And Mrs. Van giggled as if she had made a very witty
and reasonable speech.  "Oh! breakfast, breakfast, by all means,"
said the rest; "we really are dying for a warm cup of tea."

"Is it bohay tay or souchong tay that you'd like, ladies?" says I.

"Nonsense, you silly man; any tea you like," said fat Mrs. Van.

"What do you say, then, to some prime GUNPOWDER?"  Of course they
said it was the very thing.

"And do you like hot rowls or cowld--muffins or crumpets--fresh
butter or salt?  And you, gentlemen, what do you say to some
ilegant divvled-kidneys for yourselves, and just a trifle of
grilled turkeys, and a couple of hundthred new-laid eggs for the
ladies?"

"Pooh, pooh! be it as you will, my dear fellow," answered they all.

"But stop," says I.  "O ladies, O ladies!  O gentlemen, gentlemen!
that you should ever have come to the quarters of Goliah Gahagan,
and he been without--"

"What?" said they, in a breath.

"Alas! alas!  I have not got a single stick of chocolate in the
whole house."

"Well, well, we can do without it."

"Or a single pound of coffee."

"Never mind; let that pass too."  (Mrs. Van and the rest were
beginning to look alarmed.)

"And about the kidneys--now I remember, the black divvles outside
the fort have seized upon all the sheep; and how are we to have
kidneys without them?"  (Here there was a slight o-o-o!)

"And with regard to the milk and crame, it may be remarked that the
cows are likewise in pawn, and not a single drop can be had for
money or love:  but we can beat up eggs, you know, in the tay,
which will be just as good."

"Oh! just as good."

"Only the divvle's in the luck, there's not a fresh egg to be had--
no, nor a fresh chicken," continued I, "nor a stale one either; not
a tayspoonful of souchong, nor a thimbleful of bohay; nor the laste
taste in life of butther, salt or fresh; nor hot rowls or cowld!"

"In the name of Heaven!" said Mrs. Van, growing very pale, "what is
there, then?"

"Ladies and gentlemen, I'll tell you what there is now," shouted I.
"There's


"Two drumsticks of fowls, and a bone of ham.
Fourteen bottles of ginger-beer," &c. &c. &c.


And I went through the whole list of eatables as before, ending
with the ham-sandwiches and the pot of jelly.

"Law!  Mr. Gahagan," said Mrs. Colonel Vandegobbleschroy, "give me
the ham-sandwiches--I must manage to breakfast off them."

And you should have heard the pretty to-do there was at this modest
proposition!  Of course I did not accede to it--why should I?  I
was the commander of the fort, and intended to keep these three
very sandwiches for the use of myself and my dear Belinda.
"Ladies," said I, "there are in this fort one hundred and twenty-
six souls, and this is all the food which is to last us during the
siege.  Meat there is none--of drink there is a tolerable quantity;
and at one o'clock punctually, a glass of wine and one olive shall
be served out to each woman:  the men will receive two glasses, and
an olive and a fig--and this must be your food during the siege.
Lord Lake cannot be absent more than three days; and if he be--why,
still there is a chance--why do I say a chance?--a CERTAINTY of
escaping from the hands of these ruffians."

"Oh, name it, name it, dear Captain Gahagan!" screeched the whole
covey at a breath.

"It lies," answered I, "in the powder magazine.  I will blow this
fort, and all it contains, to atoms, ere it becomes the prey of
Holkar."

The women, at this, raised a squeal that might have been heard in
Holkar's camp, and fainted in different directions; but my dear
Belinda whispered in my ear, "Well done, thou noble knight! bravely
said, my heart's Goliah!"  I felt I was right:  I could have blown
her up twenty times for the luxury of that single moment!  "And
now, ladies," said I, "I must leave you.  The two chaplains will
remain with you to administer professional consolation--the other
gentlemen will follow me upstairs to the ramparts, where I shall
find plenty of work for them."



CHAPTER VII:  THE ESCAPE



Loth as they were, these gentlemen had nothing for it but to obey,
and they accordingly followed me to the ramparts, where I proceeded
to review my men.  The fort, in my absence, had been left in
command of Lieutenant Macgillicuddy, a countryman of my own (with
whom, as may be seen in an early chapter of my memoirs, I had an
affair of honour); and the prisoner Bobbachy Bahawder, whom I had
only stunned, never wishing to kill him, had been left in charge of
that officer.  Three of the garrison (one of them a man of the
Ahmednuggar Irregulars, my own body-servant, Ghorumsaug above
named) were appointed to watch the captive by turns, and never
leave him out of their sight.  The lieutenant was instructed to
look to them and to their prisoner; and as Bobbachy was severely
injured by the blow which I had given him, and was, moreover, bound
hand and foot, and gagged smartly with cords, I considered myself
sure of his person.

Macgillicuddy did not make his appearance when I reviewed my little
force, and the three havildars were likewise absent:  this did not
surprise me, as I had told them not to leave their prisoner; but
desirous to speak with the lieutenant, I despatched a messenger to
him, and ordered him to appear immediately.

The messenger came back; he was looking ghastly pale:  he whispered
some information into my ear, which instantly caused me to hasten
to the apartments where I had caused Bobbachy Bahawder to be
confined.

The men had fled;--Bobbachy had fled; and in his place, fancy my
astonishment when I found--with a rope cutting his naturally wide
mouth almost into his ears--with a dreadful sabre-cut across his
forehead--with his legs tied over his head, and his arms tied
between his legs--my unhappy, my attached friend--Mortimer
Macgillicuddy!

He had been in this position for about three hours--it was the very
position in which I had caused Bobbachy Bahawder to be placed--an
attitude uncomfortable, it is true, but one which renders escape
impossible, unless treason aid the prisoner.

I restored the lieutenant to his natural erect position; I poured
half-a-bottle of whisky down the immensely enlarged orifice of his
mouth; and when he had been released, he informed me of the
circumstances that had taken place.

Fool that I was! idiot!--upon my return to the fort, to have been
anxious about my personal appearance, and to have spent a couple of
hours in removing the artificial blackening from my beard and
complexion, instead of going to examine my prisoner--when his
escape would have been prevented.  O foppery, foppery!--it was that
cursed love of personal appearance which had led me to forget my
duty to my general, my country, my monarch, and my own honour!

Thus it was that the escape took place:- My own fellow of the
Irregulars, whom I had summoned to dress me, performed the
operation to my satisfaction, invested me with the elegant uniform
of my corps, and removed the Pitan's disguise, which I had taken
from the back of the prostrate Bobbachy Bahawder.  What did the
rogue do next?--Why, he carried back the dress to the Bobbachy--he
put it, once more, on its right owner; he and his infernal black
companions (who had been won over by the Bobbachy with promises of
enormous reward) gagged Macgillicuddy, who was going the rounds,
and then marched with the Indian coolly up to the outer gate, and
gave the word.  The sentinel, thinking it was myself, who had first
come in, and was as likely to go out again--(indeed my rascally
valet said that Gahagan Sahib was about to go out with him and his
two companions to reconnoitre)--opened the gates, and off they
went!

This accounted for the confusion of my valet when I entered!--and
for the scoundrel's speech, that the lieutenant had JUST BEEN THE
ROUNDS;--he HAD, poor fellow, and had been seized and bound in this
cruel way.  The three men, with their liberated prisoner, had just
been on the point of escape, when my arrival disconcerted them:  I
had changed the guard at the gate (whom they had won over
likewise); and yet, although they had overcome poor Mac, and
although they were ready for the start, they had positively no
means for effecting their escape, until I was ass enough to put
means in their way.  Fool! fool! thrice besotted fool that I was,
to think of my own silly person when I should have been occupied
solely with my public duty.

From Macgillicuddy's incoherent accounts, as he was gasping from
the effects of the gag and the whisky he had taken to revive him,
and from my own subsequent observations, I learned this sad story.
A sudden and painful thought struck me--my precious box!--I rushed
back, I found that box--I have it still.  Opening it, there, where
I had left ingots, sacks of bright tomauns, kopeks and rupees,
strings of diamonds as big as ducks' eggs, rubies as red as the
lips of my Belinda, countless strings of pearls, amethysts,
emeralds, piles upon piles of bank-notes--I found--a piece of
paper! with a few lines in the Sanscrit language, which are thus,
word for word, translated:-


"EPIGRAM.
(On disappointing a certain Major.)

"The conquering lion return'd with his prey,
And safe in his cavern he set it;
The sly little fox stole the booty away,
And, as he escaped, to the lion did say,
'AHA! don't you wish you may get it?'"


Confusion!  Oh, how my blood boiled as I read these cutting lines.
I stamped,--I swore,--I don't know to what insane lengths my rage
might have carried me, had not at this moment a soldier rushed in,
screaming, "The enemy, the enemy!"



CHAPTER VIII:  THE CAPTIVE



It was high time, indeed, that I should make my appearance.  Waving
my sword with one hand and seizing my telescope with the other, I
at once frightened and examined the enemy.  Well they knew when
they saw that flamingo-plume floating in the breeze--that awful
figure standing in the breach--that waving war-sword sparkling in
the sky--well, I say, they knew the name of the humble individual
who owned the sword, the plume, and the figure.  The ruffians were
mustered in front, the cavalry behind.  The flags were flying, the
drums, gongs, tambourines, violoncellos, and other instruments of
Eastern music, raised in the air a strange barbaric melody; the
officers (yatabals), mounted on white dromedaries, were seen
galloping to and fro, carrying to the advancing hosts the orders of
Holkar.

You see that two sides of the fort of Futtyghur (rising as it does
on a rock that is almost perpendicular) are defended by the
Burrumpooter river, two hundred feet deep at this point, and a
thousand yards wide, so that I had no fear about them attacking me
in that quarter.  My guns, therefore (with their six-and-thirty
miserable charges of shot), were dragged round to the point at
which I conceived Holkar would be most likely to attack me.  I was
in a situation that I did not dare to fire, except at such times as
I could kill a hundred men by a single discharge of a cannon; so
the attacking party marched and marched, very strongly, about a
mile and a half off, the elephants marching without receiving the
slightest damage from us, until they had come to within four
hundred yards of our walls (the rogues knew all the secrets of our
weakness, through the betrayal of the dastardly Ghorumsaug, or they
never would have ventured so near).  At that distance--it was about
the spot where the Futtyghur hill began gradually to rise--the
invading force stopped; the elephants drew up in a line, at right
angles with our wall (the fools! they thought they should expose
themselves too much by taking a position parallel to it); the
cavalry halted too, and--after the deuce's own flourish of trumpets
and banging of gongs, to be sure,--somebody, in a flame-coloured
satin dress, with an immense jewel blazing in his pugree (that
looked through my telescope like a small but very bright planet),
got up from the back of one of the very biggest elephants, and
began a speech.

The elephants were, as I said, in a line formed with admirable
precision, about three hundred of them.  The following little
diagram will explain matters:-

.......   G |
E           |
            | F


E is the line of elephants.  F is the wall of the fort.  G a gun in
the fort.  Now the reader will see what I did.

The elephants were standing, their trunks waggling to and fro
gracefully before them; and I, with superhuman skill and activity,
brought the gun G (a devilish long brass gun) to bear upon them.  I
pointed it myself; bang! it went, and what was the consequence?
Why, this:-

  x
.......   G |
E           |
            | F

F is the fort, as before.  G is the gun, as before.  E, the
elephants, as we have previously seen them.  What then is x? x is
the line taken by the ball fired from G, which took off ONE HUNDRED
AND THIRTY-FOUR ELEPHANTS' TRUNKS, and only spent itself in the
tusk of a very old animal, that stood the hundred and thirty-fifth!

I say that such a shot was never fired before or since; that a gun
was never pointed in such a way.  Suppose I had been a common man,
and contented myself with firing bang at the head of the first
animal?  An ass would have done it, prided himself had he hit his
mark, and what would have been the consequence?  Why, that the ball
might have killed two elephants and wounded a third; but here,
probably, it would have stopped, and done no further mischief.  The
trunk was the place at which to aim; there are no bones there; and
away, consequently, went the bullet, shearing, as I have said,
through one hundred and thirty-five probosces.  Heavens! what a
howl there was when the shot took effect!  What a sudden stoppage
of Holkar's speech!  What a hideous snorting of elephants!  What a
rush backwards was made by the whole army, as if some demon was
pursuing them!

Away they went.  No sooner did I see them in full retreat, than,
rushing forward myself, I shouted to my men, "My friends, yonder
lies your dinner!"  We flung open the gates--we tore down to the
spot where the elephants had fallen:  seven of them were killed;
and of those that escaped to die of their hideous wounds elsewhere,
most had left their trunks behind them.  A great quantity of them
we seized; and I myself, cutting up with my scimitar a couple of
the fallen animals, as a butcher would a calf, motioned to the men
to take the pieces back to the fort, where barbecued elephant was
served round for dinner, instead of the miserable allowance of an
olive and a glass of wine, which I had promised to my female
friends, in my speech to them.  The animal reserved for the ladies
was a young white one--the fattest and tenderest I ever ate in my
life:  they are very fair eating, but the flesh has an India-rubber
flavour, which, until one is accustomed to it, is unpalatable.

It was well that I had obtained this supply, for, during my absence
on the works, Mrs. Vandegobbleschroy and one or two others had
forced their way into the supper-room, and devoured every morsel of
the garrison larder, with the exception of the cheeses, the olives,
and the wine, which were locked up in my own apartment, before
which stood a sentinel.  Disgusting Mrs. Van!  When I heard of her
gluttony, I had almost a mind to eat HER.  However, we made a very
comfortable dinner off the barbecued steaks, and when everybody had
done, had the comfort of knowing that there was enough for one meal
more.

The next day, as I expected, the enemy attacked us in great force,
attempting to escalade the fort; but by the help of my guns, and my
good sword, by the distinguished bravery of Lieutenant
Macgillicuddy and the rest of the garrison, we beat this attack off
completely, the enemy sustaining a loss of seven hundred men.  We
were victorious; but when another attack was made, what were we to
do?  We had still a little powder left, but had fired off all the
shot, stones, iron-bars, &c. in the garrison!  On this day, too, we
devoured the last morsel of our food:  I shall never forget Mrs.
Vandegobbleschroy's despairing look, as I saw her sitting alone,
attempting to make some impression on the little white elephant's
roasted tail.

The third day the attack was repeated.  The resources of genius are
never at an end.  Yesterday I had no ammunition; to-day, I
discovered charges sufficient for two guns, and two swivels, which
were much longer, but had bores of about blunderbuss size.

This time my friend Loll Mahommed, who had received, as the reader
may remember, such a bastinadoing for my sake, headed the attack.
The poor wretch could not walk, but he was carried in an open
palanquin, and came on waving his sword, and cursing horribly in
his Hindustan jargon.  Behind him came troops of matchlock-men, who
picked off every one of our men who showed their noses above the
ramparts; and a great host of blackamoors with scaling-ladders,
bundles to fill the ditch, fascines, gabions, culverins, demilunes,
counterscarps, and all the other appurtenances of offensive war.

On they came; my guns and men were ready for them.  You will ask
how my pieces were loaded?  I answer, that though my garrison were
without food, I knew my duty as an officer, and HAD PUT THE TWO
DUTCH CHEESES INTO THE TWO GUNS, AND HAD CRAMMED THE CONTENTS OF A
BOTTLE OF OLIVES INTO EACH SWIVEL.

They advanced,--whish! went one of the Dutch cheeses,--bang! went
the other.  Alas! they did little execution.  In their first
contact with an opposing body, they certainly floored it; but they
became at once like so much Welsh-rabbit, and did no execution
beyond the man whom they struck down.

"Hogree, pogree, wongree-fum (praise to Allah and the forty-nine
Imaums!)" shouted out the ferocious Loll Mahommed when he saw the
failure of my shot.  "Onward, sons of the Prophet! the infidel has
no more ammunition.  A hundred thousand lakhs of rupees to the man
who brings me Gahagan's head!"

His men set up a shout, and rushed forward--he, to do him justice,
was at the very head, urging on his own palanquin-bearers, and
poking them with the tip of his scimitar.  They came panting up the
hill:  I was black with rage, but it was the cold concentrated rage
of despair.  "Macgillicuddy," said I, calling that faithful
officer, "you know where the barrels of powder are?"  He did.  "You
know the use to make of them?"  He did.  He grasped my hand.
"Goliah," said he, "farewell!  I swear that the fort shall be in
atoms, as soon as yonder unbelievers have carried it.  Oh, my poor
mother!" added the gallant youth, as sighing, yet fearless, he
retired to his post.

I gave one thought to my blessed, my beautiful Belinda, and then,
stepping into the front, took down one of the swivels;--a shower of
matchlock balls came whizzing round my head.  I did not heed them.

I took the swivel, and aimed coolly.  Loll Mahommed, his palanquin,
and his men, were now not above two hundred yards from the fort.
Loll was straight before me, gesticulating and shouting to his men.
I fired--bang!!!

I aimed so true, that ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTEEN BEST SPANISH OLIVES
WERE LODGED IN A LUMP IN THE FACE OF THE UNHAPPY LOLL MAHOMMED.
The wretch, uttering a yell the most hideous and unearthly I ever
heard, fell back dead; the frightened bearers flung down the
palanquin and ran--the whole host ran as one man:  their screams
might be heard for leagues.  "Tomasha, tomasha," they cried, "it is
enchantment!"  Away they fled, and the victory a third time was
ours.  Soon as the fight was done, I flew back to my Belinda.  We
had eaten nothing for twenty-four hours, but I forgot hunger in the
thought of once more beholding her!

The sweet soul turned towards me with a sickly smile as I entered,
and almost fainted in my arms; but alas! it was not love which
caused in her bosom an emotion so strong--it was hunger!  "Oh! my
Goliah," whispered she, "for three days I have not tasted food--I
could not eat that horrid elephant yesterday; but now--oh!
Heaven!--"  She could say no more, but sank almost lifeless on my
shoulder.  I administered to her a trifling dram of rum, which
revived her for a moment, and then rushed downstairs, determined
that if it were a piece of my own leg, she should still have
something to satisfy her hunger.  Luckily I remembered that three
or four elephants were still lying in the field, having been killed
by us in the first action, two days before.  Necessity, thought I,
has no law; my adorable girl must eat elephant, until she can get
something better.

I rushed into the court where the men were, for the most part,
assembled.  "Men," said I, "our larder is empty; we must fill it as
we did the day before yesterday.  Who will follow Gahagan on a
foraging party?"  I expected that, as on former occasions, every
man would offer to accompany me.

To my astonishment, not a soul moved--a murmur arose among the
troops; and at last one of the oldest and bravest came forward.

"Captain," he said, "it is of no use; we cannot feed upon elephants
for ever; we have not a grain of powder left, and must give up the
fort when the attack is made to-morrow.  We may as well be
prisoners now as then, and we won't go elephant-hunting any more."

"Ruffian!" I said, "he who first talks of surrender, dies!" and I
cut him down.  "Is there anyone else who wishes to speak?"

No one stirred.

"Cowards! miserable cowards!" shouted I; "what, you dare not move
for fear of death at the hands of those wretches who even now fled
before your arms--what, do I say your arms?--before MINE!--alone I
did it; and as alone I routed the foe, alone I will victual the
fortress!  Ho! open the gate!"

I rushed out; not a single man would follow.  The bodies of the
elephants that we had killed still lay on the ground where they had
fallen, about four hundred yards from the fort.  I descended calmly
the hill, a very steep one, and coming to the spot, took my pick of
the animals, choosing a tolerably small and plump one, of about
thirteen feet high, which the vultures had respected.  I threw this
animal over my shoulders, and made for the fort.

As I marched up the acclivity, whizz--piff--whirr! came the balls
over my head; and pitter-patter, pitter-patter! they fell on the
body of the elephant like drops of rain.  The enemy were behind me;
I knew it, and quickened my pace.  I heard the gallop of their
horse:  they came nearer, nearer; I was within a hundred yards of
the fort--seventy--fifty!  I strained every nerve; I panted with
the superhuman exertion--I ran--could a man run very fast with such
a tremendous weight on his shoulders?

Up came the enemy; fifty horsemen were shouting and screaming at my
tail.  O Heaven! five yards more--one moment--and I am saved.  It
is done--I strain the last strain--I make the last step--I fling
forward my precious burden into the gate opened wide to receive me
and it, and--I fall!  The gate thunders to, and I am left on the
outside!  Fifty knives are gleaming before my bloodshot eyes--fifty
black hands are at my throat, when a voice exclaims, "Stop!--kill
him not, it is Gujputi!"  A film came over my eyes--exhausted
nature would bear no more.



CHAPTER IX:  SURPRISE OF FUTTYGHUR



When I awoke from the trance into which I had fallen, I found
myself in a bath, surrounded by innumerable black faces; and a
Hindoo pothukoor (whence our word apothecary) feeling my pulse and
looking at me with an air of sagacity.

"Where am I?" I exclaimed, looking round and examining the strange
faces, and the strange apartment which met my view.  "Bekhusm!"
said the apothecary.  "Silence!  Gahagan Sahib is in the hands of
those who know his valour, and will save his life."

"Know my valour, slave?  Of course you do," said I; "but the fort--
the garrison--the elephant--Belinda, my love--my darling--
Macgillicuddy--the scoundrelly mutineers--the deal bo- "

I could say no more; the painful recollections pressed so heavily
upon my poor shattered mind and frame, that both failed once more.
I fainted again, and I know not how long I lay insensible.

Again, however, I came to my senses:  the pothukoor applied
restoratives, and after a slumber of some hours I awoke, much
refreshed.  I had no wound; my repeated swoons had been brought on
(as indeed well they might) by my gigantic efforts in carrying the
elephant up a steep hill a quarter of a mile in length.  Walking,
the task is bad enough:  but running, it is the deuce; and I would
recommend any of my readers who may be disposed to try and carry a
dead elephant, never, on any account, to go a pace of more than
five miles an hour.

Scarcely was I awake, when I heard the clash of arms at my door
(plainly indicating that sentinels were posted there), and a single
old gentleman, richly habited, entered the room.  Did my eyes
deceive me?  I had surely seen him before.  No--yes--no--yes--it
was he:  the snowy white beard, the mild eyes, the nose flattened
to a jelly, and level with the rest of the venerable face,
proclaimed him at once to be--Saadut Alee Beg Bimbukchee, Holkar's
Prime Vizier; whose nose, as the reader may recollect, his Highness
had flattened with his kaleawn during my interview with him in the
Pitan's disguise.  I now knew my fate but too well--I was in the
hands of Holkar.

Saadut Alee Beg Bimbukchee slowly advanced towards me, and with a
mild air of benevolence which distinguished that excellent man (he
was torn to pieces by wild horses the year after, on account of a
difference with Holkar), he came to my bedside and, taking gently
my hand, said, "Life and death, my son, are not ours.  Strength is
deceitful, valour is unavailing, fame is only wind--the nightingale
sings of the rose all night--where is the rose in the morning?
Booch, booch! it is withered by a frost.  The rose makes remarks
regarding the nightingale, and where is that delightful song-bird?
Pena-bekhoda, he is netted, plucked, spitted, and roasted!  Who
knows how misfortune comes?  It has come to Gahagan Gujputi!"

"It is well," said I, stoutly, and in the Malay language.  "Gahagan
Gujputi will bear it like a man."

"No doubt--like a wise man and a brave one; but there is no lane so
long to which there is not a turning, no night so black to which
there comes not a morning.  Icy winter is followed by merry
springtime--grief is often succeeded by joy."

"Interpret, O riddler!" said I; "Gahagan Khan is no reader of
puzzles--no prating mollah.  Gujputi loves not words, but swords."

"Listen then, O Gujputi:  you are in Holkar's power."

"I know it."

"You will die by the most horrible tortures to-morrow morning."

"I dare say."

"They will tear your teeth from your jaws, your nails from your
fingers, and your eyes from your head."

"Very possibly."

"They will flay you alive, and then burn you."

"Well; they can't do any more."

"They will seize upon every man and woman in yonder fort"--it was
not then taken!--"and repeat upon them the same tortures."

"Ha! Belinda!  Speak--how can all this be avoided?"

"Listen.  Gahagan loves the moon-face called Belinda."

"He does, Vizier, to distraction."

"Of what rank is he in the Koompani's army?"

"A captain."

"A miserable captain--oh, shame!  Of what creed is he?"

"I am an Irishman, and a Catholic."

"But he has not been very particular about his religious duties?"

"Alas, no!"

"He has not been to his mosque for these twelve years?"

"'Tis too true."

"Hearken now, Gahagan Khan.  His Highness Prince Holkar has sent me
to thee.  You shall have the moon-face for your wife--your second
wife, that is;--the first shall be the incomparable Puttee Rooge,
who loves you to madness;--with Puttee Rooge, who is the wife, you
shall have the wealth and rank of Bobbachy Bahawder, of whom his
Highness intends to get rid.  You shall be second in command of his
Highness's forces.  Look, here is his commission signed with the
celestial seal, and attested by the sacred names of the forty-nine
Imaums.  You have but to renounce your religion and your service,
and all these rewards are yours."

He produced a parchment, signed as he said, and gave it to me (it
was beautifully written in Indian ink:  I had it for fourteen
years, but a rascally valet, seeing it very dirty, washed it,
forsooth, and washed off every bit of the writing).  I took it
calmly, and said, "This is a tempting offer.  O Vizier, how long
wilt thou give me to consider of it?"

After a long parley, he allowed me six hours, when I promised to
give him an answer.  My mind, however, was made up--as soon as he
was gone, I threw myself on the sofa and fell asleep.

* * *

At the end of the six hours the Vizier came back:  two people were
with him; one, by his martial appearance, I knew to be Holkar, the
other I did not recognise.  It was about midnight.

"Have you considered?" said the Vizier, as he came to my couch.

"I have," said I, sitting up,--I could not stand, for my legs were
tied, and my arms fixed in a neat pair of steel handcuffs.  "I
have," said I, "unbelieving dogs!  I have.  Do you think to pervert
a Christian gentleman from his faith and honour?  Ruffian
blackamoors! do your worst; heap tortures on this body, they cannot
last long.  Tear me to pieces:  after you have torn me into a
certain number of pieces, I shall not feel it; and if I did, if
each torture could last a life, if each limb were to feel the
agonies of a whole body, what then?  I would bear all--all--all--
all--all--ALL!"  My breast heaved--my form dilated--my eye flashed
as I spoke these words.  "Tyrants!" said I, "dulce et decorum est
pro patria mori."  Having thus clinched the argument, I was silent.

The venerable.  Grand Vizier turned away; I saw a tear trickling
down his cheeks.

"What a constancy!" said he.  "Oh, that such beauty and such
bravery should be doomed so soon to quit the earth!"

His tall companion only sneered and said, "AND BELINDA--?"

"Ha!" said I, "ruffian, be still!--Heaven will protect her spotless
innocence.  Holkar, I know thee, and thou knowest me too!  Who,
with his single sword, destroyed thy armies?  Who, with his pistol,
cleft in twain thy nose-ring?  Who slew thy generals?  Who slew thy
elephants?  Three hundred mighty beasts went forth to battle:  of
these I slew one hundred and thirty-five!  Dog, coward, ruffian,
tyrant, unbeliever!  Gahagan hates thee, spurns thee, spits on
thee!"

Holkar, as I made these uncomplimentary remarks, gave a scream of
rage, and, drawing his scimitar, rushed on to despatch me at once
(it was the very thing I wished for), when the third person sprang
forward and, seizing his arm, cried -

"Papa! oh, save him!"  It was Puttee Rooge!  "Remember," continued
she, "his misfortunes--remember, oh, remember my--love!"--and here
she blushed, and putting one finger into her mouth, and hanging
down her head, looked the very picture of modest affection.

Holkar sulkily sheathed his scimitar, and muttered, "'Tis better as
it is; had I killed him now, I had spared him the torture.  None of
this shameless fooling, Puttee Rooge," continued the tyrant,
dragging her away.  "Captain Gahagan dies three hours from hence."
Puttee Rooge gave one scream and fainted--her father and the Vizier
carried her off between them; nor was I loth to part with her, for,
with all her love, she was as ugly as the deuce.

They were gone--my fate was decided.  I had but three hours more of
life:  so I flung myself again on the sofa, and fell profoundly
asleep.  As it may happen to any of my readers to be in the same
situation, and to be hanged themselves, let me earnestly entreat
them to adopt this plan of going to sleep, which I for my part have
repeatedly found to be successful.  It saves unnecessary annoyance,
it passes away a great deal of unpleasant time, and it prepares one
to meet like a man the coming catastrophe.

* * *

Three o'clock came:  the sun was at this time making his appearance
in the heavens, and with it came the guards, who were appointed to
conduct me to the torture.  I woke, rose, was carried out, and was
set on the very white donkey on which Loll Mahommed was conducted
through the camp after he was bastinadoed.  Bobbachy Bahawder rode
behind me, restored to his rank and state; troops of cavalry hemmed
us in on all sides; my ass was conducted by the common executioner:
a crier went forward, shouting out, "Make way for the destroyer of
the faithful--he goes to bear the punishment of his crimes."  We
came to the fatal plain:  it was the very spot whence I had borne
away the elephant, and in full sight of the fort.  I looked towards
it.  Thank Heaven!  King George's banner waved on it still--a crowd
were gathered on the walls--the men, the dastards who had deserted
me--and women, too.  Among the latter I thought I distinguished ONE
who--O gods! the thought turned me sick--I trembled and looked pale
for the first time.

"He trembles! he turns pale," shouted out Bobbachy Bahawder,
ferociously exulting over his conquered enemy.

"Dog!" shouted I--(I was sitting with my head to the donkey's tail,
and so looked the Bobbachy full in the face)--"not so pale as you
looked when I felled you with this arm--not so pale as your women
looked when I entered your harem!"  Completely chop-fallen, the
Indian ruffian was silent:  at any rate, I had done for HIM.

We arrived at the place of execution.  A stake, a couple of feet
thick and eight high, was driven in the grass:  round the stake,
about seven feet from the ground, was an iron ring, to which were
attached two fetters; in these my wrists were placed.  Two or three
executioners stood near, with strange-looking instruments:  others
were blowing at a fire, over which was a cauldron, and in the
embers were stuck prongs and other instruments of iron.

The crier came forward and read my sentence.  It was the same in
effect as that which had been hinted to me the day previous by the
Grand Vizier.  I confess I was too agitated to catch every word
that was spoken.

Holkar himself, on a tall dromedary, was at a little distance.  The
Grand Vizier came up to me--it was his duty to stand by, and see
the punishment performed.  "It is yet time!" said he.

I nodded my head, but did not answer.

The Vizier cast up to heaven a look of inexpressible anguish, and
with a voice choking with emotion, said, "EXECUTIONER--DO--YOUR--
DUTY!"

The horrid man advanced--he whispered sulkily in the ears of the
Grand Vizier, "Guggly ka ghee, hum khedgeree," said he, "THE OIL
DOES NOT BOIL YET--wait one minute."  The assistants blew, the fire
blazed, the oil was heated.  The Vizier drew a few feet aside:
taking a large ladle full of the boiling liquid, he advanced -

* * *

"Whish! bang, bang! pop!" the executioner was dead at my feet, shot
through the head; the ladle of scalding oil had been dashed in the
face of the unhappy Grand Vizier, who lay on the plain, howling.
"Whish! bang! pop!  Hurrah!--charge!--forwards!--cut them down!--no
quarter!"

I saw--yes, no, yes, no, yes!--I saw regiment upon regiment of
galloping British horsemen riding over the ranks of the flying
natives.  First of the host, I recognised, O Heaven! my AHMEDNUGGAR
IRREGULARS!  On came the gallant line of black steeds and horsemen;
swift swift before them rode my officers in yellow--Glogger,
Pappendick, and Stuffle; their sabres gleamed in the sun, their
voices rung in the air.  "D- them!" they cried, "give it them,
boys!"  A strength supernatural thrilled through my veins at that
delicious music:  by one tremendous effort, I wrested the post from
its foundation, five feet in the ground.  I could not release my
hands from the fetters, it is true; but, grasping the beam tightly,
I sprung forward--with one blow I levelled the five executioners in
the midst of the fire, their fall upsetting the scalding oil-can;
with the next, I swept the bearers of Bobbachy's palanquin off
their legs; with the third, I caught that chief himself in the
small of the back, and sent him flying on to the sabres of my
advancing soldiers!

The next minute, Glogger and Stuffle were in my arms, Pappendick
leading on the Irregulars.  Friend and foe in that wild chase had
swept far away.  We were alone:  I was freed from my immense bar;
and ten minutes afterwards, when Lord Lake trotted up with his
staff, he found me sitting on it.

"Look at Gahagan," said his Lordship.  "Gentlemen, did I not tell
you we should be sure to find him AT HIS POST?"

The gallant old nobleman rode on:  and this was the famous BATTLE
OF FURRUCKABAD, or SURPRISE OF FUTTYGHUR, fought on the 17th of
November, 1804.

* * *

About a month afterwards, the following announcement appeared in
the Boggleywollah Hurkaru and other Indian papers:-

"Married, on the 25th of December, at Futtyghur, by the Rev. Dr.
Snorter, Captain Goliah O'Grady Gahagan, Commanding Irregular
Horse, Ahmednuggar, to Belinda, second daughter of Major-General
Bulcher, C.B.  His Excellency the Commander-in-Chief gave away the
bride; and, after a splendid dejeuner, the happy pair set off to
pass the Mango season at Hurrygurrybang.  Venus must recollect,
however, that Mars must not always be at her side.  The Irregulars
are nothing without their leader."

Such was the paragraph--such the event--the happiest in the
existence of

G. O'G. G., M.H.E.I.C.S., C.I.H.A.



Footnotes:

{1}  So admirable are the performances of these watches, which will
stand in any climate, that I repeatedly heard poor Macgillicuddy
relate the following fact.  The hours, as it is known, count in
Italy from one to twenty-four:  THE DAY MAC LANDED AT NAPLES HIS
REPEATER RUNG THE ITALIAN HOURS, FROM ONE TO TWENTY-FOUR; as soon
as he crossed the Alps it only sounded as usual.--G. O'G. G.

{2}  In my affair with Macgillicuddy, I was fool enough to go out
with small swords:- miserable weapons, only fit for tailors.--G.
O'G. G.

{3}  The Major certainly offered to leave an old snuff-box at Mr.
Cunningham's office; but it contained no extract from a newspaper,
and does not quite prove that he killed a rhinoceros and stormed
fourteen entrenchments at the siege of Allyghur.

{4}  The double-jointed camel of Bactria, which the classic reader
may recollect is mentioned by Suidas (in his Commentary on the
Flight of Darius), is so called by the Mahrattas.

{5}  There is some trifling inconsistency on the Major's part.
Shah Allum was notoriously blind:  how, then, could he have seen
Gahagan?  The thing is manifestly impossible.

{6}  I do not wish to brag of my style of writing, or to pretend
that my genius as a writer has not been equalled in former times;
but if, in the works of Byron, Scott, Goethe, or Victor Hugo, the
reader can find a more beautiful sentence than the above, I will be
obliged to him, that is all--I simply say, I will be obliged to
him.--G. O'G. G., M.H.E.I.C.S., C.I.H.A.

{7}  The Major has put the most approved language into the mouths
of his Indian characters.  Bismillah, Barikallah, and so on,
according to the novelists, form the very essence of Eastern
conversation.

========================================
========================================

Transcribed from the 1911 John Murray edition by David Price, email
ccx074@coventry.ac.uk





THE HISTORY OF SAMUEL TITMARSH
AND THE
THE GREAT HOGGARTY DIAMOND


LONDON
JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET, W.
1911




CHAPTER I


GIVES AN ACCOUNT OF OUR VILLAGE AND THE FIRST GLIMPSE OF THE DIAMOND

When I came up to town for my second year, my aunt Hoggarty made me a
present of a diamond-pin; that is to say, it was not a diamond-pin then,
but a large old-fashioned locket, of Dublin manufacture in the year 1795,
which the late Mr. Hoggarty used to sport at the Lord Lieutenant's balls
and elsewhere.  He wore it, he said, at the battle of Vinegar Hill, when
his club pigtail saved his head from being taken off,--but that is
neither here nor there.

In the middle of the brooch was Hoggarty in the scarlet uniform of the
corps of Fencibles to which he belonged; around it were thirteen locks of
hair, belonging to a baker's dozen of sisters that the old gentleman had;
and, as all these little ringlets partook of the family hue of brilliant
auburn, Hoggarty's portrait seemed to the fanciful view like a great fat
red round of beef surrounded by thirteen carrots.  These were dished up
on a plate of blue enamel, and it was from the GREAT HOGGARTY DIAMOND (as
we called it in the family) that the collection of hairs in question
seemed as it were to spring.

My aunt, I need not say, is rich; and I thought I might be her heir as
well as another.  During my month's holiday, she was particularly pleased
with me; made me drink tea with her often (though there was a certain
person in the village with whom on those golden summer evenings I should
have liked to have taken a stroll in the hayfields); promised every time
I drank her bohea to do something handsome for me when I went back to
town,--nay, three or four times had me to dinner at three, and to whist
or cribbage afterwards.  I did not care for the cards; for though we
always played seven hours on a stretch, and I always lost, my losings
were never more than nineteenpence a night: but there was some infernal
sour black-currant wine, that the old lady always produced at dinner, and
with the tray at ten o'clock, and which I dared not refuse; though upon
my word and honour it made me very unwell.

Well, I thought after all this obsequiousness on my part, and my aunt's
repeated promises, that the old lady would at least make me a present of
a score of guineas (of which she had a power in the drawer); and so
convinced was I that some such present was intended for me, that a young
lady by the name of Miss Mary Smith, with whom I had conversed on the
subject, actually netted me a little green silk purse, which she gave me
(behind Hicks's hayrick, as you turn to the right up Churchyard
Lane)--which she gave me, I say, wrapped up in a bit of silver paper.
There was something in the purse, too, if the truth must be known.  First
there was a thick curl of the glossiest blackest hair you ever saw in
your life, and next there was threepence: that is to say, the half of a
silver sixpence hanging by a little necklace of blue riband.  Ah, but I
knew where the other half of the sixpence was, and envied that happy bit
of silver!

The last day of my holiday I was obliged, of course, to devote to Mrs.
Hoggarty.  My aunt was excessively gracious; and by way of a treat
brought out a couple of bottles of the black currant, of which she made
me drink the greater part.  At night when all the ladies assembled at her
party had gone off with their pattens and their maids, Mrs. Hoggarty, who
had made a signal to me to stay, first blew out three of the wax candles
in the drawing-room, and taking the fourth in her hand, went and unlocked
her escritoire.

I can tell you my heart beat, though I pretended to look quite
unconcerned.

"Sam my dear," said she, as she was fumbling with her keys, "take another
glass of Rosolio" (that was the name by which she baptised the cursed
beverage): "it will do you good."  I took it, and you might have seen my
hand tremble as the bottle went click--click against the glass.  By the
time I had swallowed it, the old lady had finished her operations at the
bureau, and was coming towards me, the wax-candle bobbing in one hand and
a large parcel in the other.

"Now's the time," thought I.

"Samuel, my dear nephew," said she, "your first name you received from
your sainted uncle, my blessed husband; and of all my nephews and nieces,
you are the one whose conduct in life has most pleased me."

When you consider that my aunt herself was one of seven married sisters,
that all the Hoggarties were married in Ireland and mothers of numerous
children, I must say that the compliment my aunt paid me was a very
handsome one.

"Dear aunt," says I, in a slow agitated voice, "I have often heard you
say there were seventy-three of us in all, and believe me I do think your
high opinion of me very complimentary indeed: I'm unworthy of it--indeed
I am."

"As for those odious Irish people," says my aunt, rather sharply, "don't
speak of them, I hate them, and every one of their mothers" (the fact is,
there had been a lawsuit about Hoggarty's property); "but of all my other
kindred, you, Samuel, have been the most dutiful and affectionate to me.
Your employers in London give the best accounts of your regularity and
good conduct.  Though you have had eighty pounds a year (a liberal
salary), you have not spent a shilling more than your income, as other
young men would; and you have devoted your month's holidays to your old
aunt, who, I assure you, is grateful."

"Oh, ma'am!" said I.  It was all that I could utter.

"Samuel," continued she, "I promised you a present, and here it is.  I
first thought of giving you money; but you are a regular lad; and don't
want it.  You are above money, dear Samuel.  I give you what I value most
in life--the p,--the po, the po-ortrait of my sainted Hoggarty" (tears),
"set in the locket which contains the valuable diamond that you have
often heard me speak of.  Wear it, dear Sam, for my sake; and think of
that angel in heaven, and of your dear Aunt Susy."

She put the machine into my hands: it was about the size of the lid of a
shaving-box: and I should as soon have thought of wearing it as of
wearing a cocked-hat and pigtail.  I was so disgusted and disappointed
that I really could not get out a single word.

When I recovered my presence of mind a little, I took the locket out of
the bit of paper (the locket indeed! it was as big as a barndoor
padlock), and slowly put it into my shirt.  "Thank you, Aunt," said I,
with admirable raillery.  "I shall always value this present for the sake
of you, who gave it me; and it will recall to me my uncle, and my
thirteen aunts in Ireland."

"I don't want you to wear it in _that_ way!" shrieked Mrs. Hoggarty,
"with the hair of those odious carroty women.  You must have their hair
removed."

"Then the locket will be spoiled, Aunt."

"Well, sir, never mind the locket; have it set afresh."

"Or suppose," said I, "I put aside the setting altogether: it is a little
too large for the present fashion; and have the portrait of my uncle
framed and placed over my chimney-piece, next to yours.  It's a sweet
miniature."

"That miniature," said Mrs. Hoggarty, solemnly, "was the great Mulcahy's
_chef-d'oeuvre_" (pronounced _shy dewver_, a favourite word of my aunt's;
being, with the words _bongtong_ and _ally mode de Parry_, the extent of
her French vocabulary).  "You know the dreadful story of that poor poor
artist.  When he had finished that wonderful likeness for the late Mrs.
Hoggarty of Castle Hoggarty, county Mayo, she wore it in her bosom at the
Lord Lieutenant's ball, where she played a game of piquet with the
Commander-in-Chief.  What could have made her put the hair of her vulgar
daughters round Mick's portrait, I can't think; but so it was, as you see
it this day.  'Madam,' says the Commander-in-Chief, 'if that is not my
friend Mick Hoggarty, I'm a Dutchman!'  Those were his Lordship's very
words.  Mrs. Hoggarty of Castle Hoggarty took off the brooch and showed
it to him.

"'Who is the artist?' says my Lord.  'It's the most wonderful likeness I
ever saw in my life!'

"'Mulcahy,' says she, 'of Ormond's Quay.'

"'Begad, I patronise him!' says my Lord; but presently his face darkened,
and he gave back the picture with a dissatisfied air.  'There is one
fault in that portrait,' said his Lordship, who was a rigid
disciplinarian; 'and I wonder that my friend Mick, as a military man,
should have overlooked it.'

"'What's that?' says Mrs. Hoggarty of Castle Hoggarty.

"'Madam, he has been painted WITHOUT HIS SWORD-BELT!'  And he took up the
cards again in a passion, and finished the game without saying a single
word.

"The news was carried to Mr. Mulcahy the next day, and that unfortunate
artist _went mad immediately_!  He had set his whole reputation upon this
miniature, and declared that it should be faultless.  Such was the effect
of the announcement upon his susceptible heart!  When Mrs. Hoggarty died,
your uncle took the portrait and always wore it himself.  His sisters
said it was for the sake of the diamond; whereas, ungrateful things! it
was merely on account of their hair, and his love for the fine arts.  As
for the poor artist, my dear, some people said it was the profuse use of
spirit that brought on delirium tremens; but I don't believe it.  Take
another glass of Rosolio."

The telling of this story always put my aunt into great good-humour, and
she promised at the end of it to pay for the new setting of the diamond;
desiring me to take it on my arrival in London to the great jeweller, Mr.
Polonius, and send her the bill.  "The fact is," said she, "that the gold
in which the thing is set is worth five guineas at the very least, and
you can have the diamond reset for two.  However, keep the remainder,
dear Sam, and buy yourself what you please with it."

With this the old lady bade me adieu.  The clock was striking twelve as I
walked down the village, for the story of Mulcahy always took an hour in
the telling, and I went away not quite so downhearted as when the present
was first made to me.  "After all," thought I, "a diamond-pin is a
handsome thing, and will give me a _distingue_ air, though my clothes be
never so shabby"--and shabby they were without any doubt.  "Well," I
said, "three guineas, which I shall have over, will buy me a couple of
pairs of what-d'ye-call-'ems;" of which, _entre nous_, I was in great
want, having just then done growing, whereas my pantaloons were made a
good eighteen months before.

Well, I walked down the village, my hands in my breeches pockets; I had
poor Mary's purse there, having removed the little things which she gave
me the day before, and placed them--never mind where: but look you, in
those days I had a heart, and a warm one too.  I had Mary's purse ready
for my aunt's donation, which never came, and with my own little stock of
money besides, that Mrs. Hoggarty's card parties had lessened by a good
five-and-twenty shillings, I calculated that, after paying my fare, I
should get to town with a couple of seven-shilling pieces in my pocket.

I walked down the village at a deuce of a pace; so quick that, if the
thing had been possible, I should have overtaken ten o'clock that had
passed by me two hours ago, when I was listening to Mrs. H.'s long
stories over her terrible Rosolio.  The truth is, at ten I had an
appointment under a certain person's window, who was to have been looking
at the moon at that hour, with her pretty quilled nightcap on, and her
blessed hair in papers.

There was the window shut, and not so much as a candle in it; and though
I hemmed and hawed, and whistled over the garden paling, and sang a song
of which Somebody was very fond, and even threw a pebble at the window,
which hit it exactly at the opening of the lattice,--I woke no one except
a great brute of a house-dog, that yelled, and howled, and bounced so at
me over the rails, that I thought every moment he would have had my nose
between his teeth.

So I was obliged to go off as quickly as might be; and the next morning
Mamma and my sisters made breakfast for me at four, and at five came the
"True Blue" light six-inside post-coach to London, and I got up on the
roof without having seen Mary Smith.

As we passed the house, it _did_ seem as if the window curtain in her
room was drawn aside just a little bit.  Certainly the window was open,
and it had been shut the night before: but away went the coach; and the
village, cottage, and the churchyard, and Hicks's hayricks were soon out
of sight.

* * * * *

"My hi, what a pin!" said a stable-boy, who was smoking a cigar, to the
guard, looking at me and putting his finger to his nose.

The fact is, that I had never undressed since my aunt's party; and being
uneasy in mind and having all my clothes to pack up, and thinking of
something else, had quite forgotten Mrs. Hoggarty's brooch, which I had
stuck into my shirt-frill the night before.




CHAPTER II


TELLS HOW THE DIAMOND IS BROUGHT UP TO LONDON, AND PRODUCES WONDERFUL
EFFECTS BOTH IN THE CITY AND AT THE WEST END

The circumstances recorded in this story took place some score of years
ago, when, as the reader may remember, there was a great mania in the
City of London for establishing companies of all sorts; by which many
people made pretty fortunes.

I was at this period, as the truth must be known, thirteenth clerk of
twenty-four young gents who did the immense business of the Independent
West Diddlesex Fire and Life Insurance Company, at their splendid stone
mansion in Cornhill.  Mamma had sunk a sum of four hundred pounds in the
purchase of an annuity at this office, which paid her no less than six-
and-thirty pounds a year, when no other company in London would give her
more than twenty-four.  The chairman of the directors was the great Mr.
Brough, of the house of Brough and Hoff, Crutched Friars, Turkey
Merchants.  It was a new house, but did a tremendous business in the fig
and sponge way, and more in the Zante currant line than any other firm in
the City.

Brough was a great man among the Dissenting connection, and you saw his
name for hundreds at the head of every charitable society patronised by
those good people.  He had nine clerks residing at his office in Crutched
Friars; he would not take one without a certificate from the schoolmaster
and clergyman of his native place, strongly vouching for his morals and
doctrine; and the places were so run after, that he got a premium of four
or five hundred pounds with each young gent, whom he made to slave for
ten hours a day, and to whom in compensation he taught all the mysteries
of the Turkish business.  He was a great man on 'Change, too; and our
young chaps used to hear from the stockbrokers' clerks (we commonly dined
together at the "Cock and Woolpack," a respectable house, where you get a
capital cut of meat, bread, vegetables, cheese, half a pint of porter,
and a penny to the waiter, for a shilling)--the young stockbrokers used
to tell us of immense bargains in Spanish, Greek, and Columbians, that
Brough made.  Hoff had nothing to do with them, but stopped at home
minding exclusively the business of the house.  He was a young chap, very
quiet and steady, of the Quaker persuasion, and had been taken into
partnership by Brough for a matter of thirty thousand pounds: and a very
good bargain too.  I was told in the strictest confidence that the house
one year with another divided a good seven thousand pounds: of which
Brough had half, Hoff two-sixths, and the other sixth went to old Tudlow,
who had been Mr. Brough's clerk before the new partnership began.  Tudlow
always went about very shabby, and we thought him an old miser.  One of
our gents, Bob Swinney by name, used to say that Tudlow's share was all
nonsense, and that Brough had it all; but Bob was always too knowing by
half, used to wear a green cutaway coat, and had his free admission to
Covent Garden Theatre.  He was always talking down at the shop, as we
called it (it wasn't a shop, but as splendid an office as any in
Cornhill)--he was always talking about Vestris and Miss Tree, and singing

   "The bramble, the bramble,
   The jolly jolly bramble!"

one of Charles Kemble's famous songs in "Maid Marian;" a play that was
all the rage then, taken from a famous story-book by one Peacock, a clerk
in the India House; and a precious good place he has too.

When Brough heard how Master Swinney abused him, and had his admission to
the theatre, he came one day down to the office where we all were, four-
and-twenty of us, and made one of the most beautiful speeches I ever
heard in my life.  He said that for slander he did not care, contumely
was the lot of every public man who had austere principles of his own,
and acted by them austerely; but what he _did_ care for was the character
of every single gentleman forming a part of the Independent West
Diddlesex Association.  The welfare of thousands was in their keeping;
millions of money were daily passing through their hands; the City--the
country looked upon them for order, honesty, and good example.  And if he
found amongst those whom he considered as his children--those whom he
loved as his own flesh and blood--that that order was departed from, that
that regularity was not maintained, that that good example was not kept
up (Mr. B. always spoke in this emphatic way)--if he found his children
departing from the wholesome rules of morality, religion, and decorum--if
he found in high or low--in the head clerk at six hundred a year down to
the porter who cleaned the steps--if he found the slightest taint of
dissipation, he would cast the offender from him--yea, though he were his
own son, he would cast him from him!

As he spoke this, Mr. Brough burst into tears; and we who didn't know
what was coming, looked at each other as pale as parsnips: all except
Swinney, who was twelfth clerk, and made believe to whistle.  When Mr. B.
had wiped his eyes and recovered himself, he turned round; and oh, how my
heart thumped as he looked me full in the face!  How it was relieved,
though, when he shouted out in a thundering voice--

"Mr. ROBERT SWINNEY!"

"Sir to you," says Swinney, as cool as possible, and some of the chaps
began to titter.

"Mr. SWINNEY!" roared Brough, in a voice still bigger than before, "when
you came into this office--this family, sir, for such it is, as I am
proud to say--you found three-and-twenty as pious and well-regulated
young men as ever laboured together--as ever had confided to them the
wealth of this mighty capital and famous empire.  You found, sir,
sobriety, regularity, and decorum; no profane songs were uttered in this
place sacred to--to business; no slanders were whispered against the
heads of the establishment--but over them I pass: I can afford, sir, to
pass them by--no worldly conversation or foul jesting disturbed the
attention of these gentlemen, or desecrated the peaceful scene of their
labours.  You found Christians and gentlemen, sir!"

"I paid for my place like the rest," said Swinney.  "Didn't my governor
take sha-?"

"Silence, sir!  Your worthy father did take shares in this establishment,
which will yield him one day an immense profit.  He _did_ take shares,
sir, or you never would have been here.  I glory in saying that every one
of my young friends around me has a father, a brother, a dear relative or
friend, who is connected in a similar way with our glorious enterprise;
and that not one of them is there but has an interest in procuring, at a
liberal commission, other persons to join the ranks of our Association.
_But_, sir, I am its chief.  You will find, sir, your appointment signed
by me; and in like manner, I, John Brough, annul it.  Go from us,
sir!--leave us--quit a family that can no longer receive you in its
bosom!  Mr. Swinney, I have wept--I have prayed, sir, before I came to
this determination; I have taken counsel, sir, and am resolved.  _Depart
from out of us_!

"Not without three months' salary, though, Mr. B.: that cock won't
fight!"

"They shall be paid to your father, sir."

"My father be hanged!  I tell you what, Brough, I'm of age; and if you
don't pay me my salary, I'll arrest you,--by Jingo, I will!  I'll have
you in quod, or my name's not Bob Swinney!"

"Make out a cheque, Mr. Roundhand, for the three months' salary of this
perverted young man."

"Twenty-one pun' five, Roundhand, and nothing for the stamp!" cried out
that audacious Swinney.  "There it is, sir, _re_-ceipted.  You needn't
cross it to my banker's.  And if any of you gents like a glass of punch
this evening at eight o'clock, Bob Swinney's your man, and nothing to
pay.  If Mr. Brough _would_ do me the honour to come in and take a whack?
Come, don't say no, if you'd rather not!"

We couldn't stand this impudence, and all burst out laughing like mad.

"Leave the room!" yelled Mr. Brough, whose face had turned quite blue;
and so Bob took his white hat off the peg, and strolled away with his
"tile," as he called it, very much on one side.  When he was gone, Mr.
Brough gave us another lecture, by which we all determined to profit; and
going up to Roundhand's desk put his arm round his neck, and looked over
the ledger.

"What money has been paid in to-day, Roundhand?" he said, in a very kind
way.

"The widow, sir, came with her money; nine hundred and four ten and
six--say 904_l_. 10_s_. 6_d_.  Captain Sparr, sir, paid his shares up;
grumbles, though, and says he's no more: fifty shares, two
instalments--three fifties, sir."

"He's always grumbling!"

"He says he has not a shilling to bless himself with until our dividend
day."

"Any more?"

Mr. Roundhand went through the book, and made it up nineteen hundred
pounds in all.  We were doing a famous business now; though when I came
into the office, we used to sit, and laugh, and joke, and read the
newspapers all day; bustling into our seats whenever a stray customer
came.  Brough never cared about our laughing and singing _then_, and was
hand and glove with Bob Swinney; but that was in early times, before we
were well in harness.

"Nineteen hundred pounds, and a thousand pounds in shares.  Bravo,
Roundhand--bravo, gentlemen!  Remember, every share you bring in brings
you five per cent. down on the nail!  Look to your friends--stick to your
desks--be regular--I hope none of you forget church.  Who takes Mr.
Swinney's place?"

"Mr. Samuel Titmarsh, sir."

"Mr. Titmarsh, I congratulate you.  Give me your hand, sir: you are now
twelfth clerk of this Association, and your salary is consequently
increased five pounds a year.  How is your worthy mother, sir--your dear
and excellent parent?  In good health I trust?  And long--long, I
fervently pray, may this office continue to pay her annuity!  Remember,
if she has more money to lay out, there is higher interest than the last
for her, for she is a year older; and five per cent. for you, my boy!  Why
not you as well as another?  Young men will be young men, and a ten-pound
note does no harm.  Does it, Mr. Abednego?"

"Oh, no!" says Abednego, who was third clerk, and who was the chap that
informed against Swinney; and he began to laugh, as indeed we all did
whenever Mr. Brough made anything like a joke: not that they _were_
jokes; only we used to know it by his face.

"Oh, by-the-bye, Roundhand," says he, "a word with you on business.  Mrs.
Brough wants to know why the deuce you never come down to Fulham."

"Law, that's very polite!" said Mr. Roundhand, quite pleased.

"Name your day, my boy!  Say Saturday, and bring your night-cap with
you."

"You're very polite, I'm sure.  I should be delighted beyond anything,
but--"

"But--no buts, my boy!  Hark ye! the Chancellor of the Exchequer does me
the honour to dine with us, and I want you to see him; for the truth is,
I have bragged about you to his Lordship as the best actuary in the three
kingdoms."

Roundhand could not refuse such an invitation as _that_, though he had
told us how Mrs. R. and he were going to pass Saturday and Sunday at
Putney; and we who knew what a life the poor fellow led, were sure that
the head clerk would be prettily scolded by his lady when she heard what
was going on.  She disliked Mrs. Brough very much, that was the fact;
because Mrs. B. kept a carriage, and said she didn't know where
Pentonville was, and couldn't call on Mrs. Roundhand.  Though, to be
sure, her coachman might have found out the way.

"And oh, Roundhand!" continued our governor, "draw a cheque for seven
hundred, will you!  Come, don't stare, man; I'm not going to run away!
That's right,--seven hundred--and ninety, say, while you're about it!  Our
board meets on Saturday, and never fear I'll account for it to them
before I drive you down.  We shall take up the Chancellor at Whitehall."

So saying, Mr. Brough folded up the cheque, and shaking hands with Mr.
Roundhand very cordially, got into his carriage-and-four (he always drove
four horses even in the City, where it's so difficult), which was waiting
at the office-door for him.

Bob Swinney used to say that he charged two of the horses to the Company;
but there was never believing half of what that Bob said, he used to
laugh and joke so.  I don't know how it was, but I and a gent by the name
of Hoskins (eleventh clerk), who lived together with me in Salisbury
Square, Fleet Street--where we occupied a very genteel two-pair--found
our flute duet rather tiresome that evening, and as it was a very fine
night, strolled out for a walk West End way.  When we arrived opposite
Covent Garden Theatre we found ourselves close to the "Globe Tavern," and
recollected Bob Swinney's hospitable invitation.  We never fancied that
he had meant the invitation in earnest, but thought we might as well look
in: at any rate there could be no harm in doing so.

There, to be sure, in the back drawing-room, where he said he would be,
we found Bob at the head of a table, and in the midst of a great smoke of
cigars, and eighteen of our gents rattling and banging away at the table
with the bottoms of their glasses.

What a shout they made as we came in!  "Hurray!" says Bob, "here's two
more!  Two more chairs, Mary, two more tumblers, two more hot waters, and
two more goes of gin!  Who would have thought of seeing Tit, in the name
of goodness?"

"Why," said I, "we only came in by the merest chance."

At this word there was another tremendous roar: and it is a positive
fact, that every man of the eighteen had said he came by chance!  However,
chance gave us a very jovial night; and that hospitable Bob Swinney paid
every shilling of the score.

"Gentlemen!" says he, as he paid the bill, "I'll give you the health of
John Brough, Esquire, and thanks to him for the present of 21_l_. 5_s_.
which he made me this morning.  What do I say--21_l_. 5_s_.?  That and a
month's salary that I should have had to pay--forfeit--down on the nail,
by Jingo! for leaving the shop, as I intended to do to-morrow morning.
I've got a place--a tip-top place, I tell you.  Five guineas a week, six
journeys a year, my own horse and gig, and to travel in the West of
England in oil and spermaceti.  Here's confusion to gas, and the health
of Messrs. Gann and Co., of Thames Street, in the City of London!"

I have been thus particular in my account of the West Diddlesex Insurance
Office, and of Mr. Brough, the managing director (though the real names
are neither given to the office nor to the chairman, as you may be sure),
because the fate of me and my diamond pin was mysteriously bound up with
both: as I am about to show.

You must know that I was rather respected among our gents at the West
Diddlesex, because I came of a better family than most of them; had
received a classical education; and especially because I had a rich aunt,
Mrs. Hoggarty, about whom, as must be confessed, I used to boast a good
deal.  There is no harm in being respected in this world, as I have found
out; and if you don't brag a little for yourself, depend on it there is
no person of your acquaintance who will tell the world of your merits,
and take the trouble off your hands.

So that when I came back to the office after my visit at home, and took
my seat at the old day-book opposite the dingy window that looks into
Birchin Lane, I pretty soon let the fellows know that Mrs. Hoggarty,
though she had not given me a large sum of money, as I expected--indeed,
I had promised a dozen of them a treat down the river, should the
promised riches have come to me--I let them know, I say, that though my
aunt had not given me any money, she had given me a splendid diamond,
worth at least thirty guineas, and that some day I would sport it at the
shop.

"Oh, let's see it!" says Abednego, whose father was a mock-jewel and gold-
lace merchant in Hanway Yard; and I promised that he should have a sight
of it as soon as it was set.  As my pocket-money was run out too (by
coach-hire to and from home, five shillings to our maid at home, ten to
my aunt's maid and man, five-and-twenty shillings lost at whist, as I
said, and fifteen-and-six paid for a silver scissors for the dear little
fingers of Somebody), Roundhand, who was very good-natured, asked me to
dine, and advanced me 7_l_. 1_s_. 8_d_., a month's salary.  It was at
Roundhand's house, Myddelton Square, Pentonville, over a fillet of veal
and bacon and a glass of port, that I learned and saw how his wife ill-
treated him; as I have told before.  Poor fellow!--we under-clerks all
thought it was a fine thing to sit at a desk by oneself, and have 50_l_.
per month, as Roundhand had; but I've a notion that Hoskins and I,
blowing duets on the flute together in our second floor in Salisbury
Square, were a great deal more at ease than our head--and more _in
harmony_, too; though we made sad work of the music, certainly.

One day Gus Hoskins and I asked leave from Roundhand to be off at three
o'clock, as we had _particular business_ at the West End.  He knew it was
about the great Hoggarty diamond, and gave us permission; so off we set.
When we reached St. Martin's Lane, Gus got a cigar, to give himself as it
were a _distingue_ air, and pulled at it all the way up the Lane, and
through the alleys into Coventry Street, where Mr. Polonius's shop is, as
everybody knows.

The door was open, and a number of carriages full of ladies were drawing
up and setting down.  Gus kept his hands in his pockets--trousers were
worn very full then, with large tucks, and pigeon-holes for your boots,
or Bluchers, to come through (the fashionables wore boots, but we chaps
in the City, on 80_l_. a year, contented ourselves with Bluchers); and as
Gus stretched out his pantaloons as wide as he could from his hips, and
kept blowing away at his cheroot, and clamping with the iron heels of his
boots, and had very large whiskers for so young a man, he really looked
quite the genteel thing, and was taken by everybody to be a person of
consideration.

He would not come into the shop though, but stood staring at the gold
pots and kettles in the window outside.  I went in; and after a little
hemming and hawing--for I had never been at such a fashionable place
before--asked one of the gentlemen to let me speak to Mr. Polonius.

"What can I do for you, sir?" says Mr. Polonius, who was standing close
by, as it happened, serving three ladies,--a very old one and two young
ones, who were examining pearl necklaces very attentively.

"Sir," said I, producing my jewel out of my coat-pocket, "this jewel has,
I believe, been in your house before: it belonged to my aunt, Mrs.
Hoggarty, of Castle Hoggarty."  The old lady standing near looked round
as I spoke.

"I sold her a gold neck-chain and repeating watch in the year 1795," said
Mr. Polonius, who made it a point to recollect everything; "and a silver
punch-ladle to the Captain.  How is the Major--Colonel--General--eh,
sir?"

"The General," said I, "I am sorry to say"--though I was quite proud that
this man of fashion should address me so.--"Mr. Hoggarty is--no more.  My
aunt has made me a present, however, of this--this trinket--which, as you
see, contains her husband's portrait, that I will thank you, sir, to
preserve for me very carefully; and she wishes that you would set this
diamond neatly."

"Neatly and handsomely, of course, sir."

"Neatly, in the present fashion; and send down the account to her.  There
is a great deal of gold about the trinket, for which, of course, you will
make an allowance."

"To the last fraction of a sixpence," says Mr. Polonius, bowing, and
looking at the jewel.  "It's a wonderful piece of goods, certainly," said
he; "though the diamond's a neat little bit, certainly.  Do, my Lady,
look at it.  The thing is of Irish manufacture, bears the stamp of '95,
and will recall perhaps the times of your Ladyship's earliest youth."

"Get ye out, Mr. Polonius!" said the old lady, a little wizen-faced old
lady, with her face puckered up in a million of wrinkles.  "How _dar_
you, sir, to talk such nonsense to an old woman like me?  Wasn't I fifty
years old in '95, and a grandmother in '96?"  She put out a pair of
withered trembling hands, took up the locket, examined it for a minute,
and then burst out laughing: "As I live, it's the great Hoggarty
diamond!"

Good heavens! what was this talisman that had come into my possession?

"Look, girls," continued the old lady: "this is the great jew'l of all
Ireland.  This red-faced man in the middle is poor Mick Hoggarty, a
cousin of mine, who was in love with me in the year '84, when I had just
lost your poor dear grandpapa.  These thirteen sthreamers of red hair
represent his thirteen celebrated sisters,--Biddy, Minny, Thedy, Widdy
(short for Williamina), Freddy, Izzy, Tizzy, Mysie, Grizzy, Polly, Dolly,
Nell, and Bell--all married, all ugly, and all carr'ty hair.  And of
which are you the son, young man?--though, to do you justice, you're not
like the family."

Two pretty young ladies turned two pretty pairs of black eyes at me, and
waited for an answer: which they would have had, only the old lady began
rattling on a hundred stories about the thirteen ladies above named, and
all their lovers, all their disappointments, and all the duels of Mick
Hoggarty.  She was a chronicle of fifty-years-old scandal.  At last she
was interrupted by a violent fit of coughing; at the conclusion of which
Mr. Polonius very respectfully asked me where he should send the pin, and
whether I would like the hair kept.

"No," says I, "never mind the hair."

"And the pin, sir?"

I had felt ashamed about telling my address: "But, bang it!" thought I,
"why _should_ I?--

   'A king can make a belted knight,
      A marquess, duke, and a' that;
   An honest man's abune his might--
      Gude faith, he canna fa' that.'

Why need I care about telling these ladies where I live?"

"Sir," says I, "have the goodness to send the parcel, when done, to Mr.
Titmarsh, No. 3 Bell Lane, Salisbury Square, near St. Bride's Church,
Fleet Street.  Ring, if you please, the two-pair bell."

"_What_, sir?" said Mr. Polonius.

"_Hwat_!" shrieked the old lady.  "Mr. Hwat?  Mais, ma chere, c'est
impayable.  Come along--here's the carr'age!  Give me your arm, Mr. Hwat,
and get inside, and tell me all about your thirteen aunts."

She seized on my elbow and hobbled through the shop as fast as possible;
the young ladies following her, laughing.

"Now, jump in, do you hear?" said she, poking her sharp nose out of the
window.

"I can't, ma'am," says I; "I have a friend."

"Pooh, pooh! send 'um to the juice, and jump in!"  And before almost I
could say a word, a great powdered fellow in yellow-plush breeches pushed
me up the steps and banged the door to.

I looked just for one minute as the barouche drove away at Hoskins, and
never shall forget his figure.  There stood Gus, his mouth wide open, his
eyes staring, a smoking cheroot in his hand, wondering with all his might
at the strange thing that had just happened to me.

"Who _is_ that Titmarsh?" says Gus: "there's a coronet on the carriage,
by Jingo!"




CHAPTER III


HOW THE POSSESSOR OF THE DIAMOND IS WHISKED INTO A MAGNIFICENT CHARIOT,
AND HAS YET FURTHER GOOD LUCK

I sat on the back seat of the carriage, near a very nice young lady,
about my dear Mary's age--that is to say, seventeen and three-quarters;
and opposite us sat the old Countess and her other
grand-daughter--handsome too, but ten years older.  I recollect I had on
that day my blue coat and brass buttons, nankeen trousers, a white sprig
waist-coat, and one of Dando's silk hats, that had just come in in the
year '22, and looked a great deal more glossy than the best beaver.

"And who was that hidjus manster"--that was the way her Ladyship
pronounced,--"that ojous vulgar wretch, with the iron heels to his boots,
and the big mouth, and the imitation goold neck-chain, who _steered_ at
us so as we got into the carriage?"

How she should have known that Gus's chain was mosaic I can't tell; but
so it was, and we had bought it for five-and-twenty and sixpence only the
week before at M'Phail's, in St. Paul's Churchyard.  But I did not like
to hear my friend abused, and so spoke out for him--

"Ma'am," says I, "that young gentleman's name is Augustus Hoskins.  We
live together; and a better or more kind-hearted fellow does not exist."

"You are quite right to stand up for your friends, sir," said the second
lady; whose name, it appears, was Lady Jane, but whom the grandmamma
called Lady Jene.

"Well, upon me conscience, so he is now, Lady Jene; and I like sper't in
a young man.  So his name is Hoskins, is it?  I know, my dears, all the
Hoskinses in England.  There are the Lincolnshire Hoskinses, the
Shropshire Hoskinses: they say the Admiral's daughter, Bell, was in love
with a black footman, or boatswain, or some such thing; but the world's
so censorious.  There's old Doctor Hoskins of Bath, who attended poor
dear Drum in the quinsy; and poor dear old Fred Hoskins, the gouty
General: I remember him as thin as a lath in the year '84, and as active
as a harlequin, and in love with me--oh, how he was in love with me!"

"You seem to have had a host of admirers in those days, Grandmamma?" said
Lady Jane.

"Hundreds, my dear,--hundreds of thousands.  I was the toast of Bath, and
a great beauty, too: would you ever have thought it now, upon your
conscience and without flattery, Mr.-a-What-d'ye-call-'im?"

"Indeed, ma'am, I never should," I answered, for the old lady was as ugly
as possible; and at my saying this the two young ladies began screaming
with laughter, and I saw the two great-whiskered footmen grinning over
the back of the carriage.

"Upon my word, you're mighty candid, Mr. What's-your-name--mighty candid
indeed; but I like candour in young people.  But a beauty I was.  Just
ask your friend's uncle the General.  He's one of the Lincolnshire
Hoskinses--I knew he was by the strong family likeness.  Is he the eldest
son?  It's a pretty property, though sadly encumbered; for old Sir George
was the divvle of a man--a friend of Hanbury Williams, and Lyttleton, and
those horrid, monstrous, ojous people!  How much will he have now,
mister, when the Admiral dies?"

"Why, ma'am, I can't say; but the Admiral is not my friend's father."

"Not his father?--but he _is_, I tell you, and I'm never wrong.  Who is
his father, then?"

"Ma'am, Gus's father's a leatherseller in Skinner Street, Snow Hill,--a
very respectable house, ma'am.  But Gus is only third son, and so can't
expect a great share in the property."

The two young ladies smiled at this--the old lady said, "Hwat?"

"I like you, sir," Lady Jane said, "for not being ashamed of your
friends, whatever their rank of life may be.  Shall we have the pleasure
of setting you down anywhere, Mr. Titmarsh?"

"Noways particular, my Lady," says I.  "We have a holiday at our office
to-day--at least Roundhand gave me and Gus leave; and I shall be very
happy, indeed, to take a drive in the Park, if it's no offence."

"I'm sure it will give us--infinite pleasure," said Lady Jane; though
rather in a grave way.

"Oh, that it will!" says Lady Fanny, clapping her hands: "won't it,
Grandmamma?  And after we have been in the Park, we can walk in
Kensington Gardens, if Mr. Titmarsh will be good enough to accompany us."

"Indeed, Fanny, we will do no such thing," says Lady Jane.

"Indeed, but we will though!" shrieked out Lady Drum.  "Ain't I dying to
know everything about his uncle and thirteen aunts? and you're all
chattering so, you young women, that not a blessed syllable will you
allow me or my young friend here to speak."

Lady Jane gave a shrug with her shoulders, and did not say a single word
more.  Lady Fanny, who was as gay as a young kitten (if I may be allowed
so to speak of the aristocracy), laughed, and blushed, and giggled, and
seemed quite to enjoy her sister's ill-humour.  And the Countess began at
once, and entered into the history of the thirteen Misses Hoggarty, which
was not near finished when we entered the Park.

When there, you can't think what hundreds of gents on horseback came to
the carriage and talked to the ladies.  They had their joke for Lady
Drum, who seemed to be a character in her way; their bow for Lady Jane;
and, the young ones especially, their compliment for Lady Fanny.

Though she bowed and blushed, as a young lady should, Lady Fanny seemed
to be thinking of something else; for she kept her head out of the
carriage, looking eagerly among the horsemen, as if she expected to see
somebody.  Aha! my Lady Fanny, _I_ knew what it meant when a young pretty
lady like you was absent, and on the look-out, and only half answered the
questions put to her.  Let alone Sam Titmarsh--he knows what Somebody
means as well as another, I warrant.  As I saw these manoeuvres going on,
I could not help just giving a wink to Lady Jane, as much as to say I
knew what was what.  "I guess the young lady is looking for Somebody,"
says I.  It was then her turn to look queer, I assure you, and she
blushed as red as scarlet; but, after a minute, the good-natured little
thing looked at her sister, and both the young ladies put their
handkerchiefs up to their faces, and began laughing--laughing as if I had
said the funniest thing in the world.

"Il est charmant, votre monsieur," said Lady Jane to her grandmamma; and
on which I bowed, and said, "Madame, vous me faites beaucoup d'honneur:"
for I know the French language, and was pleased to find that these good
ladies had taken a liking to me.  "I'm a poor humble lad, ma'am, not used
to London society, and do really feel it quite kind of you to take me by
the hand so, and give me a drive in your fine carriage."

At this minute a gentleman on a black horse, with a pale face and a tuft
to his chin, came riding up to the carriage; and I knew by a little start
that Lady Fanny gave, and by her instantly looking round the other way,
that _Somebody_ was come at last.

"Lady Drum," said he, "your most devoted servant!  I have just been
riding with a gentleman who almost shot himself for love of the beautiful
Countess of Drum in the year--never mind the year."

"Was it Killblazes?" said the lady: "he's a dear old man, and I'm quite
ready to go off with him this minute.  Or was it that delight of an old
bishop?  He's got a lock of my hair now--I gave it him when he was Papa's
chaplain; and let me tell you it would be a hard matter to find another
now in the same place."

"Law, my Lady!" says I, "you don't say so?"

"But indeed I do, my good sir," says she; "for between ourselves, my
head's as bare as a cannon-ball--ask Fanny if it isn't.  Such a fright as
the poor thing got when she was a babby, and came upon me suddenly in my
dressing-room without my wig!"

"I hope Lady Fanny has recovered from the shock," said "Somebody,"
looking first at her, and then at me as if he had a mind to swallow me.
And would you believe it? all that Lady Fanny could say was, "Pretty
well, I thank you, my Lord;" and she said this with as much fluttering
and blushing as we used to say our Virgil at school--when we hadn't
learned it.

My Lord still kept on looking very fiercely at me, and muttered something
about having hoped to find a seat in Lady Drum's carriage, as he was
tired of riding; on which Lady Fanny muttered something, too, about "a
friend of Grandmamma's."

"You should say a friend of yours, Fanny," says Lady Jane: "I am sure we
should never have come to the Park if Fanny had not insisted upon
bringing Mr. Titmarsh hither.  Let me introduce the Earl of Tiptoff to
Mr. Titmarsh."  But, instead of taking off his hat, as I did mine, his
Lordship growled out that he hoped for another opportunity, and galloped
off again on his black horse.  Why the deuce I should have offended him I
never could understand.

But it seemed as if I was destined to offend all the men that day; for
who should presently come up but the Right Honourable Edmund Preston, one
of His Majesty's Secretaries of State (as I know very well by the almanac
in our office) and the husband of Lady Jane.

The Right Honourable Edmund was riding a grey cob, and was a fat pale-
faced man, who looked as if he never went into the open air.  "Who the
devil's that?" said he to his wife, looking surlily both at me and her.

"Oh, it's a friend of Grandmamma's and Jane's," said Lady Fanny at once,
looking, like a sly rogue as she was, quite archly at her sister--who in
her turn appeared quite frightened, and looked imploringly at her sister,
and never dared to breathe a syllable.  "Yes, indeed," continued Lady
Fanny, "Mr. Titmarsh is a cousin of Grandmamma's by the mother's side: by
the Hoggarty side.  Didn't you know the Hoggarties when you were in
Ireland, Edmund, with Lord Bagwig?  Let me introduce you to Grandmamma's
cousin, Mr. Titmarsh: Mr. Titmarsh, my brother, Mr. Edmund Preston."

There was Lady Jane all the time treading upon her sister's foot as hard
as possible, and the little wicked thing would take no notice; and I, who
had never heard of the cousinship, feeling as confounded as could be.  But
I did not know the Countess of Drum near so well as that sly minx her
grand-daughter did; for the old lady, who had just before called poor Gus
Hoskins her cousin, had, it appeared, the mania of fancying all the world
related to her, and said--

"Yes, we're cousins, and not very far removed.  Mick Hoggarty's
grandmother was Millicent Brady, and she and my Aunt Towzer were related,
as all the world knows; for Decimus Brady, of Ballybrady, married an own
cousin of Aunt Towzer's mother, Bell Swift--that was no relation of the
Dean's, my love, who came but of a so-so family--and isn't _that_ clear?"

"Oh, perfectly, Grandmamma," said Lady Jane, laughing, while the right
honourable gent still rode by us, looking sour and surly.

"And sure you knew the Hoggarties, Edmund?--the thirteen red-haired
girls--the nine graces, and four over, as poor Clanboy used to call them.
Poor Clan!--a cousin of yours and mine, Mr. Titmarsh, and sadly in love
with me he was too.  Not remember them _all_ now, Edmund?--not
remember?--not remember Biddy and Minny, and Thedy and Widdy, and Mysie
and Grizzy, and Polly and Dolly and the rest?"

"D--- the Miss Hoggarties, ma'am," said the right honourable gent; and he
said it with such energy, that his grey horse gave a sudden lash out that
well nigh sent him over his head.  Lady Jane screamed; Lady Fanny
laughed; old Lady Drum looked as if she did not care twopence, and said
"Serve you right for swearing, you ojous man you!"

"Hadn't you better come into the carriage, Edmund--Mr. Preston?" cried
out the lady, anxiously.

"Oh, I'm sure I'll slip out, ma'am," says I.

"Pooh--pooh! don't stir," said Lady Drum: "it's my carriage; and if Mr.
Preston chooses to swear at a lady of my years in that ojous vulgar
way--in that ojous vulgar way I repeat--I don't see why my friends should
be inconvenienced for him.  Let him sit on the dicky if he likes, or come
in and ride bodkin."  It was quite clear that my Lady Drum hated her
grandson-in-law heartily; and I've remarked somehow in families that this
kind of hatred is by no means uncommon.

Mr. Preston, one of His Majesty's Secretaries of State, was, to tell the
truth, in a great fright upon his horse, and was glad to get away from
the kicking plunging brute.  His pale face looked still paler than
before, and his hands and legs trembled, as he dismounted from the cob
and gave the reins to his servant.  I disliked the looks of the chap--of
the master, I mean--at the first moment he came up, when he spoke rudely
to that nice gentle wife of his; and I thought he was a cowardly fellow,
as the adventure of the cob showed him to be.  Heaven bless you! a baby
could have ridden it; and here was the man with his soul in his mouth at
the very first kick.

"Oh, quick! _do_ come in, Edmund," said Lady Fanny, laughing; and the
carriage steps being let down, and giving me a great scowl as he came in,
he was going to place himself in Lady Fanny's corner (I warrant you I
wouldn't budge from mine), when the little rogue cried out, "Oh, no! by
no means, Mr. Preston.  Shut the door, Thomas.  And oh! what fun it will
be to show all the world a Secretary of State riding bodkin!"

And pretty glum the Secretary of State looked, I assure you!

"Take my place, Edmund, and don't mind Fanny's folly," said Lady Jane,
timidly.

"Oh no!  Pray, madam, don't stir!  I'm comfortable, very comfortable; and
so I hope is this Mr.--this gentleman."

"Perfectly, I assure you," says I.  "I was going to offer to ride your
horse home for you, as you seemed to be rather frightened at it; but the
fact was, I was so comfortable here that really I _couldn't_ move."

Such a grin as old Lady Drum gave when I said that!--how her little eyes
twinkled, and her little sly mouth puckered up!  I couldn't help
speaking, for, look you, my blood was up.

"We shall always be happy of your company, Cousin Titmarsh," says she;
and handed me a gold snuff-box, out of which I took a pinch, and sneezed
with the air of a lord.

"As you have invited this gentleman into your carriage, Lady Jane
Preston, hadn't you better invite him home to dinner?" says Mr. Preston,
quite blue with rage.

"I invited him into my carriage," says the old lady; "and as we are going
to dine at your house, and you press it, I'm sure I shall be very happy
to see him there."

"I'm very sorry I'm engaged," said I.

"Oh, indeed, what a pity!" says Right Honourable Ned, still glowering at
his wife.  "What a pity that this gentleman--I forget his name--that your
friend, Lady Jane, is engaged!  I am sure you would have had such
gratification in meeting your relation in Whitehall."

Lady Drum was over-fond of finding out relations to be sure; but this
speech of Right Honourable Ned's was rather too much.  "Now, Sam," says
I, "be a man and show your spirit!"  So I spoke up at once, and said,
"Why, ladies, as the right honourable gent is so _very_ pressing, I'll
give up my engagement, and shall have sincere pleasure in cutting mutton
with him.  What's your hour, sir?"

He didn't condescend to answer, and for me I did not care; for, you see,
I did not intend to dine with the man, but only to give him a lesson of
manners.  For though I am but a poor fellow, and hear people cry out how
vulgar it is to eat peas with a knife, or ask three times for cheese, and
such like points of ceremony, there's something, I think, much more
vulgar than all this, and that is, insolence to one's inferiors.  I hate
the chap that uses it, as I scorn him of humble rank that affects to be
of the fashion; and so I determined to let Mr. Preston know a piece of my
mind.

When the carriage drove up to his house, I handed out the ladies as
politely as possible, and walked into the hall, and then, taking hold of
Mr. Preston's button at the door, I said, before the ladies and the two
big servants--upon my word I did--"Sir," says I, "this kind old lady
asked me into her carriage, and I rode in it to please her, not myself.
When you came up and asked who the devil I was, I thought you might have
put the question in a more polite manner; but it wasn't my business to
speak.  When, by way of a joke, you invited me to dinner, I thought I
would answer in a joke too, and here I am.  But don't be frightened; I'm
not a-going to dine with you: only if you play the same joke upon other
parties--on some of the chaps in our office, for example--I recommend you
to have a care, or they will _take you at your word_."

"Is that all, sir?" says Mr. Preston, still in a rage.  "If you have
done, will you leave this house, or shall my servants turn you out?  Turn
out this fellow! do you hear me?" and he broke away from me, and flung
into his study in a rage.

"He's an ojous horrid monsther of a man, that husband of yours!" said
Lady Drum, seizing hold of her elder grand-daughter's arm, "and I hate
him; and so come away, for the dinner'll be getting cold:" and she was
for hurrying away Lady Jane without more ado.  But that kind lady, coming
forward, looking very pale and trembling, said, "Mr. Titmarsh, I do hope
you'll not be angry--that is, that you'll forget what has happened, for,
believe me, it has given me very great--"

Very great what, I never could say, for here the poor thing's eyes filled
with tears; and Lady Drum crying out "Tut, tut! none of this nonsense,"
pulled her away by the sleeve, and went upstairs.  But little Lady Fanny
walked boldly up to me, and held me out her little hand, and gave mine
such a squeeze and said, "Good-bye, my dear Mr. Titmarsh," so very
kindly, that I'm blest if I did not blush up to the ears, and all the
blood in my body began to tingle.

So, when she was gone, I clapped my hat on my head, and walked out of the
hall-door, feeling as proud as a peacock and as brave as a lion; and all
I wished for was that one of those saucy grinning footmen should say or
do something to me that was the least uncivil, so that I might have the
pleasure of knocking him down, with my best compliments to his master.
But neither of them did me any such favour! and I went away and dined at
home off boiled mutton and turnips with Gus Hoskins quite peacefully.

I did not think it was proper to tell Gus (who, between ourselves, is
rather curious, and inclined to tittle-tattle) all the particulars of the
family quarrel of which I had been the cause and witness, and so just
said that the old lady--("They were the Drum arms," says Gus; "for I went
and looked them out that minute in the 'Peerage'")--that the old lady
turned out to be a cousin of mine, and that she had taken me to drive in
the Park.  Next day we went to the office as usual, when you may be sure
that Hoskins told everything of what had happened, and a great deal more;
and somehow, though I did not pretend to care sixpence about the matter,
I must confess that I _was_ rather pleased that the gents in our office
should hear of a part of my adventure.

But fancy my surprise, on coming home in the evening, to find Mrs. Stokes
the landlady, Miss Selina Stokes her daughter, and Master Bob Stokes her
son (an idle young vagabond that was always playing marbles on St.
Bride's steps and in Salisbury Square),--when I found them all bustling
and tumbling up the steps before me to our rooms on the second floor, and
there, on the table, between our two flutes on one side, my album, Gus's
"Don Juan" and "Peerage" on the other, I saw as follows:--

1.  A basket of great red peaches, looking like the cheeks of my dear
Mary Smith.

2.  A ditto of large, fat, luscious, heavy-looking grapes.

3.  An enormous piece of raw mutton, as I thought it was; but Mrs. Stokes
said it was the primest haunch of venison that ever she saw.

And three cards--viz.

DOWAGER COUNTESS OF DRUM.
LADY FANNY RAKES.

MR. PRESTON.
LADY JANE PRESTON.

EARL OF TIPTOFF.

"Sich a carriage!" says Mrs. Stokes (for that was the way the poor thing
spoke).  "Sich a carriage--all over coronites! sich liveries--two great
footmen, with red whiskers and yellow-plush small-clothes; and inside, a
very old lady in a white poke bonnet, and a young one with a great
Leghorn hat and blue ribands, and a great tall pale gentleman with a tuft
on his chin.

"'Pray, madam, does Mr. Titmarsh live here?' says the young lady, with
her clear voice.

"'Yes, my Lady,' says I; 'but he's at the office--the West Diddlesex Fire
and Life Office, Cornhill.'

"'Charles, get out the things,' says the gentleman, quite solemn.

"'Yes, my Lord,' says Charles; and brings me out the haunch in a
newspaper, and on the chany dish as you see it, and the two baskets of
fruit besides.

"'Have the kindness, madam,' says my Lord, 'to take these things to Mr.
Titmarsh's rooms, with our, with Lady Jane Preston's compliments, and
request his acceptance of them;' and then he pulled out the cards on your
table, and this letter, sealed with his Lordship's own crown."

And herewith Mrs. Stokes gave me a letter, which my wife keeps to this
day, by the way, and which runs thus:--

   "The Earl of Tiptoff has been commissioned by Lady Jane Preston to
   express her sincere regret and disappointment that she was not able
   yesterday to enjoy the pleasure of Mr. Titmarsh's company.  Lady Jane
   is about to leave town immediately: she will therefore be unable to
   receive her friends in Whitehall Place this season.  But Lord Tiptoff
   trusts that Mr. Titmarsh will have the kindness to accept some of the
   produce of her Ladyship's garden and park; with which, perhaps, he
   will entertain some of those friends in whose favour he knows so well
   how to speak."

Along with this was a little note, containing the words "Lady Drum at
home.  Friday evening, June 17."  And all this came to me because my aunt
Hoggarty had given me a diamond-pin!

I did not send back the venison: as why should I?  Gus was for sending it
at once to Brough, our director; and the grapes and peaches to my aunt in
Somersetshire.

"But no," says I; "we'll ask Bob Swinney and half-a-dozen more of our
gents; and we'll have a merry night of it on Saturday."  And a merry
night we had too; and as we had no wine in the cupboard, we had plenty of
ale, and gin-punch afterwards.  And Gus sat at the foot of the table, and
I at the head; and we sang songs, both comic and sentimental, and drank
toasts; and I made a speech that there is no possibility of mentioning
here, because, _entre nous_, I had quite forgotten in the morning
everything that had taken place after a certain period on the night
before.




CHAPTER IV


HOW THE HAPPY DIAMOND-WEARER DINES AT PENTONVILLE

I did not go to the office till half-an-hour after opening time on
Monday.  If the truth must be told, I was not sorry to let Hoskins have
the start of me, and tell the chaps what had taken place,--for we all
have our little vanities, and I liked to be thought well of by my
companions.

When I came in, I saw my business had been done, by the way in which the
chaps looked at me; especially Abednego, who offered me a pinch out of
his gold snuff-box the very first thing.  Roundhand shook me, too, warmly
by the hand, when he came round to look over my day-book, said I wrote a
capital hand (and indeed I believe I do, without any sort of flattery),
and invited me for dinner next Sunday, in Myddelton Square.  "You won't
have," said he, "quite such a grand turn-out as with _your friends at the
West End_"--he said this with a particular accent--"but Amelia and I are
always happy to see a friend in our plain way,--pale sherry, old port,
and cut and come again.  Hey?"

I said I would come and bring Hoskins too.

He answered that I was very polite, and that he should be very happy to
see Hoskins; and we went accordingly at the appointed day and hour; but
though Gus was eleventh clerk and I twelfth, I remarked that at dinner I
was helped first and best.  I had twice as many force-meat balls as
Hoskins in my mock-turtle, and pretty nearly all the oysters out of the
sauce-boat.  Once, Roundhand was going to help Gus before me; when his
wife, who was seated at the head of the table, looking very big and
fierce in red crape and a turban, shouted out, "ANTONY!" and poor R.
dropped the plate, and blushed as red as anything.  How Mrs. R. did talk
to me about the West End to be sure!  She had a "Peerage," as you may be
certain, and knew everything about the Drum family in a manner that quite
astonished me.  She asked me how much Lord Drum had a year; whether I
thought he had twenty, thirty, forty, or a hundred and fifty thousand a
year; whether I was invited to Drum Castle; what the young ladies wore,
and if they had those odious _gigot_ sleeves which were just coming in
then; and here Mrs. R. looked at a pair of large mottled arms that she
was very proud of.

"I say, Sam my boy!" cried, in the midst of our talk, Mr. Roundhand, who
had been passing the port-wine round pretty freely, "I hope you looked to
the main chance, and put in a few shares of the West Diddlesex,--hey?"

"Mr. Roundhand, have you put up the decanters downstairs?" cries the
lady, quite angry, and wishing to stop the conversation.

"No, Milly, I've emptied 'em," says R.

"Don't Milly me, sir! and have the goodness to go down and tell Lancy my
maid" (_a look at me_) "to make the tea in the study.  We have a
gentleman here who is not _used_ to Pentonville ways" (_another look_);
"but he won't mind the ways of _friends_."  And here Mrs. Roundhand
heaved her very large chest, and gave me a third look that was so severe,
that I declare to goodness it made me look quite foolish.  As to Gus, she
never so much as spoke to him all the evening; but he consoled himself
with a great lot of muffins, and sat most of the evening (it was a cruel
hot summer) whistling and talking with Roundhand on the verandah.  I
think I should like to have been with them,--for it was very close in the
room with that great big Mrs. Roundhand squeezing close up to one on the
sofa.

"Do you recollect what a jolly night we had here last summer?" I heard
Hoskins say, who was leaning over the balcony, and ogling the girls
coming home from church.  "You and me with our coats off, plenty of cold
rum-and-water, Mrs. Roundhand at Margate, and a whole box of Manillas?"

"Hush!" said Roundhand, quite eagerly; "Milly will hear."

But Milly didn't hear: for she was occupied in telling me an immense long
story about her waltzing with the Count de Schloppenzollern at the City
ball to the Allied Sovereigns; and how the Count had great large white
moustaches; and how odd she thought it to go whirling round the room with
a great man's arm round your waist.  "Mr. Roundhand has never allowed it
since our marriage--never; but in the year 'fourteen it was considered a
proper compliment, you know, to pay the sovereigns.  So twenty-nine young
ladies, of the best families in the City of London, I assure you, Mr.
Titmarsh--there was the Lord Mayor's own daughters; Alderman Dobbins's
gals; Sir Charles Hopper's three, who have the great house in Baker
Street; and your humble servant, who was rather slimmer in those
days--twenty-nine of us had a dancing-master on purpose, and practised
waltzing in a room over the Egyptian Hall at the Mansion House.  He was a
splendid man, that Count Schloppenzollern!"

"I am sure, ma'am," says I, "he had a splendid partner!" and blushed up
to my eyes when I said it.

"Get away, you naughty creature!" says Mrs. Roundhand, giving me a great
slap: "you're all the same, you men in the West End--all deceivers.  The
Count was just like you.  Heigho!  Before you marry, it's all honey and
compliments; when you win us, it's all coldness and indifference.  Look
at Roundhand, the great baby, trying to beat down a butterfly with his
yellow bandanna!  Can a man like _that_ comprehend me? can he fill the
void in my heart?"  (She pronounced it without the h; but that there
should be no mistake, laid her hand upon the place meant.)  "Ah, no!  Will
_you_ be so neglectful when _you_ marry, Mr. Titmarsh?"

As she spoke, the bells were just tolling the people out of church, and I
fell a-thinking of my dear dear Mary Smith in the country, walking home
to her grandmother's, in her modest grey cloak, as the bells were chiming
and the air full of the sweet smell of the hay, and the river shining in
the sun, all crimson, purple, gold, and silver.  There was my dear Mary a
hundred and twenty miles off, in Somersetshire, walking home from church
along with Mr. Snorter's family, with which she came and went; and I was
listening to the talk of this great leering vulgar woman.

I could not help feeling for a certain half of a sixpence that you have
heard me speak of; and putting my hand mechanically upon my chest, I tore
my fingers with the point of my new DIAMOND-PIN.  Mr. Polonius had sent
it home the night before, and I sported it for the first time at
Roundhand's to dinner.

"It's a beautiful diamond," said Mrs. Roundhand.  "I have been looking at
it all dinner-time.  How rich you must be to wear such splendid things!
and how can you remain in a vulgar office in the City--you who have such
great acquaintances at the West End?"

The woman had somehow put me in such a passion that I bounced off the
sofa, and made for the balcony without answering a word,--ay, and half
broke my head against the sash, too, as I went out to the gents in the
open air.  "Gus," says I, "I feel very unwell: I wish you'd come home
with me."  And Gus did not desire anything better; for he had ogled the
last girl out of the last church, and the night was beginning to fall.

"What! already?" said Mrs. Roundhand; "there is a lobster coming up,--a
trifling refreshment; not what he's accustomed to, but--"

I am sorry to say I nearly said, "D--- the lobster!" as Roundhand went
and whispered to her that I was ill.

"Ay," said Gus, looking very knowing.  "Recollect, Mrs. R., that he was
_at the West End_ on Thursday, asked to dine, ma'am, with the tip-top
nobs.  Chaps don't dine at the West End for nothing, do they, R.?  If you
play at _bowls_, you know--"

"You must look out for _rubbers_," said Roundhand, as quick as thought.

"Not in my house of a Sunday," said Mrs. R., looking very fierce and
angry.  "Not a card shall be touched here.  Are we in a Protestant land,
sir? in a Christian country?"

"My dear, you don't understand.  We were not talking of rubbers of
whist."

"There shall be _no_ game at all in the house of a Sabbath eve," said
Mrs. Roundhand; and out she flounced from the room, without ever so much
as wishing us good-night.

"Do stay," said the husband, looking very much frightened,--"do stay.  She
won't come back while you're here; and I do wish you'd stay so."

But we wouldn't: and when we reached Salisbury Square, I gave Gus a
lecture about spending his Sundays idly; and read out one of Blair's
sermons before we went to bed.  As I turned over in bed, I could not help
thinking about the luck the pin had brought me; and it was not over yet,
as you will see in the next chapter.




CHAPTER V


HOW THE DIAMOND INTRODUCES HIM TO A STILL MORE FASHIONABLE PLACE

To tell the truth, though, about the pin, although I mentioned it almost
the last thing in the previous chapter, I assure you it was by no means
the last thing in my thoughts.  It had come home from Mr. Polonius's, as
I said, on Saturday night; and Gus and I happened to be out enjoying
ourselves, half-price, at Sadler's Wells; and perhaps we took a little
refreshment on our way back: but that has nothing to do with my story.

On the table, however, was the little box from the jeweller's; and when I
took it out,--_my_, how the diamond did twinkle and glitter by the light
of our one candle!

"I'm sure it would light up the room of itself," says Gus.  "I've read
they do in--in history."

It was in the history of Cogia Hassan Alhabbal, in the "Arabian Nights,"
as I knew very well.  But we put the candle out, nevertheless, to try.

"Well, I declare to goodness it does illuminate the old place!" says Gus;
but the fact was, that there was a gas-lamp opposite our window, and I
believe that was the reason why we could see pretty well.  At least in my
bedroom, to which I was obliged to go without a candle, and of which the
window looked out on a dead wall, I could not see a wink, in spite of the
Hoggarty diamond, and was obliged to grope about in the dark for a
pincushion which Somebody gave me (I don't mind owning it was Mary
Smith), and in which I stuck it for the night.  But, somehow, I did not
sleep much for thinking of it, and woke very early in the morning; and,
if the truth must be told, stuck it in my night-gown, like a fool, and
admired myself very much in the glass.

Gus admired it as much as I did; for since my return, and especially
since my venison dinner and drive with Lady Drum, he thought I was the
finest fellow in the world, and boasted about his "West End friend"
everywhere.

As we were going to dine at Roundhand's, and I had no black satin stock
to set it off, I was obliged to place it in the frill of my best shirt,
which tore the muslin sadly, by the way.  However, the diamond had its
effect on my entertainers, as we have seen; rather too much perhaps on
one of them; and next day I wore it down at the office, as Gus would make
me do; though it did not look near so well in the second day's shirt as
on the first day, when the linen was quite clear and bright with
Somersetshire washing.

The chaps at the West Diddlesex all admired it hugely, except that
snarling Scotchman M'Whirter, fourth clerk,--out of envy because I did
not think much of a great yellow stone, named a carum-gorum, or some such
thing, which he had in a snuff-mull, as he called it,--all except
M'Whirter, I say, were delighted with it; and Abednego himself, who ought
to know, as his father was in the line, told me the jewel was worth at
least ten poundsh, and that his governor would give me as much for it.

"That's a proof," says Roundhand, "that Tit's diamond is worth at least
thirty."  And we all laughed, and agreed it was.

Now I must confess that all these praises, and the respect that wag paid
me, turned my head a little; and as all the chaps said I _must_ have a
black satin stock to set the stone off, was fool enough to buy a stock
that cost me five-and-twenty shillings, at Ludlam's in Piccadilly: for
Gus said I must go to the best place, to be sure, and have none of our
cheap and common East End stuff.  I might have had one for sixteen and
six in Cheapside, every whit as good; but when a young lad becomes vain,
and wants to be fashionable, you see he can't help being extravagant.

Our director, Mr. Brough, did not fail to hear of the haunch of venison
business, and my relationship with Lady Drum and the Right Honourable
Edmund Preston: only Abednego, who told him, said I was her Ladyship's
first cousin; and this made Brough think more of me, and no worse than
before.

Mr. B. was, as everybody knows, Member of Parliament for Rottenburgh; and
being considered one of the richest men in the City of London, used to
receive all the great people of the land at his villa at Fulham; and we
often read in the papers of the rare doings going on there.

Well, the pin certainly worked wonders: for not content merely with
making me a present of a ride in a countess's carriage, of a haunch of
venison and two baskets of fruit, and the dinner at Roundhand's above
described, my diamond had other honours in store for me, and procured me
the honour of an invitation to the house of our director, Mr. Brough.

Once a year, in June, that honourable gent gave a grand ball at his house
at Fulham; and by the accounts of the entertainment brought back by one
or two of our chaps who had been invited, it was one of the most
magnificent things to be seen about London.  You saw Members of
Parliament there as thick as peas in July, lords and ladies without end.
There was everything and everybody of the tip-top sort; and I have heard
that Mr. Gunter, of Berkeley Square, supplied the ices, supper, and
footmen,--though of the latter Brough kept a plenty, but not enough to
serve the host of people who came to him.  The party, it must be
remembered, was _Mrs_. Brough's party, not the gentleman's,--he being in
the Dissenting way, would scarcely sanction any entertainments of the
kind: but he told his City friends that his lady governed him in
everything; and it was generally observed that most of them would allow
their daughters to go to the ball if asked, on account of the immense
number of the nobility which our director assembled together: Mrs.
Roundhand, I know, for one, would have given one of her ears to go; but,
as I have said before, nothing would induce Brough to ask her.

Roundhand himself, and Gutch, nineteenth clerk, son of the brother of an
East Indian director, were the only two of our gents invited, as we knew
very well: for they had received their invitations many weeks before, and
bragged about them not a little.  But two days before the ball, and after
my diamond-pin had had its due effect upon the gents at the office,
Abednego, who had been in the directors' room, came to my desk with a
great smirk, and said, "Tit, Mr. B. says that he expects you will come
down with Roundhand to the ball on Thursday."  I thought Moses was
joking,--at any rate, that Mr. B.'s message was a queer one; for people
don't usually send invitations in that abrupt peremptory sort of way;
but, sure enough, he presently came down himself and confirmed it,
saying, as he was going out of the office, "Mr. Titmarsh, you will come
down on Thursday to Mrs. Brough's party, where you will see some
relations of yours."

"West End again!" says that Gus Hoskins; and accordingly down I went,
taking a place in a cab which Roundhand hired for himself, Gutch, and me,
and for which he very generously paid eight shillings.

There is no use to describe the grand gala, nor the number of lamps in
the lodge and in the garden, nor the crowd of carriages that came in at
the gates, nor the troops of curious people outside; nor the ices,
fiddlers, wreaths of flowers, and cold supper within.  The whole
description was beautifully given in a fashionable paper, by a reporter
who observed the same from the "Yellow Lion" over the way, and told it in
his journal in the most accurate manner; getting an account of the
dresses of the great people from their footmen and coachmen, when they
came to the alehouse for their porter.  As for the names of the guests,
they, you may be sure, found their way to the same newspaper: and a great
laugh was had at my expense, because among the titles of the great people
mentioned my name appeared in the list of the "Honourables."  Next day,
Brough advertised "a hundred and fifty guineas reward for an emerald
necklace lost at the party of John Brough, Esq., at Fulham;" though some
of our people said that no such thing was lost at all, and that Brough
only wanted to advertise the magnificence of his society; but this doubt
was raised by persons not invited, and envious no doubt.

Well, I wore my diamond, as you may imagine, and rigged myself in my best
clothes, viz. my blue coat and brass buttons before mentioned, nankeen
trousers and silk stockings, a white waistcoat, and a pair of white
gloves bought for the occasion.  But my coat was of country make, very
high in the waist and short in the sleeves, and I suppose must have
looked rather odd to some of the great people assembled, for they stared
at me a great deal, and a whole crowd formed to see me dance--which I did
to the best of my power, performing all the steps accurately and with
great agility, as I had been taught by our dancing-master in the country.

And with whom do you think I had the honour to dance?  With no less a
person than Lady Jane Preston; who, it appears, had not gone out of town,
and who shook me most kindly by the hand when she saw me, and asked me to
dance with her.  We had my Lord Tiptoff and Lady Fanny Rakes for our vis-
a-vis.

You should have seen how the people crowded to look at us, and admired my
dancing too, for I cut the very best of capers, quite different to the
rest of the gents (my Lord among the number), who walked through the
quadrille as if they thought it a trouble, and stared at my activity with
all their might.  But when I have a dance I like to enjoy myself: and
Mary Smith often said I was the very best partner at our assemblies.
While we were dancing, I told Lady Jane how Roundhand, Gutch, and I, had
come down three in a cab, besides the driver; and my account of our
adventures made her Ladyship laugh, I warrant you.  Lucky it was for me
that I didn't go back in the same vehicle; for the driver went and
intoxicated himself at the "Yellow Lion," threw out Gutch and our head
clerk as he was driving them back, and actually fought Gutch afterwards
and blacked his eye, because he said that Gutch's red waistcoat
frightened the horse.

Lady Jane, however, spared me such an uncomfortable ride home: for she
said she had a fourth place in her carriage, and asked me if I would
accept it; and positively, at two o'clock in the morning, there was I,
after setting the ladies and my Lord down, driven to Salisbury Square in
a great thundering carriage, with flaming lamps and two tall footmen, who
nearly knocked the door and the whole little street down with the noise
they made at the rapper.  You should have seen Gus's head peeping out of
window in his white nightcap!  He kept me up the whole night telling him
about the ball, and the great people I had seen there; and next day he
told at the office my stories, with his own usual embroideries upon them.

"Mr. Titmarsh," said Lady Fanny, laughing to me, "who is that great fat
curious man, the master of the house?  Do you know he asked me if you
were not related to us? and I said, 'Oh, yes, you were.'"

"Fanny!" says Lady Jane.

"Well," answered the other, "did not Grandmamma say Mr. Titmarsh was her
cousin?"

"But you know that Grandmamma's memory is not very good."

"Indeed, you're wrong, Lady Jane," says my Lord; "I think it's
prodigious."

"Yes, but not very--not very accurate."

"No, my Lady," says I; "for her Ladyship, the Countess of Drum, said, if
you remember, that my friend Gus Hoskins--"

"Whose cause you supported so bravely," cries Lady Fanny.

"--That my friend Gus is her Ladyship's cousin too, which cannot be, for
I know all his family: they live in Skinner Street and St. Mary Axe, and
are not--not quite so _respectable_ as _my_ relatives."

At this they all began to laugh; and my Lord said, rather haughtily--

"Depend upon it, Mr. Titmarsh, that Lady Drum is no more your cousin than
she is the cousin of your friend Mr. Hoskinson."

"Hoskins, my Lord--and so I told Gus; but you see he is very fond of me,
and _will_ have it that I am related to Lady D.: and say what I will to
the contrary, tells the story everywhere.  Though to be sure," added I
with a laugh, "it has gained me no small good in my time."  So I
described to the party our dinner at Mrs. Roundhand's, which all came
from my diamond-pin, and my reputation as a connection of the
aristocracy.  Then I thanked Lady Jane handsomely for her magnificent
present of fruit and venison, and told her that it had entertained a
great number of kind friends of mine, who had drunk her Ladyship's health
with the greatest gratitude.

"_A haunch of venison_!" cried Lady Jane, quite astonished; "indeed, Mr.
Titmarsh, I am quite at a loss to understand you."

As we passed a gas-lamp, I saw Lady Fanny laughing as usual, and turning
her great arch sparkling black eyes at Lord Tiptoff.

"Why, Lady Jane," said he, "if the truth must out, the great haunch of
venison trick was one of this young lady's performing.  You must know
that I had received the above-named haunch from Lord Guttlebury's park:
and knowing that Preston is not averse to Guttlebury venison, was telling
Lady Drum (in whose carriage I had a seat that day, as Mr. Titmarsh was
not in the way), that I intended the haunch for your husband's table.
Whereupon my Lady Fanny, clapping together her little hands, declared and
vowed that the venison should not go to Preston, but should be sent to a
gentleman about whose adventures on the day previous we had just been
talking--to Mr. Titmarsh, in fact; whom Preston, as Fanny vowed, had used
most cruelly, and to whom, she said, a reparation was due.  So my Lady
Fanny insists upon our driving straight to my rooms in the Albany (you
know I am only to stay in my bachelor's quarters a month longer)--"

"Nonsense!" says Lady Fanny.

"--Insists upon driving straight to my chambers in the Albany, extracting
thence the above-named haunch--"

"Grandmamma was very sorry to part with it," cries Lady Fanny.

"--And then she orders us to proceed to Mr. Titmarsh's house in the City,
where the venison was left, in company with a couple of baskets of fruit
bought at Grange's by Lady Fanny herself."

"And what was more," said Lady Fanny, "I made Grandmamma go into Fr--into
Lord Tiptoff's rooms, and dictated out of my own mouth the letter which
he wrote, and pinned up the haunch of venison that his hideous old
housekeeper brought us--I am quite jealous of her--I pinned up the haunch
of venison in a copy of the John Bull newspaper."

It had one of the Ramsbottom letters in it, I remember, which Gus and I
read on Sunday at breakfast, and we nearly killed ourselves with
laughing.  The ladies laughed too when I told them this; and good-natured
Lady Jane said she would forgive her sister, and hoped I would too: which
I promised to do as often as her Ladyship chose to repeat the offence.

I never had any more venison from the family; but I'll tell you _what_ I
had.  About a month after came a card of "Lord and Lady Tiptoff," and a
great piece of plum-cake; of which, I am sorry to say, Gus ate a great
deal too much.




CHAPTER VI


OF THE WEST DIDDLESEX ASSOCIATION, AND OF THE EFFECT THE DIAMOND HAD
THERE

Well, the magic of the pin was not over yet.  Very soon after Mrs.
Brough's grand party, our director called me up to his room at the West
Diddlesex, and after examining my accounts, and speaking awhile about
business, said, "That's a very fine diamond-pin, Master Titmarsh" (he
spoke in a grave patronising way), "and I called you on purpose to speak
to you upon the subject.  I do not object to seeing the young men of this
establishment well and handsomely dressed; but I know that their salaries
cannot afford ornaments like those, and I grieve to see you with a thing
of such value.  You have paid for it, sir,--I trust you have paid for it;
for, of all things, my dear--dear young friend, beware of debt."

I could not conceive why Brough was reading me this lecture about debt
and my having bought the diamond-pin, as I knew that he had been asking
about it already, and how I came by it--Abednego told me so.  "Why, sir,"
says I, "Mr. Abednego told me that he had told you that I had told him--"

"Oh, ay-by-the-bye, now I recollect, Mr. Titmarsh--I do recollect--yes;
though I suppose, sir, you will imagine that I have other more important
things to remember."

"Oh, sir, in course," says I.

"That one of the clerks _did_ say something about a pin--that one of the
other gentlemen had it.  And so your pin was given you, was it?"

"It was given me, sir, by my aunt, Mrs. Hoggarty of Castle Hoggarty,"
said I, raising my voice; for I was a little proud of Castle Hoggarty.

"She must be very rich to make such presents, Titmarsh?"

"Why, thank you, sir," says I, "she is pretty well off.  Four hundred a
year jointure; a farm at Slopperton, sir; three houses at Squashtail; and
three thousand two hundred loose cash at the banker's, as I happen to
know, sir,--_that's all_."

I did happen to know this, you see; because, while I was down in
Somersetshire, Mr. MacManus, my aunt's agent in Ireland, wrote to say
that a mortgage she had on Lord Brallaghan's property had just been paid
off, and that the money was lodged at Coutts's.  Ireland was in a very
disturbed state in those days; and my aunt wisely determined not to
invest her money in that country any more, but to look out for some good
security in England.  However, as she had always received six per cent.
in Ireland, she would not hear of a smaller interest; and had warned me,
as I was a commercial man, on coming to town, to look out for some means
by which she could invest her money at that rate at least.

"And how do you come to know Mrs. Hoggarty's property so accurately?"
said Mr. Brough; upon which I told him.

"Good heavens, sir! and do you mean that you, a clerk in the West
Diddlesex Insurance Office, applied to by a respectable lady as to the
manner in which she should invest property, never spoke to her about the
Company which you have the honour to serve?  Do you mean, sir, that you,
knowing there was a bonus of five per cent. for yourself upon shares
taken, did not press Mrs. Hoggarty to join us?"

"Sir," says I, "I'm an honest man, and would not take a bonus from my own
relation."

"Honest I know you are, my boy--give me your hand!  So am I honest--so is
every man in this Company honest; but we must be prudent as well.  We
have five millions of capital on our books, as you see--five _bona fide_
millions of _bona fide_ sovereigns paid up, sir,--there is no dishonesty
there.  But why should we not have twenty millions--a hundred millions?
Why should not this be the greatest commercial Association in the
world?--as it shall be, sir,--it shall, as sure as my name is John
Brough, if Heaven bless my honest endeavours to establish it!  But do you
suppose that it can be so, unless every man among us use his utmost
exertions to forward the success of the enterprise?  Never, sir,--never;
and, for me, I say so everywhere.  I glory in what I do.  There is not a
house in which I enter, but I leave a prospectus of the West Diddlesex.
There is not a single tradesman I employ, but has shares in it to some
amount.  My servants, sir,--my very servants and grooms, are bound up
with it.  And the first question I ask of anyone who applies to me for a
place is, Are you insured or a shareholder in the West Diddlesex? the
second, Have you a good character?  And if the first question is answered
in the negative, I say to the party coming to me, Then be a shareholder
before you ask for a place in my household.  Did you not see me--me, John
Brough, whose name is good for millions--step out of my coach-and-four
into this office, with four pounds nineteen, which I paid in to Mr.
Roundhand as the price of half a share for the porter at my lodge-gate?
Did you remark that I deducted a shilling from the five pound?"

"Yes, sir; it was the day you drew out eight hundred and seventy-three
ten and six--Thursday week," says I.

"And why did I deduct that shilling, sir?  Because it was _my
commission_--John Brough's commission; honestly earned by him, and openly
taken.  Was there any disguise about it?  No.  Did I do it for the love
of a shilling?  No," says Brough, laying his hand on his heart, "I did it
from _principle_,--from that motive which guides every one of my actions,
as I can look up to Heaven and say.  I wish all my young men to see my
example, and follow it: I wish--I pray that they may.  Think of that
example, sir.  That porter of mine has a sick wife and nine young
children: he is himself a sick man, and his tenure of life is feeble; he
has earned money, sir, in my service--sixty pounds and more--it is all
his children have to look to--all: but for that, in the event of his
death, they would be houseless beggars in the street.  And what have I
done for that family, sir?  I have put that money out of the reach of
Robert Gates, and placed it so that it shall be a blessing to his family
at his death.  Every farthing is invested in shares in this office; and
Robert Gates, my lodge-porter, is a holder of three shares in the West
Diddlesex Association, and, in that capacity, your master and mine.  Do
you think I want to _cheat_ Gates?"

"Oh, sir!" says I.

"To cheat that poor helpless man, and those tender innocent children!--you
can't think so, sir; I should be a disgrace to human nature if I did.  But
what boots all my energy and perseverance?  What though I place my
friends' money, my family's money, my own money--my hopes, wishes,
desires, ambitions--all upon this enterprise?  You young men will not do
so.  You, whom I treat with love and confidence as my children, make no
return to me.  When I toil, you remain still; when I struggle, you look
on.  Say the word at once,--you doubt me!  O heavens, that this should be
the reward of all my care and love for you!"

Here Mr. Brough was so affected that he actually burst into tears, and I
confess I saw in its true light the negligence of which I had been
guilty.

"Sir," says I, "I am very--very sorry: it was a matter of delicacy,
rather than otherwise, which induced me not to speak to my aunt about the
West Diddlesex."

"Delicacy, my dear dear boy--as if there can be any delicacy about making
your aunt's fortune!  Say indifference to me, say ingratitude, say
folly,--but don't say delicacy--no, no, not delicacy.  Be honest, my boy,
and call things by their right names--always do."

"It _was_ folly and ingratitude, Mr. Brough," says I: "I see it all now;
and I'll write to my aunt this very post."

"You had better do no such thing," says Brough, bitterly: "the stocks are
at ninety, and Mrs. Hoggarty can get three per cent. for her money."

"I _will_ write, sir,--upon my word and honour, I will write."

"Well, as your honour is passed, you must, I suppose; for never break
your word--no, not in a trifle, Titmarsh.  Send me up the letter when you
have done, and I'll frank it--upon my word and honour I will," says Mr.
Brough, laughing, and holding out his hand to me.

I took it, and he pressed mine very kindly--"You may as well sit down
here," says he, as he kept hold of it; "there is plenty of paper."

And so I sat down and mended a beautiful pen, and began and wrote,
"Independent West Diddlesex Association, June 1822," and "My dear Aunt,"
in the best manner possible.  Then I paused a little, thinking what I
should next say; for I have always found that difficulty about letters.
The date and My dear So-and-so one writes off immediately--it is the next
part which is hard; and I put my pen in my mouth, flung myself back in my
chair, and began to think about it.

"Bah!" said Brough, "are you going to be about this letter all day, my
good fellow?  Listen to me, and I'll dictate to you in a moment."  So he
began:--

   "My Dear Aunt,--Since my return from Somersetshire, I am very happy
   indeed to tell you that I have so pleased the managing director of our
   Association and the Board, that they have been good enough to appoint
   me third clerk--"

"Sir!" says I.

"Write what I say.  Mr. Roundhand, as has been agreed by the board
yesterday, quits the clerk's desk and takes the title of secretary and
actuary.  Mr. Highmore takes his place; Mr. Abednego follows him; and I
place you as third clerk--as

   "third clerk (write), with a salary of a hundred and fifty pounds per
   annum.  This news will, I know, gratify my dear mother and you, who
   have been a second mother to me all my life.

   "When I was last at home, I remember you consulted me as to the best
   mode of laying out a sum of money which was lying useless in your
   banker's hands.  I have since lost no opportunity of gaining what
   information I could: and situated here as I am, in the very midst of
   affairs, I believe, although very young, I am as good a person to
   apply to as many others of greater age and standing.

   "I frequently thought of mentioning to you our Association, but
   feelings of delicacy prevented me from doing so.  I did not wish that
   anyone should suppose that a shadow of self-interest could move me in
   any way.

   "But I believe, without any sort of doubt, that the West Diddlesex
   Association offers the best security that you can expect for your
   capital, and, at the same time, the highest interest you can anywhere
   procure.

   "The situation of the Company, as I have it from _the very best
   authority_ (underline that), is as follows:--

   "The subscribed and _bona fide_ capital is FIVE MILLIONS STERLING.

   "The body of directors you know.  Suffice it to say that the managing
   director is John Brough, Esq., of the firm of Brough and Hoff, a
   Member of Parliament, and a man as well known as Mr. Rothschild in the
   City of London.  His private fortune, I know for a fact, amounts to
   half a million; and the last dividends paid to the shareholders of the
   I. W. D. Association amounted to 6.125 per cent. per annum."

[That I know was the dividend declared by us.]

   "Although the shares in the market are at a very great premium, it is
   the privilege of the four first clerks to dispose of a certain number,
   5,000_l_. each at par; and if you, my dearest aunt, would wish for
   2,500_l_. worth, I hope you will allow me to oblige you by offering
   you so much of my new privileges.

   "Let me hear from you immediately upon the subject, as I have already
   an offer for the whole amount of my shares at market price."

"But I haven't, sir," says I.

"You have, sir.  _I_ will take the shares; but I want _you_.  I want as
many respectable persons in the Company as I can bring.  I want you
because I like you, and I don't mind telling you that I have views of my
own as well; for I am an honest man and say openly what I mean, and I'll
tell you _why_ I want you.  I can't, by the regulations of the Company,
have more than a certain number of votes, but if your aunt takes shares,
I expect--I don't mind owning it--that she will vote with me.  _Now_ do
you understand me?  My object is to be all in all with the Company; and
if I be, I will make it the most glorious enterprise that ever was
conducted in the City of London."

So I signed the letter and left it with Mr. B. to frank.

The next day I went and took my place at the third clerk's desk, being
led to it by Mr. B., who made a speech to the gents, much to the
annoyance of the other chaps, who grumbled about their services: though,
as for the matter of that, our services were very much alike: the Company
was only three years old, and the oldest clerk in it had not six months'
more standing in it than I.  "Look out," said that envious M'Whirter to
me.  "Have you got money, or have any of your relations money? or are any
of them going to put it into the concern?"

I did not think fit to answer him, but took a pinch out of his mull, and
was always kind to him; and he, to say the truth, was always most civil
to me.  As for Gus Hoskins, he began to think I was a superior being; and
I must say that the rest of the chaps behaved very kindly in the matter,
and said that if one man were to be put over their heads before another,
they would have pitched upon me, for I had never harmed any of them, and
done little kindnesses to several.

"I know," says Abednego, "how you got the place.  It was I who got it
you.  I told Brough you were a cousin of Preston's, the Lord of the
Treasury, had venison from him and all that; and depend upon it he
expects that you will be able to do him some good in that quarter."

I think there was some likelihood in what Abednego said, because our
governor, as we called him, frequently spoke to me about my cousin; told
me to push the concern in the West End of the town, get as many noblemen
as we could to insure with us, and so on.  It was in vain I said I could
do nothing with Mr. Preston.  "Bah! bah!" says Mr. Brough, "don't tell
_me_.  People don't send haunches of venison to you for nothing;" and I'm
convinced he thought I was a very cautious prudent fellow, for not
bragging about my great family, and keeping my connection with them a
secret.  To be sure he might have learned the truth from Gus, who lived
with me; but Gus would insist that I was hand in glove with all the
nobility, and boasted about me ten times as much as I did myself.

The chaps used to call me the "West Ender."

"See," thought I, "what I have gained by Aunt Hoggarty giving me a
diamond-pin!  What a lucky thing it is that she did not give me the
money, as I hoped she would!  Had I not had the pin--had I even taken it
to any other person but Mr. Polonius, Lady Drum would never have noticed
me; had Lady Drum never noticed me, Mr. Brough never would, and I never
should have been third clerk of the West Diddlesex."

I took heart at all this, and wrote off on the very evening of my
appointment to my dearest Mary Smith, giving her warning that a "certain
event," for which one of us was longing very earnestly, might come off
sooner than we had expected.  And why not?  Miss S.'s own fortune was
70_l_. a year, mine was 150_l_., and when we had 300_l_., we always vowed
we would marry.  "Ah!" thought I, "if I could but go to Somersetshire
now, I might boldly walk up to old Smith's door" (he was her grandfather,
and a half-pay lieutenant of the navy), "I might knock at the knocker and
see my beloved Mary in the parlour, and not be obliged to sneak behind
hayricks on the look-out for her, or pelt stones at midnight at her
window."

My aunt, in a few days, wrote a pretty gracious reply to my letter.  She
had not determined, she said, as to the manner in which she should employ
her three thousand pounds, but should take my offer into consideration;
begging me to keep my shares open for a little while, until her mind was
made up.

What, then, does Mr. Brough do?  I learned afterwards, in the year 1830,
when he and the West Diddlesex Association had disappeared altogether,
how he had proceeded.

"Who are the attorneys at Slopperton?" says he to me in a careless way.

"Mr. Ruck, sir," says I, "is the Tory solicitor, and Messrs. Hodge and
Smithers the Liberals."  I knew them very well, for the fact is, before
Mary Smith came to live in our parts, I was rather partial to Miss Hodge,
and her great gold-coloured ringlets; but Mary came and soon put _her_
nose out of joint, as the saying is.

"And you are of what politics?"

"Why, sir, we are Liberals."  I was rather ashamed of this, for Mr.
Brough was an out-and-out Tory; but Hodge and Smithers is a most
respectable firm.  I brought up a packet from them to Hickson, Dixon,
Paxton, and Jackson, _our_ solicitors, who are their London
correspondents.

Mr. Brough only said, "Oh, indeed!" and did not talk any further on the
subject, but began admiring my diamond-pin very much.

"Titmarsh, my dear boy," says he, "I have a young lady at Fulham who is
worth seeing, I assure you, and who has heard so much about you from her
father (for I like you, my boy, I don't care to own it), that she is
rather anxious to see you too.  Suppose you come down to us for a week?
Abednego will do your work."

"Law, sir! you are very kind," says I.

"Well, you shall come down; and I hope you will like my claret.  But hark
ye!  I don't think, my dear fellow, you are quite smart enough--quite
well enough dressed.  Do you understand me?"

"I've my blue coat and brass buttons at home, sir."

"What! that thing with the waist between your shoulders that you wore at
Mrs. Brough's party?"  (It _was_ rather high-waisted, being made in the
country two years before.)  "No--no, that will never do.  Get some new
clothes, sir,--two new suits of clothes."

"Sir!" says I, "I'm already, if the truth must be told, very short of
money for this quarter, and can't afford myself a new suit for a long
time to come."

"Pooh, pooh! don't let that annoy you.  Here's a ten-pound note--but no,
on second thoughts, you may as well go to my tailor's.  I'll drive you
down there: and never mind the bill, my good lad!"  And drive me down he
actually did, in his grand coach-and-four, to Mr. Von Stiltz, in Clifford
Street, who took my measure, and sent me home two of the finest coats
ever seen, a dress-coat and a frock, a velvet waist-coat, a silk ditto,
and three pairs of pantaloons, of the most beautiful make.  Brough told
me to get some boots and pumps, and silk stockings for evenings; so that
when the time came for me to go down to Fulham, I appeared as handsome as
any young nobleman, and Gus said that "I looked, by Jingo, like a regular
tip-top swell."

In the meantime the following letter had been sent down to Hodge and
Smithers:--

   "RAM ALLEY, CORNHILL, LONDON: _July_ 1822.

   "DEAR SIRS,

   * * * * *

   [This part being on private affairs relative to the cases of Dixon v.
   Haggerstony, Snodgrass v. Rubbidge and another, I am not permitted to
   extract.]

   * * * * *

   "Likewise we beg to hand you a few more prospectuses of the
   Independent West Diddlesex Fire and Life Insurance Company, of which
   we have the honour to be the solicitors in London.  We wrote to you
   last year, requesting you to accept the Slopperton and Somerset agency
   for the same, and have been expecting for some time back that either
   shares or assurances should be effected by you.

   "The capital of the Company, as you know, is five millions sterling
   (say 5,000,000_l_.), and we are in a situation to offer more than the
   usual commission to our agents of the legal profession.  We shall be
   happy to give a premium of 6 per cent. for shares to the amount of
   1,000_l_., 6.5 per cent. above a thousand, to be paid immediately upon
   the taking of the shares.

   "I am, dear Sirs, for self and partners,
   Yours most faithfully,
   SAMUEL JACKSON."

This letter, as I have said, came into my hands some time afterwards.  I
knew nothing of it in the year 1822, when, in my new suit of clothes, I
went down to pass a week at the Rookery, Fulham, residence of John
Brough, Esquire, M.P.




CHAPTER VII


HOW SAMUEL TITMARSH REACHED THE HIGHEST POINT OF PROSPERITY

If I had the pen of a George Robins, I might describe the Rookery
properly: suffice it, however, to say it is a very handsome country
place; with handsome lawns sloping down to the river, handsome
shrubberies and conservatories, fine stables, outhouses, kitchen-gardens,
and everything belonging to a first-rate _rus in urbe_, as the great
auctioneer called it when he hammered it down some years after.

I arrived on a Saturday at half-an-hour before dinner: a grave gentleman
out of livery showed me to my room; a man in a chocolate coat and gold
lace, with Brough's crest on the buttons, brought me a silver shaving-pot
of hot water on a silver tray; and a grand dinner was ready at six, at
which I had the honour of appearing in Von Stiltz's dress-coat and my new
silk stockings and pumps.

Brough took me by the hand as I came in, and presented me to his lady, a
stout fair-haired woman, in light blue satin; then to his daughter, a
tall, thin, dark-eyed girl, with beetle-brows, looking very ill-natured,
and about eighteen.

"Belinda my love," said her papa, "this young gentleman is one of my
clerks, who was at our ball."

"Oh, indeed!" says Belinda, tossing up her head.

"But not a common clerk, Miss Belinda,--so, if you please, we will have
none of your aristocratic airs with him.  He is a nephew of the Countess
of Drum; and I hope he will soon be very high in our establishment, and
in the city of London."

At the name of Countess (I had a dozen times rectified the error about
our relationship), Miss Belinda made a low curtsey, and stared at me very
hard, and said she would try and make the Rookery pleasant to any friend
of Papa's.  "We have not much _monde_ to-day," continued Miss Brough,
"and are only in _petit comite_; but I hope before you leave us you will
see some _societe_ that will make your _sejour_ agreeable."

I saw at once that she was a fashionable girl, from her using the French
language in this way.

"Isn't she a fine girl?" said Brough, whispering to me, and evidently as
proud of her as a man could be.  "Isn't she a fine girl--eh, you dog?  Do
you see breeding like that in Somersetshire?"

"No, sir, upon my word!" answered I, rather slily; for I was thinking all
the while how "Somebody" was a thousand times more beautiful, simple, and
ladylike.

"And what has my dearest love been doing all day?" said her papa.

"Oh, Pa!  I have _pinced_ the harp a little to Captain Fizgig's flute.
Didn't I, Captain Fizgig?"

Captain the Honourable Francis Fizgig said, "Yes, Brough, your fair
daughter _pinced_ the harp, and _touched_ the piano, and _egratigned_ the
guitar, and _ecorched_ a song or two; and we had the pleasure of a
_promenade a l'eau_,--of a walk upon the water."

"Law, Captain!" cries Mrs. Brough, "walk on the water?"

"Hush, Mamma, you don't understand French!" says Miss Belinda, with a
sneer.

"It's a sad disadvantage, madam," says Fizgig, gravely; "and I recommend
you and Brough here, who are coming out in the great world, to have some
lessons; or at least get up a couple of dozen phrases, and introduce them
into your conversation here and there.  I suppose, sir, you speak it
commonly at the office, Mr. What you call it?"  And Mr. Fizgig put his
glass into his eye and looked at me.

"We speak English, sir," says I, "knowing it better than French."

"Everybody has not had your opportunities," Miss Brough, continued the
gentleman.  "Everybody has not _voyage_ like _nous autres_, hey?  _Mais
que voulez-vous_, my good sir? you must stick to your cursed ledgers and
things.  What's the French for ledger, Miss Belinda?"

"How can you ask?  _Je n'en scais rien_, I'm sure."

"You should learn, Miss Brough," said her father.  "The daughter of a
British merchant need not be ashamed of the means by which her father
gets his bread.  _I'm_ not ashamed--I'm not proud.  Those who know John
Brough, know that ten years ago he was a poor clerk like my friend
Titmarsh here, and is now worth half-a-million.  Is there any man in the
House better listened to than John Brough?  Is there any duke in the land
that can give a better dinner than John Brough; or a larger fortune to
his daughter than John Brough?  Why, sir, the humble person now speaking
to you could buy out many a German duke!  But I'm not proud--no, no, not
proud.  There's my daughter--look at her--when I die, she will be
mistress of my fortune; but am I proud?  No!  Let him who can win her,
marry her, that's what I say.  Be it you, Mr. Fizgig, son of a peer of
the realm; or you, Bill Tidd.  Be it a duke or a shoeblack, what do I
care, hey?--what do I care?"

"O-o-oh!" sighed the gent who went by the name of Bill Tidd: a very pale
young man, with a black riband round his neck instead of a handkerchief,
and his collars turned down like Lord Byron.  He was leaning against the
mantelpiece, and with a pair of great green eyes ogling Miss Brough with
all his might.

"Oh, John--my dear John!" cried Mrs. Brough, seizing her husband's hand
and kissing it, "you are an angel, that you are!"

"Isabella, don't flatter me; I'm a _man_,--a plain downright citizen of
London, without a particle of pride, except in you and my daughter
here--my two Bells, as I call them!  This is the way that we live,
Titmarsh my boy: ours is a happy, humble, Christian home, and that's all.
Isabella, leave go my hand!"

"Mamma, you mustn't do so before company; it's odious!" shrieked Miss B.;
and Mamma quietly let the hand fall, and heaved from her ample bosom a
great large sigh.  I felt a liking for that simple woman, and a respect
for Brough too.  He couldn't be a bad man, whose wife loved him so.

Dinner was soon announced, and I had the honour of leading in Miss B.,
who looked back rather angrily, I thought, at Captain Fizgig, because
that gentleman had offered his arm to Mrs. Brough.  He sat on the right
of Mrs. Brough, and Miss flounced down on the seat next to him, leaving
me and Mr. Tidd to take our places at the opposite side of the table.

At dinner there was turbot and soup first, and boiled turkey afterwards
of course.  How is it that at all the great dinners they have this
perpetual boiled turkey?  It was real turtle-soup: the first time I had
ever tasted it; and I remarked how Mrs. B., who insisted on helping it,
gave all the green lumps of fat to her husband, and put several slices of
the breast of the bird under the body, until it came to his turn to be
helped.

"I'm a plain man," says John, "and eat a plain dinner.  I hate your
kickshaws, though I keep a French cook for those who are not of my way of
thinking.  I'm no egotist, look you; I've no prejudices; and Miss there
has her bechamels and fallals according to her taste.  Captain, try the
_volly-vong_."

We had plenty of champagne and old madeira with dinner, and great silver
tankards of porter, which those might take who chose.  Brough made
especially a boast of drinking beer; and, when the ladies retired, said,
"Gentlemen, Tiggins will give you an unlimited supply of wine: there's no
stinting here;" and then laid himself down in his easy-chair and fell
asleep.

"He always does so," whispered Mr. Tidd to me.

"Get some of that yellow-sealed wine, Tiggins," says the Captain.  "That
other claret we had yesterday is loaded, and disagrees with me
infernally!"

I must say I liked the yellow seal much better than Aunt Hoggarty's
Rosolio.

I soon found out what Mr. Tidd was, and what he was longing for.

"Isn't she a glorious creature?" says he to me.

"Who, sir?" says I.

"Miss Belinda, to be sure!" cried Tidd.  "Did mortal ever look upon eyes
like hers, or view a more sylph-like figure?"

"She might have a little more flesh, Mr. Tidd," says the Captain, "and a
little less eyebrow.  They look vicious, those scowling eyebrows, in a
girl.  _Qu'en dites-vous_, Mr. Titmarsh, as Miss Brough would say?"

"I think it remarkably good claret, sir," says I.

"Egad, you're the right sort of fellow!" says the Captain.  "_Volto
sciolto_, eh?  You respect our sleeping host yonder?"

"That I do, sir, as the first man in the city of London, and my managing
director."

"And so do I," says Tidd; "and this day fortnight, when I'm of age, I'll
prove my confidence too."

"As how?" says I.

"Why, sir, you must know that I come into--ahem--a considerable property,
sir, on the 14th of July, which my father made--in business."

"Say at once he was a tailor, Tidd."

"He _was_ a tailor, sir,--but what of that?  I've had a University
education, and have the feelings of a gentleman; as much--ay, perhaps,
and more, than some members of an effete aristocracy."

"Tidd, don't be severe!" says the Captain, drinking a tenth glass.

"Well, Mr. Titmarsh, when of age I come into a considerable property; and
Mr. Brough has been so good as to say he can get me twelve hundred a year
for my twenty thousand pounds, and I have promised to invest them."

"In the West Diddlesex, sir?" says I--"in our office?"

"No, in another company, of which Mr. Brough is director, and quite as
good a thing.  Mr. Brough is a very old friend of my family, sir, and he
has taken a great liking to me; and he says that with my talents I ought
to get into Parliament; and then--and then! after I have laid out my
patrimony, I may look to _matrimony_, you see!"

"Oh, you designing dog!" said the Captain.  "When I used to lick you at
school, who ever would have thought that I was thrashing a sucking
statesman?"

"Talk away, boys!" said Brough, waking out of his sleep; "I only sleep
with half an eye, and hear you all.  Yes, you shall get into Parliament,
Tidd my man, or my name's not Brough!  You shall have six per cent. for
your money, or never believe me!  But as for my daughter--ask _her_, and
not me. You, or the Captain, or Titmarsh, may have her, if you can get
her.  All I ask in a son-in-law is, that he should be, as every one of
you is, an honourable and high-minded man!"

Tidd at this looked very knowing; and as our host sank off to sleep
again, pointed archly at his eyebrows, and wagged his head at the
Captain.

"Bah!" says the Captain.  "I say what I think; and you may tell Miss
Brough if you like."  And so presently this conversation ended, and we
were summoned in to coffee.  After which the Captain sang songs with Miss
Brough; Tidd looked at her and said nothing; I looked at prints, and Mrs.
Brough sat knitting stockings for the poor.  The Captain was sneering
openly at Miss Brough and her affected ways and talk; but in spite of his
bullying contemptuous way I thought she seemed to have a great regard for
him, and to bear his scorn very meekly.

At twelve Captain Fizgig went off to his barracks at Knightsbridge, and
Tidd and I to our rooms.  Next day being Sunday, a great bell woke us at
eight, and at nine we all assembled in the breakfast-room, where Mr.
Brough read prayers, a chapter, and made an exhortation afterwards, to us
and all the members of the household; except the French cook, Monsieur
Nontong-paw, whom I could see, from my chair, walking about in the
shrubberies in his white night-cap, smoking a cigar.

Every morning on week-days, punctually at eight, Mr. Brough went through
the same ceremony, and had his family to prayers; but though this man was
a hypocrite, as I found afterwards, I'm not going to laugh at the family
prayers, or say he was a hypocrite _because_ he had them.  There are many
bad and good men who don't go through the ceremony at all; but I am sure
the good men would be the better for it, and am not called upon to settle
the question with respect to the bad ones; and therefore I have passed
over a great deal of the religious part of Mr. Brough's behaviour:
suffice it, that religion was always on his lips; that he went to church
thrice every Sunday, when he had not a party; and if he did not talk
religion with us when we were alone, had a great deal to say upon the
subject upon occasions, as I found one day when we had a Quaker and
Dissenter party to dine, and when his talk was as grave as that of any
minister present.  Tidd was not there that day,--for nothing could make
him forsake his Byron riband or refrain from wearing his collars turned
down; so Tidd was sent with the buggy to Astley's.  "And hark ye,
Titmarsh my boy," said he, "leave your diamond pin upstairs: our friends
to-day don't like such gewgaws; and though for my part I am no enemy to
harmless ornaments, yet I would not shock the feelings of those who have
sterner opinions.  You will see that my wife and Miss Brough consult my
wishes in this respect."  And so they did,--for they both came down to
dinner in black gowns and tippets; whereas Miss B. had commonly her dress
half off her shoulders.

The Captain rode over several times to see us; and Miss Brough seemed
always delighted to see _him_.  One day I met him as I was walking out
alone by the river, and we had a long talk together.

"Mr. Titmarsh," says he, "from what little I have seen of you, you seem
to be an honest straight-minded young fellow; and I want some information
that you can give.  Tell me, in the first place, if you will--and upon my
honour it shall go no farther--about this Insurance Company of yours?  You
are in the City, and see how affairs are going on.  Is your concern a
stable one?"

"Sir," said I, "frankly then, and upon my honour too, I believe it is.  It
has been set up only four years, it is true; but Mr. Brough had a great
name when it was established, and a vast connection.  Every clerk in the
office has, to be sure, in a manner, paid for his place, either by taking
shares himself, or by his relations taking them.  I got mine because my
mother, who is very poor, devoted a small sum of money that came to us to
the purchase of an annuity for herself and a provision for me.  The
matter was debated by the family and our attorneys, Messrs. Hodge and
Smithers, who are very well known in our part of the country; and it was
agreed on all hands that my mother could not do better with her money for
all of us than invest it in this way.  Brough alone is worth half a
million of money, and his name is a host in itself.  Nay, more: I wrote
the other day to an aunt of mine, who has a considerable sum of money in
loose cash, and who had consulted me as to the disposal of it, to invest
it in our office.  Can I give you any better proof of my opinion of its
solvency?"

"Did Brough persuade you in any way?"

"Yes, he certainly spoke to me: but he very honestly told me his motives,
and tells them to us all as honestly.  He says, 'Gentlemen, it is my
object to increase the connection of the office, as much as possible.  I
want to crush all the other offices in London.  Our terms are lower than
any office, and we can bear to have them lower, and a great business will
come to us that way.  But we must work ourselves as well.  Every single
shareholder and officer of the establishment must exert himself, and
bring us customers,--no matter for how little they are engaged--engage
them: that is the great point.'  And accordingly our Director makes all
his friends and servants shareholders: his very lodge-porter yonder is a
shareholder; and he thus endeavours to fasten upon all whom he comes
near.  I, for instance, have just been appointed over the heads of our
gents, to a much better place than I held.  I am asked down here, and
entertained royally: and why?  Because my aunt has three thousand pounds
which Mr. Brough wants her to invest with us."

"That looks awkward, Mr. Titmarsh."

"Not a whit, sir: he makes no disguise of the matter.  When the question
is settled one way or the other, I don't believe Mr. Brough will take any
further notice of me.  But he wants me now.  This place happened to fall
in just at the very moment when he had need of me; and he hopes to gain
over my family through me.  He told me as much as we drove down.  'You
are a man of the world, Titmarsh,' said he; 'you know that I don't give
you this place because you are an honest fellow, and write a good hand.
If I had a lesser bribe to offer you at the moment, I should only have
given you that; but I had no choice, and gave you what was in my power.'"

"That's fair enough; but what can make Brough so eager for such a small
sum as three thousand pounds?"

"If it had been ten, sir, he would have been not a bit more eager.  You
don't know the city of London, and the passion which our great men in the
share-market have for increasing their connection.  Mr. Brough, sir,
would canvass and wheedle a chimney-sweep in the way of business.  See,
here is poor Tidd and his twenty thousand pounds.  Our Director has taken
possession of him just in the same way.  He wants all the capital he can
lay his hands on."

"Yes, and suppose he runs off with the capital?"

"Mr. Brough, of the firm of Brough and Hoff, sir?  Suppose the Bank of
England runs off!  But here we are at the lodge-gate.  Let's ask Gates,
another of Mr. Brough's victims."  And we went in and spoke to old Gates.

"Well, Mr. Gates," says I, beginning the matter cleverly, "you are one of
my masters, you know, at the West Diddlesex yonder?"

"Yees, sure," says old Gates, grinning.  He was a retired servant, with a
large family come to him in his old age.

"May I ask you what your wages are, Mr. Gates, that you can lay by so
much money, and purchase shares in our Company?"

Gates told us his wages; and when we inquired whether they were paid
regularly, swore that his master was the kindest gentleman in the world:
that he had put two of his daughters into service, two of his sons to
charity schools, made one apprentice, and narrated a hundred other
benefits that he had received from the family.  Mrs. Brough clothed half
the children; master gave them blankets and coats in winter, and soup and
meat all the year round.  There never was such a generous family, sure,
since the world began.

"Well, sir," said I to the Captain, "does that satisfy you?  Mr. Brough
gives to these people fifty times as much as he gains from them; and yet
he makes Mr. Gates take shares in our Company."

"Mr. Titmarsh," says the Captain, "you are an honest fellow; and I
confess your argument sounds well.  Now tell me, do you know anything
about Miss Brough and her fortune?"

"Brough will leave her everything--or says so."  But I suppose the
Captain saw some particular expression in my countenance, for he laughed
and said--

"I suppose, my dear fellow, you think she's dear at the price.  Well, I
don't know that you are far wrong."

"Why, then, if I may make so bold, Captain Fizgig, are you always at her
heels?"

"Mr. Titmarsh," says the Captain, "I owe twenty thousand pounds;" and he
went back to the house directly, and proposed for her.

I thought this rather cruel and unprincipled conduct on the gentleman's
part; for he had been introduced to the family by Mr. Tidd, with whom he
had been at school, and had supplanted Tidd entirely in the great
heiress's affections.  Brough stormed, and actually swore at his daughter
(as the Captain told me afterwards) when he heard that the latter had
accepted Mr. Fizgig; and at last, seeing the Captain, made him give his
word that the engagement should be kept secret for a few months.  And
Captain F. only made a confidant of me, and the mess, as he said: but
this was after Tidd had paid his twenty thousand pounds over to our
governor, which he did punctually when he came of age.  The same day,
too, he proposed for the young lady, and I need not say was rejected.
Presently the Captain's engagement began to be whispered about: all his
great relations, the Duke of Doncaster, the Earl of Cinqbars, the Earl of
Crabs, &c. came and visited the Brough family; the Hon. Henry Ringwood
became a shareholder in our Company, and the Earl of Crabs offered to be.
Our shares rose to a premium; our Director, his lady, and daughter were
presented at Court; and the great West Diddlesex Association bid fair to
be the first Assurance Office in the kingdom.

A very short time after my visit to Fulham, my dear aunt wrote to me to
say that she had consulted with her attorneys, Messrs. Hodge and
Smithers, who strongly recommended that she should invest the sum as I
advised.  She had the sum invested, too, in my name, paying me many
compliments upon my honesty and talent; of which, she said, Mr. Brough
had given her the most flattering account.  And at the same time my aunt
informed me that at her death the shares should be my own.  This gave me
a great weight in the Company, as you may imagine.  At our next annual
meeting, I attended in my capacity as a shareholder, and had great
pleasure in hearing Mr. Brough, in a magnificent speech, declare a
dividend of six per cent., that we all received over the counter.

"You lucky young scoundrel!" said Brough to me; "do you know what made me
give you your place?"

"Why, my aunt's money, to be sure, sir," said I.

"No such thing.  Do you fancy I cared for those paltry three thousand
pounds?  I was told you were nephew of Lady Drum; and Lady Drum is
grandmother of Lady Jane Preston; and Mr. Preston is a man who can do us
a world of good.  I knew that they had sent you venison, and the deuce
knows what; and when I saw Lady Jane at my party shake you by the hand,
and speak to you so kindly, I took all Abednego's tales for gospel.
_That_ was the reason you got the place, mark you, and not on account of
your miserable three thousand pounds.  Well, sir, a fortnight after you
were with us at Fulham, I met Preston in the House, and made a merit of
having given the place to his cousin.  'Confound the insolent scoundrel!'
said he; '_he_ my cousin!  I suppose you take all old Drum's stories for
true?  Why, man, it's her mania: she never is introduced to a man but she
finds out a cousinship, and would not fail of course with that cur of a
Titmarsh!'  'Well,' said I, laughing, 'that cur has got a good place in
consequence, and the matter can't be mended.'  So you see," continued our
Director, "that you were indebted for your place, not to your aunt's
money, but--"

"But to MY AUNT'S DIAMOND PIN!"

"Lucky rascal!" said Brough, poking me in the side and going out of the
way.  And lucky, in faith, I thought I was.




CHAPTER VIII


RELATES THE HAPPIEST DAY OF SAMUEL TITMARSH'S LIFE

I don't know how it was that in the course of the next six months Mr.
Roundhand, the actuary, who had been such a profound admirer of Mr.
Brough and the West Diddlesex Association, suddenly quarrelled with both,
and taking his money out of the concern, he disposed of his 5,000_l_.
worth of shares to a pretty good profit, and went away, speaking
everything that was evil both of the Company and the Director.

Mr. Highmore now became secretary and actuary, Mr. Abednego was first
clerk, and your humble servant was second in the office at a salary of
250_l_. a year.  How unfounded were Mr. Roundhand's aspersions of the
West Diddlesex appeared quite clearly at our meeting in January, 1823,
when our Chief Director, in one of the most brilliant speeches ever
heard, declared that the half-yearly dividend was 4_l_. per cent., at the
rate of 8_l_. per cent. per annum; and I sent to my aunt 120_l_. sterling
as the amount of the interest of the stock in my name.

My excellent aunt, Mrs. Hoggarty, delighted beyond measure, sent me back
10_l_. for my own pocket, and asked me if she had not better sell
Slopperton and Squashtail, and invest all her money in this admirable
concern.

On this point I could not surely do better than ask the opinion of Mr.
Brough.  Mr. B. told me that shares could not be had but at a premium;
but on my representing that I knew of 5,000_l_. worth in the market at
par, he said--"Well, if so, he would like a fair price for his, and would
not mind disposing of 5,000_l_. worth, as he had rather a glut of West
Diddlesex shares, and his other concerns wanted feeding with ready
money."  At the end of our conversation, of which I promised to report
the purport to Mrs. Hoggarty, the Director was so kind as to say that he
had determined on creating a place of private secretary to the Managing
Director, and that I should hold that office with an additional salary of
150_l_.

I had 250_l_. a year, Miss Smith had 70_l_. per annum to her fortune.
What had I said should be my line of conduct whenever I could realise
300_l_. a year?

Gus of course, and all the gents in our office through him, knew of my
engagement with Mary Smith.  Her father had been a commander in the navy
and a very distinguished officer; and though Mary, as I have said, only
brought me a fortune of 70_l_. a year, and I, as everybody said, in my
present position in the office and the City of London, might have
reasonably looked out for a lady with much more money, yet my friends
agreed that the connection was very respectable, and I was content: as
who would not have been with such a darling as Mary?  I am sure, for my
part, I would not have taken the Lord Mayor's own daughter in place of
Mary, even with a plum to her fortune.

Mr. Brough of course was made aware of my approaching marriage, as of
everything else relating to every clerk in the office; and I do believe
Abednego told him what we had for dinner every day.  Indeed, his
knowledge of our affairs was wonderful.

He asked me how Mary's money was invested.  It was in the three per cent.
consols--2,333_l_. 6_s_. 8_d_.

"Remember," says he, "my lad, Mrs. Sam Titmarsh that is to be may have
seven per cent. for her money at the very least, and on better security
than the Bank of England; for is not a Company of which John Brough is
the head better than any other company in England?" and to be sure I
thought he was not far wrong, and promised to speak to Mary's guardians
on the subject before our marriage.  Lieutenant Smith, her grandfather,
had been at the first very much averse to our union.  (I must confess
that, one day finding me alone with her, and kissing, I believe, the tips
of her little fingers, he had taken me by the collar and turned me out of
doors.)  But Sam Titmarsh, with a salary of 250_l_. a year, a promised
fortune of 150_l_. more, and the right-hand man of Mr. John Brough of
London, was a very different man from Sam the poor clerk, and the poor
clergyman's widow's son; and the old gentleman wrote me a kind letter
enough, and begged me to get him six pairs of lamb's-wool stockings and
four ditto waistcoats from Romanis', and accepted them too as a present
from me when I went down in June--in happy June of 1823--to fetch my dear
Mary away.

Mr. Brough was likewise kindly anxious about my aunt's Slopperton and
Squashtail property, which she had not as yet sold, as she talked of
doing; and, as Mr. B. represented, it was a sin and a shame that any
person in whom he took such interest, as he did in all the relatives of
his dear young friend, should only have three per cent. for her money,
when she could have eight elsewhere.  He always called me Sam now,
praised me to the other young men (who brought the praises regularly to
me), said there was a cover always laid for me at Fulham, and repeatedly
took me thither.  There was but little company when I went; and M'Whirter
used to say he only asked me on days when he had his vulgar
acquaintances.  But I did not care for the great people, not being born
in their sphere; and indeed did not much care for going to the house at
all.  Miss Belinda was not at all to my liking.  After her engagement
with Captain Fizgig, and after Mr. Tidd had paid his 20,000_l_. and
Fizgig's great relations had joined in some of our Director's companies,
Mr. Brough declared he believed that Captain Fizgig's views were
mercenary, and put him to the proof at once, by saying that he must take
Miss Brough without a farthing, or not have her at all.  Whereupon
Captain Fizgig got an appointment in the colonies, and Miss Brough became
more ill-humoured than ever.  But I could not help thinking she was rid
of a bad bargain, and pitying poor Tidd, who came back to the charge
again more love-sick than ever, and was rebuffed pitilessly by Miss
Belinda.  Her father plainly told Tidd, too, that his visits were
disagreeable to Belinda, and though he must always love and value him, he
begged him to discontinue his calls at the Rookery.  Poor fellow! he had
paid his 20,000_l_. away for nothing! for what was six per cent. to him
compared to six per cent. and the hand of Miss Belinda Brough?

Well, Mr. Brough pitied the poor love-sick swain, as he called me, so
much, and felt such a warm sympathy in my well-being, that he insisted on
my going down to Somersetshire with a couple of months' leave; and away I
went, as happy as a lark, with a couple of brand-new suits from Von
Stiltz's in my trunk (I had them made, looking forward to a certain
event), and inside the trunk Lieutenant Smith's fleecy hosiery; wrapping
up a parcel of our prospectuses and two letters from John Brough, Esq.,
to my mother our worthy annuitant, and to Mrs. Hoggarty our excellent
shareholder.  Mr. Brough said I was all that the fondest father could
wish, that he considered me as his own boy, and that he earnestly begged
Mrs. Hoggarty not to delay the sale of her little landed property, as
land was high now and _must fall_; whereas the West Diddlesex Association
shares were (comparatively) low, and must inevitably, in the course of a
year or two, double, treble, quadruple their present value.

In this way I was prepared, and in this way I took leave of my dear Gus.
As we parted in the yard of the "Bolt-in-Tun," Fleet Street, I felt that
I never should go back to Salisbury Square again, and had made my little
present to the landlady's family accordingly.  She said I was the
respectablest gentleman she had ever had in her house: nor was that
saying much, for Bell Lane is in the Rules of the Fleet, and her lodgers
used commonly to be prisoners on Rule from that place.  As for Gus, the
poor fellow cried and blubbered so that he could not eat a morsel of the
muffins and grilled ham with which I treated him for breakfast in the
"Bolt-in-Tun" coffee-house; and when I went away was waving his hat and
his handkerchief so in the archway of the coach-office that I do believe
the wheels of the "True Blue" went over his toes, for I heard him roaring
as we passed through the arch.  Ah! how different were my feelings as I
sat proudly there on the box by the side of Jim Ward, the coachman, to
those I had the last time I mounted that coach, parting from my dear Mary
and coming to London with my DIAMOND PIN!

When arrived near home (at Grumpley, three miles from our village, where
the "True Blue" generally stops to take a glass of ale at the Poppleton
Arms) it was as if our Member, Mr. Poppleton himself, was come into the
country, so great was the concourse of people assembled round the inn.
And there was the landlord of the inn and all the people of the village.
Then there was Tom Wheeler, the post-boy, from Mrs. Rincer's
posting-hotel in our town; he was riding on the old bay posters, and
they, Heaven bless us! were drawing my aunt's yellow chariot, in which
she never went out but thrice in a year, and in which she now sat in her
splendid cashmere shawl and a new hat and feather.  She waved a white
handkerchief out of the window, and Tom Wheeler shouted out "Huzza!" as
did a number of the little blackguard boys of Grumpley: who, to be sure,
would huzza for anything.  What a change on Tom Wheeler's part, however!
I remembered only a few years before how he had whipped me from the box
of the chaise, as I was hanging on for a ride behind.

Next to my aunt's carriage came the four-wheeled chaise of Lieutenant
Smith, R.N., who was driving his old fat pony with his lady by his side.
I looked in the back seat of the chaise, and felt a little sad at seeing
that _Somebody_ was not there.  But, O silly fellow! there was Somebody
in the yellow chariot with my aunt, blushing like a peony, I declare, and
looking so happy!--oh, so happy and pretty!  She had a white dress, and a
light blue and yellow scarf, which my aunt said were the Hoggarty
colours; though what the Hoggartys had to do with light blue and yellow,
I don't know to this day.

Well, the "True Blue" guard made a great bellowing on his horn as his
four horses dashed away; the boys shouted again; I was placed bodkin
between Mrs. Hoggarty and Mary; Tom Wheeler cut into his bays; the
Lieutenant (who had shaken me cordially by the hand, and whose big dog
did not make the slightest attempt at biting me this time) beat his pony
till its fat sides lathered again; and thus in this, I may say,
unexampled procession, I arrived in triumph at our village.

My dear mother and the girls,--Heaven bless them!--nine of them in their
nankeen spencers (I had something pretty in my trunk for each of
them)--could not afford a carriage, but had posted themselves on the road
near the village; and there was such a waving of hands and handkerchiefs:
and though my aunt did not much notice them, except by a majestic toss of
the head, which is pardonable in a woman of her property, yet Mary Smith
did even more than I, and waved her hands as much as the whole nine.  Ah!
how my dear mother cried and blessed me when we met, and called me her
soul's comfort and her darling boy, and looked at me as if I were a
paragon of virtue and genius: whereas I was only a very lucky young
fellow, that by the aid of kind friends had stepped rapidly into a very
pretty property.

I was not to stay with my mother,--that had been arranged beforehand; for
though she and Mrs. Hoggarty were not remarkably good friends, yet Mother
said it was for my benefit that I should stay with my aunt, and so give
up the pleasure of having me with her: and though hers was much the
humbler house of the two, I need not say I preferred it far to Mrs.
Hoggarty's more splendid one; let alone the horrible Rosolio, of which I
was obliged now to drink gallons.

It was to Mrs. H.'s then we were driven: she had prepared a great dinner
that evening, and hired an extra waiter, and on getting out of the
carriage, she gave a sixpence to Tom Wheeler, saying that was for
himself, and that she would settle with Mrs. Rincer for the horses
afterwards.  At which Tom flung the sixpence upon the ground, swore most
violently, and was very justly called by my aunt an "impertinent fellow."

She had taken such a liking to me that she would hardly bear me out of
her sight.  We used to sit for morning after morning over her accounts,
debating for hours together the propriety of selling the Slopperton
property; but no arrangement was come to yet about it, for Hodge and
Smithers could not get the price she wanted.  And, moreover, she vowed
that at her decease she would leave every shilling to me.

Hodge and Smithers, too, gave a grand party, and treated me with marked
consideration; as did every single person of the village.  Those who
could not afford to give dinners gave teas, and all drank the health of
the young couple; and many a time after dinner or supper was my Mary made
to blush by the allusions to the change in her condition.

The happy day for that ceremony was now fixed, and the 24th July, 1823,
saw me the happiest husband of the prettiest girl in Somersetshire.  We
were married from my mother's house, who would insist upon that at any
rate, and the nine girls acted as bridesmaids; ay! and Gus Hoskins came
from town express to be my groomsman, and had my old room at my mother's,
and stayed with her for a week, and cast a sheep's-eye upon Miss Winny
Titmarsh too, my dear fourth sister, as I afterwards learned.

My aunt was very kind upon the marriage ceremony, indeed.  She had
desired me some weeks previous to order three magnificent dresses for
Mary from the celebrated Madame Mantalini of London, and some elegant
trinkets and embroidered pocket-handkerchiefs from Howell and James's.
These were sent down to me, and were to be _my_ present to the bride; but
Mrs. Hoggarty gave me to understand that I need never trouble myself
about the payment of the bill, and I thought her conduct very generous.
Also she lent us her chariot for the wedding journey, and made with her
own hands a beautiful crimson satin reticule for Mrs. Samuel Titmarsh,
her dear niece.  It contained a huswife completely furnished with
needles, &c., for she hoped Mrs. Titmarsh would never neglect her needle;
and a purse containing some silver pennies, and a very curious pocket-
piece.  "As long as you keep these, my dear," said Mrs. Hoggarty, "you
will never want; and fervently--fervently do I pray that you will keep
them."  In the carriage-pocket we found a paper of biscuits and a bottle
of Rosolio.  We laughed at this, and made it over to Tom Wheeler--who,
however, did not seem to like it much better than we.

I need not say I was married in Mr. Von Stiltz's coat (the third and
fourth coats, Heaven help us! in a year), and that I wore sparkling in my
bosom the GREAT HOGGARTY DIAMOND.




CHAPTER IX


BRINGS BACK SAM, HIS WIFE, AUNT, AND DIAMOND, TO LONDON

We pleased ourselves during the honeymoon with forming plans for our life
in London, and a pretty paradise did we build for ourselves!  Well, we
were but forty years old between us; and, for my part, I never found any
harm come of castle-building, but a great deal of pleasure.

Before I left London I had, to say the truth, looked round me for a
proper place, befitting persons of our small income; and Gus Hoskins and
I, who hunted after office-hours in couples, bad fixed on a very snug
little cottage in Camden Town, where there was a garden that certain
_small people_ might play in when they came: a horse and gig-house, if
ever we kept one,--and why not, in a few years?--and a fine healthy air,
at a reasonable distance from 'Change; all for 30_l_. a year.  I had
described this little spot to Mary as enthusiastically as Sancho
describes Lizias to Don Quixote; and my dear wife was delighted with the
prospect of housekeeping there, vowed she would cook all the best dishes
herself (especially jam-pudding, of which I confess I am very fond), and
promised Gus that he should dine with us at Clematis Bower every Sunday:
only he must not smoke those horrid cigars.  As for Gus, he vowed he
would have a room in the neighbourhood too, for he could not bear to go
back to Bell Lane, where we two had been so happy together; and so good-
natured Mary said she would ask my sister Winny to come and keep her
company.  At which Hoskins blushed, and said, "Pooh! nonsense now."

But all our hopes of a happy snug Clematis Lodge were dashed to the
ground on our return from our little honeymoon excursion; when Mrs.
Hoggarty informed us that she was sick of the country, and was determined
to go to London with her dear nephew and niece, and keep house for them,
and introduce them to her friends in the metropolis.

What could we do?  We wished her at--Bath: certainly not in London.  But
there was no help for it; and we were obliged to bring her: for, as my
mother said, if we offended her, her fortune would go out of our family;
and were we two young people not likely to want it?

So we came to town rather dismally in the carriage, posting the whole
way; for the carriage must be brought, and a person of my aunt's rank in
life could not travel by the stage.  And I had to pay 14_l_. for the
posters, which pretty nearly exhausted all my little hoard of cash.

First we went into lodgings,--into three sets in three weeks.  We
quarrelled with the first landlady, because my aunt vowed that she cut a
slice off the leg of mutton which was served for our dinner; from the
second lodgings we went because aunt vowed the maid would steal the
candles; from the third we went because Aunt Hoggarty came down to
breakfast the morning after our arrival with her face shockingly swelled
and bitten by--never mind what.  To cut a long tale short, I was half mad
with the continual choppings and changings, and the long stories and
scoldings of my aunt.  As for her great acquaintances, none of them were
in London; and she made it a matter of quarrel with me that I had not
introduced her to John Brough, Esquire, M.P., and to Lord and Lady
Tiptoff, her relatives.

Mr. Brough was at Brighton when we arrived in town; and on his return I
did not care at first to tell our Director that I had brought my aunt
with me, or mention my embarrassments for money.  He looked rather
serious when perforce I spoke of the latter to him and asked for an
advance; but when he heard that my lack of money had been occasioned by
the bringing of my aunt to London, his tone instantly changed.  "That, my
dear boy, alters the question; Mrs. Hoggarty is of an age when all things
must be yielded to her.  Here are a hundred pounds; and I beg you to draw
upon me whenever you are in the least in want of money."  This gave me
breathing-time until she should pay her share of the household expenses.
And the very next day Mr. and Mrs. John Brough, in their splendid
carriage-and-four, called upon Mrs. Hoggarty and my wife at our lodgings
in Lamb's Conduit Street.

It was on the very day when my poor aunt appeared with her face in that
sad condition; and she did not fail to inform Mrs. Brough of the cause,
and to state that at Castle Hoggarty, or at her country place in
Somersetshire, she had never heard or thought of such vile odious things.

"Gracious heavens!" shouted John Brough, Esquire, "a lady of your rank to
suffer in this way!--the excellent relative of my dear boy, Titmarsh!
Never, madam--never let it be said that Mrs. Hoggarty of Castle Hoggarty
should be subject to such horrible humiliation, while John Brough has a
home to offer her,--a humble, happy, Christian home, madam; though
unlike, perhaps, the splendour to which you have been accustomed in the
course of your distinguished career.  Isabella my love!--Belinda! speak
to Mrs. Hoggarty.  Tell her that John Brough's house is hers from garret
to cellar.  I repeat it, madam, from garret to cellar.  I desire--I
insist--I order, that Mrs. Hoggarty of Castle Hoggarty's trunks should be
placed this instant in my carriage!  Have the goodness to look to them
yourself, Mrs. Titmarsh, and see that your dear aunt's comforts are
better provided for than they have been."

Mary went away rather wondering at this order.  But, to be sure, Mr.
Brough was a great man, and her Samuel's benefactor; and though the silly
child absolutely began to cry as she packed and toiled at Aunt's enormous
valises, yet she performed the work, and came down with a smiling face to
my aunt, who was entertaining Mr. and Mrs. Brough with a long and
particular account of the balls at the Castle, in Dublin, in Lord
Charleville's time.

"I have packed the trunks, Aunt, but I am not strong enough to bring them
down," said Mary.

"Certainly not, certainly not," said John Brough, perhaps a little
ashamed.  "Hallo!  George, Frederic, Augustus, come upstairs this
instant, and bring down the trunks of Mrs. Hoggarty of Castle Hoggarty,
which this young lady will show you."

Nay, so great was Mr. Brough's condescension, that when some of his
fashionable servants refused to meddle with the trunks, he himself seized
a pair of them with both bands, carried them to the carriage, and shouted
loud enough for all Lamb's Conduit Street to hear, "John Brough is not
proud--no, no; and if his footmen are too high and mighty, he'll show
them a lesson of humility."

Mrs. Brough was for running downstairs too, and taking the trunks from
her husband; but they were too heavy for her, so she contented herself
with sitting on one, and asking all persons who passed her, whether John
Brough was not an angel of a man?

In this way it was that my aunt left us.  I was not aware of her
departure, for I was at the office at the time; and strolling back at
five with Gus, saw my dear Mary smiling and bobbing from the window, and
beckoning to us both to come up.  This I thought was very strange,
because Mrs. Hoggarty could not abide Hoskins, and indeed had told me
repeatedly that either she or he must quit the house.  Well, we went
upstairs, and there was Mary, who had dried her tears and received us
with the most smiling of faces, and laughed and clapped her hands, and
danced, and shook Gus's hand.  And what do you think the little rogue
proposed?  I am blest if she did not say she would like to go to
Vauxhall!

As dinner was laid for three persons only, Gus took his seat with fear
and trembling; and then Mrs. Sam Titmarsh related the circumstances which
had occurred, and how Mrs. Hoggarty had been whisked away to Fulham in
Mr. Brough's splendid carriage-and-four.  "Let her go," I am sorry to
say, said I; and indeed we relished our veal-cutlets and jam-pudding a
great deal more than Mrs. Hoggarty did her dinner off plate at the
Rookery.

We had a very merry party to Vauxhall, Gus insisting on standing treat;
and you may be certain that my aunt, whose absence was prolonged for
three weeks, was heartily welcome to remain away, for we were much
merrier and more comfortable without her.  My little Mary used to make my
breakfast before I went to office of mornings; and on Sundays we had a
holiday, and saw the dear little children eat their boiled beef and
potatoes at the Foundling, and heard the beautiful music: but, beautiful
as it is, I think the children were a more beautiful sight still, and the
look of their innocent happy faces was better than the best sermon.  On
week-days Mrs. Titmarsh would take a walk about five o'clock in the
evening on the _left_-hand side of Lamb's Conduit Street (as you go to
Holborn)--ay, and sometimes pursue her walk as far as Snow Hill, when two
young gents from the I. W. D. Fire and Life were pretty sure to meet her;
and then how happily we all trudged off to dinner!  Once we came up as a
monster of a man, with high heels and a gold-headed cane, and whiskers
all over his face, was grinning under Mary's bonnet, and chattering to
her, close to Day and Martin's Blacking Manufactory (not near such a
handsome thing then as it is now)--there was the man chattering and
ogling his best, when who should come up but Gus and I?  And in the
twinkling of a pegpost, as Lord Duberley says, my gentleman was seized by
the collar of his coat and found himself sprawling under a stand of
hackney-coaches; where all the watermen were grinning at him.  The best
of it was, he left his _head of hair and whiskers_ in my hand: but Mary
said, "Don't be hard upon him, Samuel; it's only a Frenchman."  And so we
gave him his wig back, which one of the grinning stable-boys put on and
carried to him as he lay in the straw.

He shrieked out something about "arretez," and "Francais," and "champ-
d'honneur;" but we walked on, Gus putting his thumb to his nose and
stretching out his finger at Master Frenchman.  This made everybody
laugh; and so the adventure ended.

About ten days after my aunt's departure came a letter from her, of which
I give a copy:--

   "My Dear Nephew,--It was my earnest whish e'er this to have returned
   to London, where I am sure you and my niece Titmarsh miss me very
   much, and where she, poor thing, quite inexperienced in the ways of
   'the great metropulus,' in aconamy, and indeed in every qualaty
   requasit in a good wife and the mistress of a famaly, can hardly
   manidge, I am sure, without me.

   "Tell her _on no account_ to pay more than 6.5_d_. for the prime
   pieces, 4.75_d_. for soup meat; and that the very best of London
   butter is to be had for 8.5_d_.; of course, for pudns and the kitchin
   you'll employ a commoner sort.  My trunks were sadly packed by Mrs.
   Titmarsh, and the hasp of the portmantyou-lock has gone through my
   yellow satn.  I have darned it, and woar it already twice, at two
   ellygant (though quiat) evening-parties given by my _hospatable_ host;
   and my pegreen velvet on Saturday at a grand dinner, when Lord
   Scaramouch handed me to table.  Everything was in the most _sumptious
   style_.  Soup top and bottom (white and brown), removed by turbit and
   sammon with _immense boles of lobster-sauce_.  Lobsters alone cost
   15_s_.  Turbit, three guineas.  The hole sammon, weighing, I'm sure,
   15 lbs., and _never seen_ at table again; not a bitt of pickled sammon
   the hole weak afterwards.  This kind of extravigance would _just suit_
   Mrs. Sam Titmarsh, who, as I always say, burns _the candle at both
   ends_.  Well, young people, it is lucky for you you have an old aunt
   who knows better, and has a long purse; without witch, I dare say,
   _some_ folks would be glad to see her out of doors.  I don't mean you,
   Samuel, who have, I must say, been a dutiful nephew to me.  Well, I
   dare say I shan't live long, and some folks won't be sorry to have me
   in my grave.

   "Indeed, on Sunday I was taken in my stomick very ill, and thought it
   might have been the lobster-sauce; but Doctor Blogg, who was called
   in, said it was, he very much feared, _cumsumptive_; but gave me some
   pills and a draft wh made me better.  Please call upon him--he lives
   at Pimlico, and you can walk out there after office hours--and present
   him with 1_l_. 1_s_., with my compliments.  I have no money here but a
   10_l_. note, the rest being locked up in my box at Lamb's Cundit
   Street.

   "Although the flesh is not neglected in Mr. B.'s sumptious
   establishment, I can assure you the _sperrit_ is likewise cared for.
   Mr. B. reads and igspounds every morning; and o but his exorcises
   refresh the hungry sole before breakfast!  Everything is in the
   handsomest style,--silver and goold plate at breakfast, lunch, and
   dinner; and his crest and motty, a beehive, with the Latn word
   _Industria_, meaning industry, on _everything_--even on the chany
   juggs and things in my bedd-room.  On Sunday we were favoured by a
   special outpouring from the Rev. Grimes Wapshot, of the Amabaptist
   Congrigation here, and who egshorted for 3 hours in the afternoon in
   Mr. B.'s private chapel.  As the widow of a Hoggarty, I have always
   been a staunch supporter of the established Church of England and
   Ireland; but I must say Mr. Wapshot's stirring way was far superior to
   that of the Rev. Bland Blenkinsop of the Establishment, who lifted up
   his voice after dinner for a short discourse of two hours.

   "Mrs. Brough is, between ourselves, a poor creature, and has no
   sperrit of her own.  As for Miss B., she is so saucy that once I
   promised to box her years; and would have left the house, had not Mr.
   B. taken my part, and Miss made me a suitable apollogy.

   "I don't know when I shall return to town, being made really so
   welcome here.  Dr. Blogg says the air of Fulham is the best in the
   world for my simtums; and as the ladies of the house do not choose to
   walk out with me, the Rev. Grimes Wapshot has often been kind enough
   to lend me his arm, and 'tis sweet with such a guide to wander both to
   Putney and Wandsworth, and igsamin the wonderful works of nature.  I
   have spoke to him about the Slopperton property, and he is not of Mr.
   B.'s opinion that I should sell it; but on this point I shall follow
   my own counsel.

   "Meantime you must gett into more comfortable lodgings, and lett my
   bedd be warmed every night, and of rainy days have a fire in the
   grate: and let Mrs. Titmarsh look up my blue silk dress, and turn it
   against I come; and there is my purple spencer she can have for
   herself; and I hope she does not wear those three splendid gowns you
   gave her, but keep them until _better times_.  I shall soon introduse
   her to my friend Mr. Brough, and others of my acquaintances; and am
   always

   "Your loving AUNT.

   "I have ordered a chest of the Rosolio to be sent from Somersetshire.
   When it comes, please to send half down here (paying the carriage, of
   course).  'Twill be an acceptable present to my kind entertainer, Mr.
   B."

This letter was brought to me by Mr. Brough himself at the office, who
apologised to me for having broken the seal by inadvertence; for the
letter had been mingled with some more of his own, and he opened it
without looking at the superscription.  Of course he had not read it, and
I was glad of that; for I should not have liked him to see my aunt's
opinion of his daughter and lady.

The next day, a gentleman at "Tom's Coffee-house," Cornhill, sent me word
at the office that he wanted particularly to speak to me: and I stopped
thither, and found my old friend Smithers, of the house of Hodge and
Smithers, just off the coach, with his carpet-bag between his legs.

"Sam my boy," said he, "you are your aunt's heir, and I have a piece of
news for you regarding her property which you ought to know.  She wrote
us down a letter for a chest of that home-made wine of hers which she
calls Rosolio, and which lies in our warehouse along with her furniture."

"Well," says I, smiling, "she may part with as much Rosolio as she likes
for me.  I cede all my right."

"Psha!" says Smithers, "it's not that; though her furniture puts us to a
deuced inconvenience, to be sure--it's not that: but, in the postscript
of her letter, she orders us to advertise the Slopperton and Squashtail
estates for immediate sale, as she purposes placing her capital
elsewhere."

I know that the Slopperton and Squashtail property had been the source of
a very pretty income to Messrs.  Hodge and Smithers, for Aunt was always
at law with her tenants, and paid dearly for her litigious spirit; so
that Mr. Smithers's concern regarding the sale of it did not seem to me
to be quite disinterested.

"And did you come to London, Mr. Smithers, expressly to acquaint me with
this fact?  It seems to me you had much better have obeyed my aunt's
instructions at once, or go to her at Fulham, and consult with her on
this subject."

"'Sdeath, Mr. Titmarsh! don't you see that if she makes a sale of her
property, she will hand over the money to Brough; and if Brough gets the
money he--"

"Will give her seven per cent. for it instead of three,--there's no harm
in that."

"But there's such a thing as security, look you.  He is a warm man,
certainly--very warm--quite respectable--most undoubtedly respectable.
But who knows?  A panic may take place; and then these five hundred
companies in which he is engaged may bring him to ruin.  There's the
Ginger Beer Company, of which Brough is a director: awkward reports are
abroad concerning it.  The Consolidated Baffin's Bay Muff and Tippet
Company--the shares are down very low, and Brough is a director there.
The Patent Pump Company--shares at 65, and a fresh call, which nobody
will pay."

"Nonsense, Mr. Smithers!  Has not Mr. Brough five hundred thousand
pounds' worth of shares in the INDEPENDENT WEST DIDDLESEX, and is THAT at
a discount?  Who recommended my aunt to invest her money in that
speculation, I should like to know?"  I had him there.

"Well, well, it is a very good speculation, certainly, and has brought
you three hundred a year, Sam my boy; and you may thank us for the
interest we took in you (indeed, we loved you as a son, and Miss Hodge
has not recovered a certain marriage yet).  You don't intend to rebuke us
for making your fortune, do you?"

"No, hang it, no!" says I, and shook hands with him, and accepted a glass
of sherry and biscuits, which he ordered forthwith.

Smithers returned, however, to the charge.  "Sam," he said, "mark my
words, and take your aunt _away from the Rookery_.  She wrote to Mrs. S.
a long account of a reverend gent with whom she walks out there,--the
Reverend Grimes Wapshot.  That man has an eye upon her.  He was tried at
Lancaster in the year '14 for forgery, and narrowly escaped with his
neck.  Have a care of him--he has an eye to her money."

"Nay," said I, taking out Mrs. Hoggarty's letter: "read for yourself."

He read it over very carefully, seemed to be amused by it; and as he
returned it to me, "Well, Sam," he said, "I have only two favours to ask
of you: one is, not to mention that I am in town to any living soul; and
the other is to give me a dinner in Lamb's Conduit Street with your
pretty wife."

"I promise you both gladly," I said, laughing.  "But if you dine with us,
your arrival in town must be known, for my friend Gus Hoskins dines with
us likewise; and has done so nearly every day since my aunt went."

He laughed too, and said, "We must swear Gus to secrecy over a bottle."
And so we parted till dinner-time.

The indefatigable lawyer pursued his attack after dinner, and was
supported by Gus and by my wife too; who certainly was disinterested in
the matter--more than disinterested, for she would have given a great
deal to be spared my aunt's company.  But she said she saw the force of
Mr. Smithers's arguments, and I admitted their justice with a sigh.
However, I rode my high horse, and vowed that my aunt should do what she
liked with her money; and that I was not the man who would influence her
in any way in the disposal of it.

After tea, the two gents walked away together, and Gus told me that
Smithers had asked him a thousand questions about the office, about
Brough, about me and my wife, and everything concerning us.  "You are a
lucky fellow, Mr. Hoskins, and seem to be the friend of this charming
young couple," said Smithers; and Gus confessed he was, and said he had
dined with us fifteen times in six weeks, and that a better and more
hospitable fellow than I did not exist.  This I state not to trumpet my
own praises,--no, no; but because these questions of Smithers's had a
good deal to do with the subsequent events narrated in this little
history.

Being seated at dinner the next day off the cold leg of mutton that
Smithers had admired so the day before, and Gus as usual having his legs
under our mahogany, a hackney-coach drove up to the door, which we did
not much heed; a step was heard on the floor, which we hoped might be for
the two-pair lodger, when who should burst into the room but Mrs.
Hoggarty herself!  Gus, who was blowing the froth off a pot of porter
preparatory to a delicious drink of the beverage, and had been making us
die of laughing with his stories and jokes, laid down the pewter pot as
Mrs. H. came in, and looked quite sick and pale.  Indeed we all felt a
little uneasy.

My aunt looked haughtily in Mary's face, then fiercely at Gus, and
saying, "It is too true--my poor boy--_already_!" flung herself
hysterically into my arms, and swore, almost choking, that she would
never never leave me.

I could not understand the meaning of this extraordinary agitation on
Mrs. Hoggarty's part, nor could any of us.  She refused Mary's hand when
the poor thing rather nervously offered it; and when Gus timidly said, "I
think, Sam, I'm rather in the way here, and perhaps--had better go," Mrs.
H. looked him full in the face, pointed to the door majestically with her
forefinger, and said, "I think, sir, you _had_ better go."

"I hope Mr. Hoskins will stay as long as he pleases," said my wife, with
spirit.

"_Of course_ you hope so, madam," answered Mrs. Hoggarty, very sarcastic.
But Mary's speech and my aunt's were quite lost upon Gus; for he had
instantly run to his hat, and I heard him tumbling downstairs.

The quarrel ended, as usual, by Mary's bursting into a fit of tears, and
by my aunt's repeating the assertion that it was not too late, she
trusted; and from that day forth she would never never leave me.

"What could have made Aunt return and be so angry?" said I to Mary that
night, as we were in our own room; but my wife protested she did not
know: and it was only some time after that I found out the reason of this
quarrel, and of Mrs. H.'s sudden reappearance.

The horrible fat coarse little Smithers told me the matter as a very good
joke, only the other year, when he showed me the letter of Hickson,
Dixon, Paxton and Jackson, which has before been quoted in my Memoirs.

"Sam my boy," said he, "you were determined to leave Mrs. Hoggarty in
Brough's clutches at the Rookery, and I was determined to have her away.
I resolved to kill two of your mortal enemies with one stone as it were.
It was quite clear to me that the Reverend Grimes Wapshot had an eye to
your aunt's fortune; and that Mr. Brough had similar predatory intentions
regarding her.  Predatory is a mild word, Sam: if I had said robbery at
once, I should express my meaning clearer.

"Well, I took the Fulham stage, and arriving, made straight for the
lodgings of the reverend gentleman.  'Sir,' said I, on finding that
worthy gent,--he was drinking warm brandy-and-water, Sam, at two o'clock
in the day, or at least the room smelt very strongly of that
beverage--'Sir,' says I, 'you were tried for forgery in the year '14, at
Lancaster assizes.'

"'And acquitted, sir.  My innocence was by Providence made clear,' said
Wapshot.

"'But you were not acquitted of embezzlement in '16, sir,' says I, 'and
passed two years in York Gaol in consequence.'  I knew the fellow's
history, for I had a writ out against him when he was a preacher at
Clifton.  I followed up my blow.  'Mr. Wapshot,' said I, 'you are making
love to an excellent lady now at the house of Mr. Brough: if you do not
promise to give up all pursuit of her, I will expose you.'

"'I _have_ promised,' said Wapshot, rather surprised, and looking more
easy.  'I have given my solemn promise to Mr. Brough, who was with me
this very morning, storming, and scolding, and swearing.  Oh, sir, it
would have frightened you to hear a Christian babe like him swear as he
did.'

"'Mr. Brough been here?' says I, rather astonished.

"'Yes; I suppose you are both here on the same scent,' says Wapshot.  'You
want to marry the widow with the Slopperton and Squashtail estate, do
you?  Well, well, have your way.  I've promised not to have anything more
to do with the widow and a Wapshot's honour is sacred.'

"'I suppose, sir,' says I, 'Mr. Brough has threatened to kick you out of
doors, if you call again.'

"'You _have_ been with him, I see,' says the reverend gent, with a shrug:
then I remembered what you had told me of the broken seal of your letter,
and have not the slightest doubt that Brough opened and read every word
of it.

"Well, the first bird was bagged: both I and Brough had had a shot at
him.  Now I had to fire at the whole Rookery; and off I went, primed and
loaded, sir,--primed and loaded.

"It was past eight when I arrived, and I saw, after I passed the lodge-
gates, a figure that I knew, walking in the shrubbery--that of your
respected aunt, sir: but I wished to meet the amiable ladies of the house
before I saw her; because look, friend Titmarsh, I saw by Mrs. Hoggarty's
letter, that she and they were at daggers drawn, and hoped to get her out
of the house at once by means of a quarrel with them."

I laughed, and owned that Mr. Smithers was a very cunning fellow.

"As luck would have it," continued he, "Miss Brough was in the drawing-
room twangling on a guitar, and singing most atrociously out of tune; but
as I entered at the door, I cried 'Hush!' to the footman, as loud as
possible, stood stock-still, and then walked forward on tip-toe lightly.
Miss B. could see in the glass every movement that I made; she pretended
not to see, however, and finished the song with a regular roulade.

"'Gracious Heaven!' said I, 'do, madam, pardon me for interrupting that
delicious harmony,--for coming unaware upon it, for daring uninvited to
listen to it.'

"'Do you come for Mamma, sir?' said Miss Brough, with as much
graciousness as her physiognomy could command.  'I am Miss Brough, sir.'

"'I wish, madam, you would let me not breathe a word regarding my
business until you have sung another charming strain.'

"She did not sing, but looked pleased, and said, 'La! sir, what is your
business?'

"'My business is with a lady, your respected father's guest in this
house.'

"'Oh, Mrs. Hoggarty!' says Miss Brough, flouncing towards the bell, and
ringing it.  'John, send to Mrs. Hoggarty, in the shrubbery; here is a
gentleman who wants to see her.'

"'I know,' continued I, 'Mrs. Hoggarty's peculiarities as well as anyone,
madam; and aware that those and her education are not such as to make her
a fit companion for you.  I know you do not like her: she has written to
us in Somersetshire that you do not like her.'

"'What! she has been abusing us to her friends, has she?' cried Miss
Brough (it was the very point I wished to insinuate).  'If she does not
like us, why does she not leave us?'

"'She _has_ made rather a long visit,' said I; 'and I am sure that her
nephew and niece are longing for her return.  Pray, madam, do not move,
for you may aid me in the object for which I come.'

"The object for which I came, sir, was to establish a regular
battle-royal between the two ladies; at the end of which I intended to
appeal to Mrs. Hoggarty, and say that she ought really no longer to stay
in a house with the members of which she had such unhappy differences.
Well, sir, the battle-royal was fought,--Miss Belinda opening the fire,
by saying she understood Mrs. Hoggarty had been calumniating her to her
friends.  But though at the end of it Miss rushed out of the room in a
rage, and vowed she would leave her home unless that odious woman left
it, your dear aunt said, 'Ha, ha!  I know the minx's vile stratagems;
but, thank Heaven! I have a good heart, and my religion enables me to
forgive her.  I shall not leave her excellent papa's house, or vex by my
departure that worthy admirable man.'

"I then tried Mrs. H. on the score of compassion.  'Your niece,' said I,
'Mrs. Titmarsh, madam, has been of late, Sam says, rather
poorly,--qualmish of mornings, madam,--a little nervous, and low in
spirits,--symptoms, madam, that are scarcely to be mistaken in a young
married person.'

"Mrs. Hoggarty said she had an admirable cordial that she would send Mrs.
Samuel Titmarsh, and she was perfectly certain it would do her good.

"With very great unwillingness I was obliged now to bring my last reserve
into the field, and may tell you what that was, Sam my boy, now that the
matter is so long passed.  'Madam,' said I, 'there's a matter about which
I must speak, though indeed I scarcely dare.  I dined with your nephew
yesterday, and met at his table a young man--a young man of low manners,
but evidently one who has blinded your nephew, and I too much fear has
succeeded in making an impression upon your niece.  His name is Hoskins,
madam; and when I state that he who was never in the house during your
presence there, has dined with your too confiding nephew sixteen times in
three weeks, I may leave you to imagine what I dare not--dare not imagine
myself.'

"The shot told.  Your aunt bounced up at once, and in ten minutes more
was in my carriage, on our way back to London.  There, sir, was not that
generalship?"

"And you played this pretty trick off at my wife's expense, Mr.
Smithers," said I.

"At your wife's expense, certainly; but for the benefit of both of you."

"It's lucky, sir, that you are an old man," I replied, "and that the
affair happened ten years ago; or, by the Lord, Mr. Smithers, I would
have given you such a horsewhipping as you never heard of!"

But this was the way in which Mrs. Hoggarty was brought back to her
relatives; and this was the reason why we took that house in Bernard
Street, the doings at which must now he described.




CHAPTER X


OF SAM'S PRIVATE AFFAIRS AND OF THE FIRM OF BROUGH AND HOFF

We took a genteel house in Bernard Street, Russell Square, and my aunt
sent for all her furniture from the country; which would have filled two
such houses, but which came pretty cheap to us young housekeepers, as we
had only to pay the carriage of the goods from Bristol.

When I brought Mrs. H. her third half-year's dividend, having not for
four months touched a shilling of her money, I must say she gave me
50_l_. of the 80_l_., and told me that was ample pay for the board and
lodging of a poor old woman like her, who did not eat more than a
sparrow.

I have myself, in the country, seen her eat nine sparrows in a pudding;
but she was rich and I could not complain.  If she saved 600_l_. a year,
at the least, by living with us, why, all the savings would one day come
to me; and so Mary and I consoled ourselves, and tried to manage matters
as well as we might.  It was no easy task to keep a mansion in Bernard
Street and save money out of 470_l_. a year, which was my income.  But
what a lucky fellow I was to have such an income!

As Mrs. Hoggarty left the Rookery in Smithers's carriage, Mr. Brough,
with his four greys, was entering the lodge-gate; and I should like to
have seen the looks of these two gentlemen, as the one was carrying the
other's prey off, out of his own very den, under his very nose.

He came to see her the next day, and protested that he would not leave
the house until she left it with him: that he had heard of his daughter's
infamous conduct, and had seen her in tears--"in tears, madam, and on her
knees, imploring Heaven to pardon her!"  But Mr. B. was obliged to leave
the house without my aunt, who had a _causa major_ for staying, and
hardly allowed poor Mary out of her sight,--opening every one of the
letters that came into the house directed to my wife, and suspecting hers
to everybody.  Mary never told me of all this pain for many many years
afterwards; but had always a smiling face for her husband when he came
home from his work.  As for poor Gus, my aunt had so frightened him, that
he never once showed his nose in the place all the time we lived there;
but used to be content with news of Mary, of whom he was as fond as he
was of me.

Mr. Brough, when my aunt left him, was in a furious ill-humour with me.
He found fault with me ten times a day, and openly, before the gents of
the office; but I let him one day know pretty smartly that I was not only
a servant, but a considerable shareholder in the company; that I defied
him to find fault with my work or my regularity; and that I was not
minded to receive any insolent language from him or any man.  He said it
was always so: that he had never cherished a young man in his bosom, but
the ingrate had turned on him; that he was accustomed to wrong and
undutifulness from his children, and that he would pray that the sin
might be forgiven me.  A moment before he had been cursing and swearing
at me, and speaking to me as if I had been his shoeblack.  But, look you,
I was not going to put up with any more of Madam Brough's airs, or of
his.  With me they might act as they thought fit; but I did not choose
that my wife should be passed over by them, as she had been in the matter
of the visit to Fulham.

Brough ended by warning me of Hodge and Smithers.  "Beware of these men,"
said he; "but for my honesty, your aunt's landed property would have been
sacrificed by these cormorants: and when, for her benefit--which you,
obstinate young man, will not perceive--I wished to dispose of her land,
her attorneys actually had the audacity--the unchristian avarice I may
say--to ask ten per cent. commission on the sale."

There might be some truth in this, I thought: at any rate, when rogues
fall out, honest men come by their own: and now I began to suspect, I am
sorry to say, that both the attorney and the Director had a little of the
rogue in their composition.  It was especially about my wife's fortune
that Mr. B. showed _his_ cloven foot: for proposing, as usual, that I
should purchase shares with it in our Company, I told him that my wife
was a minor, and as such her little fortune was vested out of my control
altogether.  He flung away in a rage at this; and I soon saw that he did
not care for me any more, by Abednego's manner to me.  No more holidays,
no more advances of money, had I: on the contrary, the private clerkship
at 150_l_. was abolished, and I found myself on my 250_l_. a year again.
Well, what then? it was always a good income, and I did my duty, and
laughed at the Director.

About this time, in the beginning of 1824, the Jamaica Ginger Beer
Company shut up shop--exploded, as Gus said, with a bang!  The Patent
Pump shares were down to 15_l_. upon a paid-up capital of 65_l_.  Still
ours were at a high premium; and the Independent West Diddlesex held its
head up as proudly as any office in London.  Roundhand's abuse had had
some influence against the Director, certainly; for he hinted at
malversation of shares: but the Company still stood as united as the Hand-
in-Hand, and as firm as the Rock.

To return to the state of affairs in Bernard Street, Russell Square: my
aunt's old furniture crammed our little rooms; and my aunt's enormous old
jingling grand piano, with crooked legs and half the strings broken,
occupied three-fourths of the little drawing-room.  Here used Mrs. H. to
sit, and play us, for hours, sonatas that were in fashion in Lord
Charleville's time; and sung with a cracked voice, till it was all that
we could do to refrain from laughing.

And it was queer to remark the change that had taken place in Mrs.
Hoggarty's character now: for whereas she was in the country among the
topping persons of the village, and quite content with a tea-party at six
and a game of twopenny whist afterwards,--in London she would never dine
till seven; would have a fly from the mews to drive in the Park twice a
week; cut and uncut, and ripped up and twisted over and over, all her old
gowns, flounces, caps, and fallals, and kept my poor Mary from morning
till night altering them to the present mode.  Mrs. Hoggarty, moreover,
appeared in a new wig; and, I am sorry to say, turned out with such a
pair of red cheeks as Nature never gave her, and as made all the people
in Bernard Street stare, where they are not as yet used to such fashions.

Moreover, she insisted upon our establishing a servant in livery,--a boy,
that is, of about sixteen,--who was dressed in one of the old liveries
that she had brought with her from Somersetshire, decorated with new
cuffs and collars, and new buttons: on the latter were represented the
united crests of the Titmarshes and Hoggartys, viz., a tomtit rampant and
a hog in armour.  I thought this livery and crest-button rather absurd, I
must confess; though my family is very ancient.  And heavens! what a roar
of laughter was raised in the office one day, when the little servant in
the big livery, with the immense cane, walked in and brought me a message
from Mrs. Hoggarty of Castle Hoggarty!  Furthermore, all letters were
delivered on a silver tray.  If we had had a baby, I believe Aunt would
have had it down on the tray: but there was as yet no foundation for Mr.
Smithers's insinuation upon that score, any more than for his other
cowardly fabrication before narrated.  Aunt and Mary used to walk gravely
up and down the New Road, with the boy following with his great
gold-headed stick; but though there was all this ceremony and parade, and
Aunt still talked of her acquaintances, we did not see a single person
from week's end to week's end, and a more dismal house than ours could
hardly be found in London town.

On Sundays, Mrs. Hoggarty used to go to St. Pancras Church, then just
built, and as handsome as Covent Garden Theatre; and of evenings, to a
meeting-house of the Anabaptists: and that day, at least, Mary and I had
to ourselves,--for we chose to have seats at the Foundling, and heard the
charming music there, and my wife used to look wistfully in the pretty
children's faces,--and so, for the matter of that, did I.  It was not,
however, till a year after our marriage that she spoke in a way which
shall be here passed over, but which filled both her and me with
inexpressible joy.

I remember she had the news to give me on the very day when the Muff and
Tippet Company shut up, after swallowing a capital of 300,000_l_. as some
said, and nothing to show for it except a treaty with some Indians, who
had afterwards tomahawked the agent of the Company.  Some people said
there were no Indians, and no agent to be tomahawked at all; but that the
whole had been invented in a house in Crutched Friars.  Well, I pitied
poor Tidd, whose 20,000_l_. were thus gone in a year, and whom I met in
the City that day with a most ghastly face.  He had 1,000_l_. of debts,
he said, and talked of shooting himself; but he was only arrested, and
passed a long time in the Fleet.  Mary's delightful news, however, soon
put Tidd and the Muff and Tippet Company out of my head; as you may
fancy.

Other circumstances now occurred in the City of London which seemed to
show that our Director was--what is not to be found in Johnson's
Dictionary--rather shaky.  Three of his companies had broken; four more
were in a notoriously insolvent state; and even at the meetings of the
directors of the West Diddlesex, some stormy words passed, which ended in
the retirement of several of the board.  Friends of Mr. B.'s filled up
their places: Mr. Puppet, Mr. Straw, Mr. Query, and other respectable
gents, coming forward and joining the concern.  Brough and Hoff dissolved
partnership; and Mr. B. said he had quite enough to do to manage the I.
W. D., and intended gradually to retire from the other affairs.  Indeed,
such an Association as ours was enough work for any man, let alone the
parliamentary duties which Brough was called on to perform, and the
seventy-two lawsuits which burst upon him as principal director of the
late companies.

Perhaps I should here describe the desperate attempts made by Mrs.
Hoggarty to introduce herself into genteel life.  Strange to say,
although we had my Lord Tiptoff's word to the contrary, she insisted upon
it that she and Lady Drum were intimately related; and no sooner did she
read in the _Morning Post_ of the arrival of her Ladyship and her
granddaughters in London, than she ordered the fly before mentioned, and
left cards at their respective houses: her card, that is--"MRS. HOGGARTY
of CASTLE HOGGARTY," magnificently engraved in Gothic letters and
flourishes; and ours, viz., "Mr. and Mrs. S. Titmarsh," which she had
printed for the purpose.

She would have stormed Lady Jane Preston's door and forced her way
upstairs, in spite of Mary's entreaties to the contrary, had the footman
who received her card given her the least encouragement; but that
functionary, no doubt struck by the oddity of her appearance, placed
himself in the front of the door, and declared that he had positive
orders not to admit any strangers to his lady.  On which Mrs. Hoggarty
clenched her fist out of the coach-window, and promised that she would
have him turned away.

Yellowplush only burst out laughing at this; and though Aunt wrote a most
indignant letter to Mr. Edmund Preston, complaining of the insolence of
the servants of that right honourable gent, Mr. Preston did not take any
notice of her letter, further than to return it, with a desire that he
might not be troubled with such impertinent visits for the future.  A
pretty day we had of it when this letter arrived, owing to my aunt's
disappointment and rage in reading the contents; for when Solomon brought
up the note on the silver tea-tray as usual, my aunt, seeing Mr.
Preston's seal and name at the corner of the letter (which is the common
way of writing adopted by those official gents)--my aunt, I say, seeing
his name and seal, cried, "_Now_, Mary, who is right?" and betted my wife
a sixpence that the envelope contained an invitation to dinner.  She
never paid the sixpence, though she lost, but contented herself by
abusing Mary all day, and said I was a poor-spirited sneak for not
instantly horsewhipping Mr. P.  A pretty joke, indeed!  They would have
hanged me in those days, as they did the man who shot Mr. Perceval.

And now I should be glad to enlarge upon that experience in genteel life
which I obtained through the perseverance of Mrs. Hoggarty; but it must
be owned that my opportunities were but few, lasting only for the brief
period of six months: and also, genteel society has been fully described
already by various authors of novels, whose names need not here be set
down, but who, being themselves connected with the aristocracy, viz., as
members of noble families, or as footmen or hangers-on thereof, naturally
understand their subject a great deal better than a poor young fellow
from a fire-office can.

There was our celebrated adventure in the Opera House, whither Mrs. H.
would insist upon conducting us; and where, in a room of the
establishment called the crush-room, where the ladies and gents after the
music and dancing await the arrival of their carriages (a pretty figure
did our little Solomon cut, by the way, with his big cane, among the
gentlemen of the shoulder-knot assembled in the lobby!)--where, I say, in
the crush-room, Mrs. H. rushed up to old Lady Drum, whom I pointed out to
her, and insisted upon claiming relationship with her Ladyship.  But my
Lady Drum had only a memory when she chose, as I may say, and had
entirely on this occasion thought fit to forget her connection with the
Titmarshes and Hoggarties.  Far from recognising us, indeed, she called
Mrs. Hoggarty an "ojus 'oman," and screamed out as loud as possible for a
police-officer.

This and other rebuffs made my aunt perceive the vanities of this wicked
world, as she said, and threw her more and more into really serious
society.  She formed several very valuable acquaintances, she said, at
the Independent Chapel; and among others, lighted upon her friend of the
Rookery, Mr. Grimes Wapshot.  We did not know then the interview which he
had had with Mr. Smithers, nor did Grimes think proper to acquaint us
with the particulars of it; but though I did acquaint Mrs. H. with the
fact that her favourite preacher had been tried for forgery, _she_
replied that she considered the story an atrocious calumny; and _he_
answered by saying that Mary and I were in lamentable darkness, and that
we should infallibly find the way to a certain bottomless pit, of which
he seemed to know a great deal.  Under the reverend gentleman's guidance
and advice, she, after a time, separated from St. Pancras
altogether--"_sat under him_," as the phrase is, regularly thrice a
week--began to labour in the conversion of the poor of Bloomsbury and St.
Giles's, and made a deal of baby-linen for distribution among those
benighted people.  She did not make any, however, for Mrs. Sam Titmarsh,
who now showed signs that such would be speedily necessary, but let Mary
(and my mother and sisters in Somersetshire) provide what was requisite
for the coming event.  I am not, indeed, sure that she did not say it was
wrong on our parts to make any such provision, and that we ought to let
the morrow provide for itself.  At any rate, the Reverend Grimes Wapshot
drank a deal of brandy-and-water at our house, and dined there even
oftener than poor Gus used to do.

But I had little leisure to attend to him and his doings; for I must
confess at this time I was growing very embarrassed in my circumstances,
and was much harassed both as a private and public character.

As regards the former, Mrs. Hoggarty had given me 50_l_.; but out of that
50_l_. I had to pay a journey post from Somersetshire, all the carriage
of her goods from the country, the painting, papering, and carpeting of
my house, the brandy and strong liquors drunk by the Reverend Grimes and
his friends (for the reverend gent said that Rosolio did not agree with
him); and finally, a thousand small bills and expenses incident to all
housekeepers in the town of London.

Add to this, I received just at the time when I was most in want of cash,
Madame Mantalini's bill, Messrs.  Howell and James's ditto, the account
of Baron Von Stiltz, and the bill of Mr. Polonius for the setting of the
diamond pin.  All these bills arrived in a week, as they have a knack of
doing; and fancy my astonishment in presenting them to Mrs. Hoggarty,
when she said, "Well, my dear, you are in the receipt of a very fine
income.  If you choose to order dresses and jewels from first-rate shops,
you must pay for them; and don't expect that _I_ am to abet your
extravagance, or give you a shilling more than the munificent sum I pay
you for board and lodging!"

How could I tell Mary of this behaviour of Mrs. Hoggarty, and Mary in
such a delicate condition?  And bad as matters were at home, I am sorry
to say at the office they began to look still worse.

Not only did Roundhand leave, but Highmore went away.  Abednego became
head clerk: and one day old Abednego came to the place and was shown into
the directors' private room; when he left it, he came trembling,
chattering, and cursing downstairs; and had begun, "Shentlemen--" a
speech to the very clerks in the office, when Mr. Brough, with an
imploring look, and crying out, "Stop till Saturday!" at length got him
into the street.

On Saturday Abednego junior left the office for ever, and I became head
clerk with 400_l_. a year salary.  It was a fatal week for the office,
too.  On Monday, when I arrived and took my seat at the head desk, and my
first read of the newspaper, as was my right, the first thing I read was,
"Frightful fire in Houndsditch!  Total destruction of Mr. Meshach's
sealing-wax manufactory and of Mr. Shadrach's clothing depot, adjoining.
In the former was 20,000_l_. worth of the finest Dutch wax, which the
voracious element attacked and devoured in a twinkling.  The latter
estimable gentleman had just completed forty thousand suits of clothes
for the cavalry of H.H. the Cacique of Poyais."

Both of these Jewish gents, who were connections of Mr. Abednego, were
insured in our office to the full amount of their loss.  The calamity was
attributed to the drunkenness of a scoundrelly Irish watchman, who was
employed on the premises, and who upset a bottle of whisky in the
warehouse of Messrs. Shadrach, and incautiously looked for the liquor
with a lighted candle.  The man was brought to our office by his
employers; and certainly, as we all could testify, was _even then_ in a
state of frightful intoxication.

As if this were not sufficient, in the obituary was announced the demise
of Alderman Pash--Alderman Cally-Pash we used to call him in our lighter
hours, knowing his propensity to green fat: but such a moment as this was
no time for joking!  He was insured by our house for 5,000_l_.  And now I
saw very well the truth of a remark of Gus's--viz., that life-assurance
companies go on excellently for a year or two after their establishment,
but that it is much more difficult to make them profitable when the
assured parties begin to die.

The Jewish fires were the heaviest blows we had had; for though the
Waddingley Cotton-mills had been burnt in 1822, at a loss to the Company
of 80,000_l_., and though the Patent Erostratus Match Manufactory had
exploded in the same year at a charge of 14,000_l_., there were those who
said that the loss had not been near so heavy as was supposed--nay, that
the Company had burnt the above-named establishments as advertisements
for themselves.  Of these facts I can't be positive, having never seen
the early accounts of the concern.

Contrary to the expectation of all us gents, who were ourselves as dismal
as mutes, Mr. Brough came to the office in his coach-and-four, laughing
and joking with a friend as he stepped out at the door.

"Gentlemen!" said he, "you have read the papers; they announce an event
which I most deeply deplore.  I mean the demise of the excellent Alderman
Pash, one of our constituents.  But if anything can console me for the
loss of that worthy man, it is to think that his children and widow will
receive, at eleven o'clock next Saturday, 5,000_l_. from my friend Mr.
Titmarsh, who is now head clerk here.  As for the accident which has
happened to Messrs. Shadrach and Meshach,--in _that_, at least, there is
nothing that can occasion any person sorrow.  On Saturday next, or as
soon as the particulars of their loss can be satisfactorily ascertained,
my friend Mr. Titmarsh will pay to them across the counter a sum of
forty, fifty, eighty, one hundred thousand pounds--according to the
amount of their loss.  _They_, at least, will be remunerated; and though
to our proprietors the outlay will no doubt be considerable, yet we can
afford it, gentlemen.  John Brough can afford it himself, for the matter
of that, and not be very much embarrassed; and we must learn to bear ill-
fortune as we have hitherto borne good, and show ourselves to be men
always!"

Mr. B. concluded with some allusions, which I confess I don't like to
give here; for to speak of Heaven in connection with common worldly
matters, has always appeared to me irreverent; and to bring it to bear
witness to the lie in his mouth, as a religious hypocrite does, is such a
frightful crime, that one should be careful even in alluding to it.

Mr. Brough's speech somehow found its way into the newspapers of that
very evening; nor can I think who gave a report of it, for none of our
gents left the office that day until the evening papers had appeared.  But
there was the speech--ay, and at the week's end, although Roundhand was
heard on 'Change that day declaring he would bet five to one that
Alderman Pash's money would never be paid,--at the week's end the money
was paid by me to Mrs. Pash's solicitor across the counter, and no doubt
Roundhand lost his money.

Shall I tell how the money was procured?  There can be no harm in
mentioning the matter now after twenty years' lapse of time; and
moreover, it is greatly to the credit of two individuals now dead.

As I was head clerk, I had occasion to be frequently in Brough's room,
and he now seemed once more disposed to take me into his confidence.

"Titmarsh my boy," said he one day to me, after looking me hard in the
face, "did you ever hear of the fate of the great Mr. Silberschmidt of
London?"  Of course I had.  Mr. Silberschmidt, the Rothschild of his day
(indeed I have heard the latter famous gent was originally a clerk in
Silberschmidt's house)--Silberschmidt, fancying he could not meet his
engagements, committed suicide; and had he lived till four o'clock that
day, would have known that he was worth 400,000_l_.  "To tell you frankly
the truth," says Mr. B., "I am in Silberschmidt's case.  My late partner,
Hoff, has given bills in the name of the firm to an enormous amount, and
I have been obliged to meet them.  I have been cast in fourteen actions,
brought by creditors of that infernal Ginger Beer Company; and all the
debts are put upon my shoulders, on account of my known wealth.  Now,
unless I have time, I cannot pay; and the long and short of the matter is
that if I cannot procure 5,000_l_. before Saturday, _our concern is
ruined_!"

"What! the West Diddlesex ruined?" says I, thinking of my poor mother's
annuity.  "Impossible! our business is splendid!"

"We must have 5,000_l_. on Saturday, and we are saved; and if you will,
as you can, get it for me, I will give you 10,000_l_. for the money!"

B. then showed me to a fraction the accounts of the concern, and his own
private account; proving beyond the possibility of a doubt, that with the
5,000_l_. our office must be set a-going; and without it, that the
concern must stop.  No matter how he proved the thing; but there is, you
know, a dictum of a statesman that, give him but leave to use figures,
and he will prove anything.

I promised to ask Mrs. Hoggarty once more for the money, and she seemed
not to be disinclined.  I told him so; and that day he called upon her,
his wife called upon her, his daughter called upon her, and once more the
Brough carriage-and-four was seen at our house.

But Mrs. Brough was a bad manager; and, instead of carrying matters with
a high hand, fairly burst into tears before Mrs. Hoggarty, and went down
on her knees and besought her to save dear John.  This at once aroused my
aunt's suspicions; and instead of lending the money, she wrote off to Mr.
Smithers instantly to come up to her, desired me to give her up the
3,000_l_. scrip shares that I possessed, called me an atrocious cheat and
heartless swindler, and vowed I had been the cause of her ruin.

How was Mr. Brough to get the money?  I will tell you.  Being in his room
one day, old Gates the Fulham porter came and brought him from Mr. Balls,
the pawnbroker, a sum of 1,200_l_.  Missus told him, he said, to carry
the plate to Mr. Balls; and having paid the money, old Gates fumbled a
great deal in his pockets, and at last pulled out a 5_l_. note, which he
said his daughter Jane had just sent him from service, and begged Mr. B.
would let him have another share in the Company.  "He was mortal sure it
would go right yet.  And when he heard master crying and cursing as he
and missus were walking in the shrubbery, and saying that for the want of
a few pounds--a few shillings--the finest fortune in Europe was to be
overthrown, why Gates and his woman thought that they should come
for'ard, to be sure, with all they could, to help the kindest master and
missus ever was."

This was the substance of Gates's speech; and Mr. Brough shook his hand
and--took the 5_l_.  "Gates," said he, "that 5_l_. note shall be the best
outlay you ever made in your life!" and I have no doubt it was,--but it
was in heaven that poor old Gates was to get the interest of his little
mite.

Nor was this the only instance.  Mrs. Brough's sister, Miss Dough, who
had been on bad terms with the Director almost ever since he had risen to
be a great man, came to the office with a power of attorney, and said,
"John, Isabella has been with me this morning, and says you want money,
and I have brought you my 4,000_l_.; it is all I have, John, and pray God
it may do you good--you and my dear sister, who was the best sister in
the world to me--till--till a little time ago."

And she laid down the paper: I was called up to witness it, and Brough,
with tears in his eyes, told me her words; for he could trust me, he
said.  And thus it was that I came to be present at Gates's interview
with his master, which took place only an hour afterwards.  Brave Mrs.
Brough! how she was working for her husband!  Good woman, and kind! but
_you_ had a true heart, and merited a better fate!  Though wherefore say
so?  The woman, to this day, thinks her husband an angel, and loves him a
thousand times better for his misfortunes.

On Saturday, Alderman Pash's solicitor was paid by me across the counter,
as I said.  "Never mind your aunt's money, Titmarsh my boy," said Brough:
"never mind her having resumed her shares.  You are a true honest fellow;
you have never abused me like that pack of curs downstairs, and I'll make
your fortune yet!"

* * * * *

The next week, as I was sitting with my wife, with Mr. Smithers, and with
Mrs. Hoggarty, taking our tea comfortably, a knock was heard at the door,
and a gentleman desired to speak to me in the parlour.  It was Mr.
Aminadab of Chancery Lane, who arrested me as a shareholder of the
Independent West Diddlesex Association, at the suit of Von Stiltz of
Clifford Street, tailor and draper.

I called down Smithers, and told him for Heaven's sake not to tell Mary.

"Where is Brough?" says Mr. Smithers.

"Why," says Mr. Aminadab, "he's once more of the firm of Brough and Off,
sir--he breakfasted at Calais this morning!"




CHAPTER XI


IN WHICH IT APPEARS THAT A MAN MAY POSSESS A DIAMOND AND YET BE VERY HARD
PRESSED FOR A DINNER

On that fatal Saturday evening, in a hackney-coach, fetched from the
Foundling, was I taken from my comfortable house and my dear little wife;
whom Mr. Smithers was left to console as he might.  He said that I was
compelled to take a journey upon business connected with the office; and
my poor Mary made up a little portmanteau of clothes, and tied a
comforter round my neck, and bade my companion particularly to keep the
coach windows shut: which injunction the grinning wretch promised to
obey.  Our journey was not long: it was only a shilling fare to Cursitor
Street, Chancery Lane, and there I was set down.

The house before which the coach stopped seemed to be only one of half-a-
dozen in that street which were used for the same purpose.  No man, be he
ever so rich, can pass by those dismal houses, I think, without a
shudder.  The front windows are barred, and on the dingy pillar of the
door was a shining brass-plate, setting forth that "Aminadab, Officer to
the Sheriff of Middlesex," lived therein.  A little red-haired Israelite
opened the first door as our coach drove up, and received me and my
baggage.

As soon as we entered the door, he barred it, and I found myself in the
face of another huge door, which was strongly locked; and, at last,
passing through that, we entered the lobby of the house.

There is no need to describe it.  It is very like ten thousand other
houses in our dark City of London.  There was a dirty passage and a dirty
stair, and from the passage two dirty doors let into two filthy rooms,
which had strong bars at the windows, and yet withal an air of horrible
finery that makes me uncomfortable to think of even yet.  On the walls
hung all sorts of trumpery pictures in tawdry frames (how different from
those capital performances of my cousin Michael Angelo!); on the
mantelpiece huge French clocks, vases, and candlesticks; on the
sideboards, enormous trays of Birmingham plated ware: for Mr. Aminadab
not only arrested those who could not pay money, but lent it to those who
could; and had already, in the way of trade, sold and bought these
articles many times over.

I agreed to take the back-parlour for the night, and while a Hebrew
damsel was arranging a little dusky sofa-bedstead (woe betide him who has
to sleep on it!) I was invited into the front parlour, where Mr.
Aminadab, bidding me take heart, told me I should have a dinner for
nothing with a party who had just arrived.  I did not want for dinner,
but I was glad not to be alone--not alone, even till Gus came; for whom I
despatched a messenger to his lodgings hard by.

I found there, in the front parlour, at eight o'clock in the evening,
four gentlemen, just about to sit down to dinner.  Surprising! there was
Mr. B., a gentleman of fashion, who had only within half-an-hour arrived
in a post-chaise with his companion, Mr. Lock, an officer of Horsham
gaol.  Mr. B. was arrested in this wise:--He was a careless good-humoured
gentleman, and had indorsed bills to a large amount for a friend; who, a
man of high family and unquestionable honour, had pledged the latter,
along with a number of the most solemn oaths, for the payment of the
bills in question.  Having indorsed the notes, young Mr. B., with a
proper thoughtlessness, forgot all about them, and so, by some chance,
did the friend whom he obliged; for, instead of being in London with the
money for the payment of his obligations, this latter gentleman was
travelling abroad, and never hinted one word to Mr. B. that the notes
would fall upon him.  The young gentleman was at Brighton lying sick of a
fever; was taken from his bed by a bailiff, and carried, on a rainy day,
to Horsham gaol; had a relapse of his complaint, and when sufficiently
recovered, was brought up to London to the house of Mr. Aminadab; where I
found him--a pale, thin, good-humoured, _lost_ young man: he was lying on
a sofa, and had given orders for the dinner to which I was invited.  The
lad's face gave one pain to look at; it was impossible not to see that
his hours were numbered.

Now Mr. B. has not anything to do with my humble story; but I can't help
mentioning him, as I saw him.  He sent for his lawyer and his doctor; the
former settled speedily his accounts with the bailiff, and the latter
arranged all his earthly accounts: for after he went from the spunging-
house he never recovered from the shock of the arrest, and in a few weeks
he _died_.  And though this circumstance took place many years ago, I
can't forget it to my dying day; and often see the author of Mr. B.'s
death,--a prosperous gentleman, riding a fine horse in the Park, lounging
at the window of a club; with many friends, no doubt, and a good
reputation.  I wonder whether the man sleeps easily and eats with a good
appetite?  I wonder whether he has paid Mr. B.'s heirs the sum which that
gentleman paid, and _died for_?

If Mr. B.'s history has nothing to do with mine, and is only inserted
here for the sake of a moral, what business have I to mention particulars
of the dinner to which I was treated by that gentleman, in the spunging-
house in Cursitor Street?  Why, for the moral too; and therefore the
public must be told of what really and truly that dinner consisted.

There were five guests, and three silver tureens of soup: viz.,
mock-turtle soup, ox-tail soup, and giblet soup.  Next came a great piece
of salmon, likewise on a silver dish, a roast goose, a roast saddle of
mutton, roast game, and all sorts of adjuncts.  In this way can a
gentleman live in a spunging-house if he be inclined; and over this
repast (which, in truth, I could not touch, for, let alone having dined,
my heart was full of care)--over this meal my friend Gus Hoskins found
me, when he received the letter that I had despatched to him.

Gus, who had never been in a prison before, and whose heart failed him as
the red-headed young Moses opened and shut for him the numerous iron
outer doors, was struck dumb to see me behind a bottle of claret, in a
room blazing with gilt lamps; the curtains were down too, and you could
not see the bars at the windows; and Mr. B., Mr. Lock the Brighton
officer, Mr. Aminadab, and another rich gentleman of his trade and
religious persuasion, were chirping as merrily, and looked as
respectably, as any noblemen in the land.

"Have him in," said Mr. B., "if he's a friend of Mr. Titmarsh's; for,
cuss me, I like to see a rogue: and run me through, Titmarsh, but I think
you are one of the best in London.  You beat Brough; you do, by Jove! for
he looks like a rogue--anybody would swear to him; but you! by Jove, you
look the very picture of honesty!"

"A deep file," said Aminadab, winking and pointing me out to his friend
Mr. Jehoshaphat.

"A good one," says Jehoshaphat.

"In for three hundred thousand pound," says Aminadab: "Brough's right-
hand man, and only three-and-twenty."

"Mr. Titmarsh, sir, your 'ealth, sir," says Mr. Lock, in an ecstasy of
admiration.  "Your very good 'earth, sir, and better luck to you next
time."

"Pooh, pooh! _he's_ all right," says Aminadab; "let _him_ alone."

"In for _what_?" shouted I, quite amazed.  "Why, sir, you arrested me for
90_l_."

"Yes, but you are in for half a million,--you know you are.  _Them_ debts
I don't count--them paltry tradesmen's accounts.  I mean Brough's
business.  It's an ugly one; but you'll get through it.  We all know you;
and I lay my life that when you come through the court, Mrs. Titmarsh has
got a handsome thing laid by."

"Mrs. Titmarsh has a small property," says I.  "What then?"

The three gentlemen burst into a loud laugh, said I was a "rum chap"--a
"downy cove," and made other remarks which I could not understand then;
but the meaning of which I have since comprehended, for they took me to
be a great rascal, I am sorry to say, and supposed that I had robbed the
I. W. D. Association, and, in order to make my money secure, settled it
on my wife.

It was in the midst of this conversation that, as I said, Gus came in;
and whew! when he saw what was going on, he gave _such_ a whistle!

"Herr von Joel, by Jove!" says Aminadab.  At which all laughed.

"Sit down," says Mr. B.,--"sit down, and wet your whistle, my piper!  I
say, egad! you're the piper that played before Moses!  Had you there,
Dab.  Dab, get a fresh bottle of Burgundy for Mr. Hoskins."  And before
he knew where he was, there was Gus for the first time in his life
drinking Clos-Vougeot.  Gus said he had never tasted Bergamy before, at
which the bailiff sneered, and told him the name of the wine.

"_Old Clo_!  What?" says Gus; and we laughed: but the Hebrew gents did
not this time.

"Come, come, sir!" says Mr. Aminadab's friend, "ve're all shentlemen
here, and shentlemen never makish reflexunsh upon other gentlemen'sh
pershuashunsh."

After this feast was concluded, Gus and I retired to my room to consult
about my affairs.  With regard to the responsibility incurred as a
shareholder in the West Diddlesex, I was not uneasy; for though the
matter might cause me a little trouble at first, I knew I was not a
shareholder; that the shares were scrip shares, making the dividend
payable to the bearer; and my aunt had called back her shares, and
consequently I was free.  But it was very unpleasant to me to consider
that I was in debt nearly a hundred pounds to tradesmen, chiefly of Mrs.
Hoggarty's recommendation; and as she had promised to be answerable for
their bills, I determined to send her a letter reminding her of her
promise, and begging her at the same time to relieve me from Mr. Von
Stiltz's debt, for which I was arrested: and which was incurred not
certainly at her desire, but at Mr. Brough's; and would never have been
incurred by me but at the absolute demand of that gentleman.

I wrote to her, therefore, begging her to pay all these debts, and
promised myself on Monday morning again to be with my dear wife.  Gus
carried off the letter, and promised to deliver it in Bernhard Street
after church-time; taking care that Mary should know nothing at all of
the painful situation in which I was placed.  It was near midnight when
we parted, and I tried to sleep as well as I could in the dirty little
sofa-bedstead of Mr. Aminadab's back-parlour.

That morning was fine and sunshiny, and I heard all the bells ringing
cheerfully for church, and longed to be walking to the Foundling with my
wife: but there were the three iron doors between me and liberty, and I
had nothing for it but to read my prayers in my own room, and walk up and
down afterwards in the court at the back of the house.  Would you believe
it?  This very court was like a cage! Great iron bars covered it in from
one end to another; and here it was that Mr. Aminadab's gaol-birds took
the air.

They had seen me reading out of the prayer-book at the back-parlour
window, and all burst into a yell of laughter when I came to walk in the
cage.  One of them shouted out "Amen!" when I appeared; another called me
a muff (which means, in the slang language, a very silly fellow); a third
wondered that I took to my prayer-book _yet_.

"When do you mean, sir?" says I to the fellow--a rough man, a
horse-dealer.

"Why, when you are going _to be hanged_, you young hypocrite!" says the
man.  "But that is always the way with Brough's people," continued he.  "I
had four greys once for him--a great bargain, but he would not go to look
at them at Tattersall's, nor speak a word of business about them, because
it was a Sunday."

"Because there are hypocrites," sir, says I, "religion is not to be
considered a bad thing; and if Mr. Brough would not deal with you on a
Sunday, he certainly did his duty."

The men only laughed the more at this rebuke, and evidently considered me
a great criminal.  I was glad to be released from their society by the
appearance of Gus and Mr. Smithers.  Both wore very long faces.  They
were ushered into my room, and, without any orders of mine, a bottle of
wine and biscuits were brought in by Mr. Aminadab; which I really thought
was very kind of him.

"Drink a glass of wine, Mr. Titmarsh," says Smithers, "and read this
letter.  A pretty note was that which you sent to your aunt this morning,
and here you have an answer to it."

I drank the wine, and trembled rather as I read as follows:--

   "Sir,--If, because you knew I had desined to leave you my proparty,
   you wished to murdar me, and so stepp into it, you are dissapointed.
   Your _villiany_ and _ingratitude would_ have murdard me, had I not, by
   Heaven's grace, been inabled to look for consalation _elsewhere_.

   "For nearly a year I have been a _martar_ to you.  I gave up
   everything,--my happy home in the country, where all respected the
   name of Hoggarty; my valuble furnitur and wines; my plate, glass, and
   crockry; I brought all--all to make your home happy and rispectable.  I
   put up with the _airs and impertanencies_ of Mrs. Titmarsh; I loaded
   her and you with presents and bennafits.  I sacrafised myself; I gave
   up the best sociaty in the land, to witch I have been accustomed, in
   order to be a gardian and compannion to you, and prevent, if possible,
   that _waist and ixtravygance_ which I _prophycied_ would be your ruin.
   Such waist and ixtravygance never, never, never did I see.  Buttar
   waisted as if it had been dirt, coles flung away, candles burnt _at
   both ends_, tea and meat the same.  The butcher's bill in this house
   was enough to support six famalies.

   "And now you have the audassaty, being placed in prison justly for
   your crimes,--for cheating me of 3,000_l_., for robbing your mother of
   an insignificient summ, which to her, poor thing, was everything
   (though she will not feel her loss as I do, being all her life next
   door to a beggar), for incurring detts which you cannot pay, wherein
   you knew that your miserable income was quite unable to support your
   ixtravygance--you come upon me to pay your detts!  No, sir, it is
   quite enough that your mother should go on the parish, and that your
   wife should sweep the streets, to which you have indeed brought them;
   _I_, at least, though cheated by you of a large summ, and obliged to
   pass my days in comparative ruin, can retire, and have some of the
   comforts to which my rank entitles me.  The furnitur in this house is
   mine; and as I presume you intend _your lady_ to sleep in the streets,
   I give you warning that I shall remove it all tomorrow.

   "Mr. Smithers will tell you that I had intended to leave you my intire
   fortune.  I have this morning, in his presents, solamly toar up my
   will; and hereby renounce all connection with you and your beggarly
   family.

   "SUSAN HOGGARTY.

   "P.S.--I took a viper into my bosom, _and it stung me_."

I confess that, on the first reading of this letter, I was in such a fury
that I forgot almost the painful situation in which it plunged me, and
the ruin hanging over me.

"What a fool you were, Titmarsh, to write that letter!" said Mr.
Smithers.  "You have cut your own throat, sir,--lost a fine
property,--written yourself out of five hundred a year.  Mrs. Hoggarty,
my client, brought the will, as she says, downstairs, and flung it into
the fire before our faces."

"It's a blessing that your wife was from home," added Gus.  "She went to
church this morning with Dr. Salt's family, and sent word that she would
spend the day with them.  She was always glad to be away from Mrs. H.,
you know."

"She never knew on which side her bread was buttered," said Mr. Smithers.
"You should have taken the lady when she was in the humour, sir, and have
borrowed the money elsewhere.  Why, sir, I had almost reconciled her to
her loss in that cursed Company.  I showed her how I had saved out of
Brough's claws the whole of her remaining fortune; which he would have
devoured in a day, the scoundrel!  And if you would have left the matter
to me, Mr. Titmarsh, I would have had you reconciled completely to Mrs.
Hoggarty; I would have removed all your difficulties; I would have lent
you the pitiful sum of money myself."

"Will you?" says Gus; "that's a trump!" and he seized Smithers's hand,
and squeezed it so that the tears came into the attorney's eyes.

"Generous fellow!" said I; "lend me money, when you know what a situation
I am in, and not able to pay!"

"Ay, my good sir, there's the rub!" says Mr. Smithers.  "I said I _would_
have lent the money; and so to the acknowledged heir of Mrs. Hoggarty I
would--would at this moment; for nothing delights the heart of Bob
Smithers more than to do a kindness.  I would have rejoiced in doing it;
and a mere acknowledgment from that respected lady would have amply
sufficed.  But now, sir, the case is altered,--you have no security to
offer, as you justly observe."

"Not a whit, certainly."

"And without security, sir, of course can expect no money--of course not.
You are a man of the world, Mr. Titmarsh, and I see our notions exactly
agree."

"There's his wife's property," says Gus.

"Wife's property?  Bah!  Mrs. Sam Titmarsh is a minor, and can't touch a
shilling of it.  No, no, no meddling with minors for me!  But stop!--your
mother has a house and shop in our village.  Get me a mortgage of that--"

"I'll do no such thing, sir," says I.  "My mother has suffered quite
enough on my score already, and has my sisters to provide for; and I will
thank you, Mr. Smithers, not to breathe a syllable to her regarding my
present situation."

"You speak like a man of honour, sir," says Mr. Smithers, "and I will
obey your injunctions to the letter.  I will do more, sir.  I will
introduce you to a respectable firm here, my worthy friends, Messrs.
Higgs, Biggs, and Blatherwick, who will do everything in their power to
serve you.  And so, sir, I wish you a very good morning."

And with this Mr. Smithers took his hat and left the room; and after a
further consultation with my aunt, as I heard afterwards, quitted London
that evening by the mail.

I sent my faithful Gus off once more to break the matter gently to my
wife, fearing lest Mrs. Hoggarty should speak of it abruptly to her; as I
knew in her anger she would do.  But he came in an hour panting back, to
say that Mrs. H. had packed and locked her trunks, and had gone off in a
hackney-coach.  So, knowing that my poor Mary was not to return till
night, Hoskins remained with me till then; and, after a dismal day, left
me once more at nine, to carry the dismal tidings to her.

At ten o'clock on that night there was a great rattling and ringing at
the outer door, and presently my poor girl fell into my arms; and Gus
Hoskins sat blubbering in a corner, as I tried my best to console her.

* * * * *

The next morning I was favoured with a visit from Mr. Blatherwick; who,
hearing from me that I had only three guineas in my pocket, told me very
plainly that lawyers only lived by fees.  He recommended me to quit
Cursitor Street, as living there was very expensive.  And as I was
sitting very sad, my wife made her appearance (it was with great
difficulty that she could be brought to leave me the night previous)--

"The horrible men came at four this morning," said she; "four hours
before light."

"What horrible men?" says I.

"Your aunt's men," said she, "to remove the furniture they had it all
packed before I came away.  And I let them carry all," said she; "I was
too sad to look what was ours and what was not.  That odious Mr. Wapshot
was with them; and I left him seeing the last waggon-load from the door.
I have only brought away your clothes," added she, "and a few of mine;
and some of the books you used to like to read; and some--some things I
have been getting for the--for the baby.  The servants' wages were paid
up to Christmas; and I paid them the rest.  And see! just as I was going
away, the post came, and brought to me my half-year's income--35_l_.,
dear Sam.  Isn't it a blessing?"

"Will you pay my bill, Mr. What-d'ye-call-'im?" here cried Mr. Aminadab,
flinging open the door (he had been consulting with Mr. Blatherwick, I
suppose).  "I want the room for _a gentleman_.  I guess it's too dear for
the like of you."  And here--will you believe it?--the man handed me a
bill of three guineas for two days' board and lodging in his odious
house.

* * * * *

There was a crowd of idlers round the door as I passed out of it, and had
I been alone I should have been ashamed of seeing them; but, as it was, I
was only thinking of my dear dear wife, who was leaning trustfully on my
arm, and smiling like heaven into my face--ay, and _took_ heaven, too,
into the Fleet prison with me--or an angel out of heaven.  Ah! I had
loved her before, and happy it is to love when one is hopeful and young
in the midst of smiles and sunshine; but be _un_happy, and then see what
it is to be loved by a good woman!  I declare before Heaven, that of all
the joys and happy moments it has given me, that was the crowning
one--that little ride, with my wife's cheek on my shoulder, down Holborn
to the prison!  Do you think I cared for the bailiff that sat opposite?
No, by the Lord!  I kissed her, and hugged her--yes, and cried with her
likewise.  But before our ride was over her eyes dried up, and she
stepped blushing and happy out of the coach at the prison door, as if she
were a princess going to the Queen's Drawing-room.




CHAPTER XII


IN WHICH THE HERO'S AUNT'S DIAMOND MAKES ACQUAINTANCE WITH THE HERO'S
UNCLE

The failure of the great Diddlesex Association speedily became the theme
of all the newspapers, and every person concerned in it was soon held up
to public abhorrence as a rascal and a swindler.  It was said that Brough
had gone off with a million of money.  Even it was hinted that poor I had
sent a hundred thousand pounds to America, and only waited to pass
through the court in order to be a rich man for the rest of my days.  This
opinion had some supporters in the prison; where, strange to say, it
procured me consideration--of which, as may be supposed, I was little
inclined to avail myself.  Mr. Aminadab, however, in his frequent visits
to the Fleet, persisted in saying that I was a poor-spirited creature, a
mere tool in Brough's hands, and had not saved a shilling.  Opinions,
however, differed; and I believe it was considered by the turnkeys that I
was a fellow of exquisite dissimulation, who had put on the appearance of
poverty in order more effectually to mislead the public.

Messrs. Abednego and Son were similarly held up to public odium: and, in
fact, what were the exact dealings of these gentlemen with Mr. Brough I
have never been able to learn.  It was proved by the books that large
sums of money had been paid to Mr. Abednego by the Company; but he
produced documents signed by Mr. Brough, which made the latter and the
West Diddlesex Association his debtors to a still further amount.  On the
day I went to the Bankruptcy Court to be examined, Mr. Abednego and the
two gentlemen from Houndsditch were present to swear to their debts, and
made a sad noise, and uttered a vast number of oaths in attestation of
their claim.  But Messrs. Jackson and Paxton produced against them that
very Irish porter who was said to have been the cause of the fire, and, I
am told, hinted that they had matter for hanging the Jewish gents if they
persisted in their demand.  On this they disappeared altogether, and no
more was ever heard of their losses.  I am inclined to believe that our
Director had had money from Abednego--had given him shares as bonus and
security--had been suddenly obliged to redeem these shares with ready
money; and so had precipitated the ruin of himself and the concern.  It
is needless to say here in what a multiplicity of companies Brough was
engaged.  That in which poor Mr. Tidd invested his money did not pay
2_d_. in the pound; and that was the largest dividend paid by any of
them.

As for ours--ah! there was a pretty scene as I was brought from the Fleet
to the Bankruptcy Court, to give my testimony as late head clerk and
accountant of the West Diddlesex Association.

My poor wife, then very near her time, insisted upon accompanying me to
Basinghall Street; and so did my friend Gus Hoskins, that true and honest
fellow.  If you had seen the crowd that was assembled, and the hubbub
that was made as I was brought up!

"Mr. Titmarsh," says the Commissioner as I came to the table, with a
peculiar sarcastic accent on the Tit--"Mr. Titmarsh, you were the
confidant of Mr. Brough, the principal clerk of Mr. Brough, and a
considerable shareholder in the Company?"

"Only a nominal one, sir," said I.

"Of course, only nominal," continued the Commissioner, turning to his
colleague with a sneer; "and a great comfort it must be to you, sir, to
think that you had a share in all the plun--the profits of the
speculation, and now can free yourself from the losses, by saying you are
only a nominal shareholder."

"The infernal villain!" shouted out a voice from the crowd.  It was that
of the furious half-pay captain and late shareholder, Captain Sparr.

"Silence in the court there!" the Commissioner continued: and all this
while Mary was anxiously looking in his face, and then in mine, as pale
as death; while Gus, on the contrary, was as red as vermilion.  "Mr.
Titmarsh, I have had the good fortune to see a list of your debts from
the Insolvent Court, and find that you are indebted to Mr. Stiltz, the
great tailor, in a handsome sum; to Mr. Polonius, the celebrated
jeweller, likewise; to fashionable milliners and dressmakers,
moreover;--and all this upon a salary of 200_l_. per annum.  For so young
a gentleman it must be confessed you have employed your time well."

"Has this anything to do with the question, sir?" says I.  "Am I here to
give an account of my private debts, or to speak as to what I know
regarding the affairs of the Company?  As for my share in it, I have a
mother, sir, and many sisters--"

"The d-d scoundrel!" shouts the Captain.

"Silence that there fellow!" shouts Gus, as bold as brass; at which the
court burst out laughing, and this gave me courage to proceed.

"My mother, sir, four years since, having a legacy of 400_l_. left to
her, advised with her solicitor, Mr. Smithers, how she should dispose of
this sum; and as the Independent West Diddlesex was just then
established, the money was placed in an annuity in that office, where I
procured a clerkship.  You may suppose me a very hardened criminal,
because I have ordered clothes of Mr. Von Stiltz; but you will hardly
fancy that I, a lad of nineteen, knew anything of the concerns of the
Company into whose service I entered as twentieth clerk, my own mother's
money paying, as it were, for my place.  Well, sir, the interest offered
by the Company was so tempting, that a rich relative of mine was induced
to purchase a number of shares."

"Who induced your relative, if I may make so bold as to inquire?"

"I can't help owning, sir," says I, blushing, "that I wrote a letter
myself.  But consider, my relative was sixty years old, and I was twenty-
one.  My relative took several months to consider, and had the advice of
her lawyers before she acceded to my request.  And I made it at the
instigation of Mr. Brough, who dictated the letter which I wrote, and who
I really thought then was as rich as Mr. Rothschild himself."

"Your friend placed her money in your name; and you, if I mistake not,
Mr. Titmarsh, were suddenly placed over the heads of twelve of your
fellow-clerks as a reward for your service in obtaining it?"

"It is very true, sir,"--and, as I confessed it, poor Mary began to wipe
her eyes, and Gus's ears (I could not see his face) looked like two red-
hot muffins--"it's quite true, sir; and, as matters have turned out, I am
heartily sorry for what I did.  But at the time I thought I could serve
my aunt as well as myself; and you must remember, then, how high our
shares were."

"Well, sir, having procured this sum of money, you were straightway taken
into Mr. Brough's confidence.  You were received into his house, and from
third clerk speedily became head clerk; in which post you were found at
the disappearance of your worthy patron!"

"Sir, you have no right to question me, to be sure; but here are a
hundred of our shareholders, and I'm not unwilling to make a clean breast
of it," said I, pressing Mary's hand.  "I certainly was the head clerk.
And why?  Because the other gents left the office.  I certainly was
received into Mr. Brough's house.  And why?  Because, sir, my aunt _had
more money to lay out_.  I see it all clearly now, though I could not
understand it then; and the proof that Mr. Brough wanted my aunt's money,
and not me, is that, when she came to town, our Director carried her by
force out of my house to Fulham, and never so much as thought of asking
me or my wife thither.  Ay, sir, and he would have had her remaining
money, had not her lawyer from the country prevented her disposing of it.
Before the concern finally broke, and as soon as she heard there was
doubt concerning it, she took back her shares--scrip shares they were,
sir, as you know--and has disposed of them as she thought fit.  Here,
sir, and gents," says I, "you have the whole of the history as far as
regards me.  In order to get her only son a means of livelihood, my
mother placed her little money with the Company--it is lost.  My aunt
invested larger sums with it, which were to have been mine one day, and
they are lost too; and here am I, at the end of four years, a disgraced
and ruined man.  Is there anyone present, however much he has suffered by
the failure of the Company, that has had worse fortune through it than
I?"

"Mr. Titmarsh," says Mr. Commissioner, in a much more friendly way, and
at the same time casting a glance at a newspaper reporter that was
sitting hard by, "your story is not likely to get into the newspapers;
for, as you say, it is a private affair, which you had no need to speak
of unless you thought proper, and may be considered as a confidential
conversation between us and the other gentlemen here.  But if it _could_
be made public, it might do some good, and warn people, if they _will_ be
warned, against the folly of such enterprises as that in which you have
been engaged.  It is quite clear from your story, that you have been
deceived as grossly as anyone of the persons present.  But look you, sir,
if you had not been so eager after gain, I think you would not have
allowed yourself to be deceived, and would have kept your relative's
money, and inherited it, according to your story, one day or other.
Directly people expect to make a large interest, their judgment seems to
desert them; and because they wish for profit, they think they are sure
of it, and disregard all warnings and all prudence.  Besides the hundreds
of honest families who have been ruined by merely placing confidence in
this Association of yours, and who deserve the heartiest pity, there are
hundreds more who have embarked in it, like yourself, not for investment,
but for speculation; and these, upon my word, deserve the fate they have
met with.  As long as dividends are paid, no questions are asked; and Mr.
Brough might have taken the money for his shareholders on the high-road,
and they would have pocketed it, and not been too curious.  But what's
the use of talking?" says Mr. Commissioner, in a passion: "here is one
rogue detected, and a thousand dupes made; and if another swindler starts
to-morrow, there will be a thousand more of his victims round this table
a year hence; and so, I suppose, to the end.  And now let's go to
business, gentlemen, and excuse this sermon."

After giving an account of all I knew, which was very little, other gents
who were employed in the concern were examined; and I went back to
prison, with my poor little wife on my arm.  We had to pass through the
crowd in the rooms, and my heart bled as I saw, amongst a score of
others, poor Gates, Brough's porter, who had advanced every shilling to
his master, and was now, with ten children, houseless and penniless in
his old age.  Captain Sparr was in this neighbourhood, but by no means so
friendly disposed; for while Gates touched his hat, as if I had been a
lord, the little Captain came forward threatening with his bamboo-cane
and swearing with great oaths that I was an accomplice of Brough.  "Curse
you for a smooth-faced scoundrel!" says he.  "What business have you to
ruin an English gentleman, as you have me?"  And again he advanced with
his stick.  But this time, officer as he was, Gus took him by the collar,
and shoved him back, and said, "Look at the lady, you brute, and hold
your tongue!"  And when he looked at my wife's situation, Captain Sparr
became redder for shame than he had before been for anger.  "I'm sorry
she's married to such a good-for-nothing," muttered he, and fell back;
and my poor wife and I walked out of the court, and back to our dismal
room in the prison.

It was a hard place for a gentle creature like her to be confined in; and
I longed to have some of my relatives with her when her time should come.
But her grandmother could not leave the old lieutenant; and my mother had
written to say that, as Mrs. Hoggarty was with us, she was quite as well
at home with her children.  "What a blessing it is for you, under your
misfortunes," continued the good soul, "to have the generous purse of
your aunt for succour!"  Generous purse of my aunt, indeed!  Where could
Mrs. Hoggarty be?  It was evident that she had not written to any of her
friends in the country, nor gone thither, as she threatened.

But as my mother had already lost so much money through my unfortunate
luck, and as she had enough to do with her little pittance to keep my
sisters at home; and as, on hearing of my condition, she would infallibly
have sold her last gown to bring me aid, Mary and I agreed that we would
not let her know what our real condition was--bad enough! Heaven knows,
and sad and cheerless.  Old Lieutenant Smith had likewise nothing but his
half-pay and his rheumatism; so we were, in fact, quite friendless.

That period of my life, and that horrible prison, seem to me like
recollections of some fever.  What an awful place!--not for the sadness,
strangely enough, as I thought, but for the gaiety of it; for the long
prison galleries were, I remember, full of life and a sort of grave
bustle.  All day and all night doors were clapping to and fro; and you
heard loud voices, oaths, footsteps, and laughter.  Next door to our room
was one where a man sold gin, under the name of _tape_; and here, from
morning till night, the people kept up a horrible revelry;--and sang--sad
songs some of them: but my dear little girl was, thank God! unable to
understand the most part of their ribaldry.  She never used to go out
till nightfall; and all day she sat working at a little store of caps and
dresses for the expected stranger--and not, she says to this day,
unhappy.  But the confinement sickened her, who had been used to happy
country air, and she grew daily paler and paler.

The Fives Court was opposite our window; and here I used, very
unwillingly at first, but afterwards, I do confess, with much eagerness,
to take a couple of hours' daily sport.  Ah! it was a strange place.
There was an aristocracy there as elsewhere,--amongst other gents, a son
of my Lord Deuce-ace; and many of the men in the prison were as eager to
walk with him, and talked of his family as knowingly, as if they were
Bond Street bucks.  Poor Tidd, especially, was one of these.  Of all his
fortune he had nothing left but a dressing-case and a flowered dressing-
gown; and to these possessions he added a fine pair of moustaches, with
which the poor creature strutted about; and though cursing his ill
fortune, was, I do believe, as happy whenever his friends brought him a
guinea, as he had been during his brief career as a gentleman on town.  I
have seen sauntering dandies in watering-places ogling the women,
watching eagerly for steamboats and stage-coaches as if their lives
depended upon them, and strutting all day in jackets up and down the
public walks.  Well, there are such fellows in prison: quite as dandified
and foolish, only a little more shabby--dandies with dirty beards and
holes at their elbows.

I did not go near what is called the poor side of the prison--I _dared_
not, that was the fact.  But our little stock of money was running low;
and my heart sickened to think what might be my dear wife's fate, and on
what sort of a couch our child might be born.  But Heaven spared me that
pang,--Heaven, and my dear good friend, Gus Hoskins.

The attorneys to whom Mr. Smithers recommended me, told me that I could
get leave to live in the rules of the Fleet, could I procure sureties to
the marshal of the prison for the amount of the detainer lodged against
me; but though I looked Mr. Blatherwick hard in the face, he never
offered to give the bail for me, and I knew no housekeeper in London who
would procure it.  There was, however, one whom I did not know,--and that
was old Mr. Hoskins, the leatherseller of Skinner Street, a kind fat
gentleman, who brought his fat wife to see Mrs. Titmarsh; and though the
lady gave herself rather patronising airs (her husband being free of the
Skinners' Company, and bidding fair to be Alderman, nay, Lord Mayor of
the first city in the world), she seemed heartily to sympathise with us;
and her husband stirred and bustled about until the requisite leave was
obtained, and I was allowed comparative liberty.

As for lodgings, they were soon had.  My old landlady, Mrs. Stokes, sent
her Jemima to say that her first floor was at our service; and when we
had taken possession of it, and I offered at the end of the week to pay
her bill, the good soul, with tears in her eyes, told me that she did not
want for money now, and that she knew I had enough to do with what I had.
I did not refuse her kindness; for, indeed, I had but five guineas left,
and ought not by rights to have thought of such expensive apartments as
hers; but my wife's time was very near, and I could not bear to think
that she should want for any comfort in her lying-in.

The admirable woman, with whom the Misses Hoskins came every day to keep
company--and very nice, kind ladies they are--recovered her health a good
deal, now she was out of the odious prison and was enabled to take
exercise.  How gaily did we pace up and down Bridge Street and Chatham
Place, to be sure! and yet, in truth, I was a beggar, and felt sometimes
ashamed of being so happy.

With regard to the liabilities of the Company my mind was now made quite
easy; for the creditors could only come upon our directors, and these it
was rather difficult to find.  Mr. Brough was across the water; and I
must say, to the credit of that gentleman, that while everybody thought
he had run away with hundreds of thousands of pounds, he was in a garret
at Boulogne, with scarce a shilling in his pocket, and his fortune to
make afresh.  Mrs. Brough, like a good brave woman, remained faithful to
him, and only left Fulham with the gown on her back; and Miss Belinda,
though grumbling and sadly out of temper, was no better off.  For the
other directors,--when they came to inquire at Edinburgh for Mr. Mull, W.
S., it appeared there _was_ a gentleman of that name, who had practised
in Edinburgh with good reputation until 1800, since when he had retired
to the Isle of Skye; and on being applied to, knew no more of the West
Diddlesex Association than Queen Anne did.  General Sir Dionysius
O'Halloran had abruptly quitted Dublin, and returned to the republic of
Guatemala.  Mr. Shirk went into the _Gazette_.  Mr. Macraw, M.P. and
King's Counsel, had not a single guinea in the world but what he received
for attending our board; and the only man seizable was Mr. Manstraw, a
wealthy navy contractor, as we understood, at Chatham.  He turned out to
be a small dealer in marine stores, and his whole stock in trade was not
worth 10_l_.  Mr. Abednego was the other director, and we have already
seen what became of _him_.

"Why, as there is no danger from the West Diddlesex," suggested Mr.
Hoskins, senior, "should you not now endeavour to make an arrangement
with your creditors; and who can make a better bargain with them than
pretty Mrs. Titmarsh here, whose sweet eyes would soften the
hardest-hearted tailor or milliner that ever lived?"

Accordingly my dear girl, one bright day in February, shook me by the
hand, and bidding me be of good cheer, set forth with Gus in a coach, to
pay a visit to those persons.  Little did I think a year before, that the
daughter of the gallant Smith should ever be compelled to be a suppliant
to tailors and haberdashers; but _she_, Heaven bless her! felt none of
the shame which oppressed me--or _said_ she felt none--and went away,
nothing doubting, on her errand.

In the evening she came back, and my heart thumped to know the news.  I
saw it was bad by her face.  For some time she did not speak, but looked
as pale as death, and wept as she kissed me.  "_You_ speak, Mr.
Augustus," at last said she, sobbing; and so Gus told me the
circumstances of that dismal day.

"What do you think, Sam?" says he; "that infernal aunt of yours, at whose
command you had the things, has written to the tradesmen to say that you
are a swindler and impostor; that you give out that _she_ ordered the
goods; that she is ready to drop down dead, and to take her bible-oath
she never did any such thing, and that they must look to you alone for
payment.  Not one of them would hear of letting you out; and as for
Mantalini, the scoundrel was so insolent that I gave him a box on the
ear, and would have half-killed him, only poor Mary--Mrs. Titmarsh I
mean--screamed and fainted: and I brought her away, and here she is, as
ill as can be."

That night, the indefatigable Gus was obliged to run post-haste for
Doctor Salts, and next morning a little boy was born.  I did not know
whether to be sad or happy, as they showed me the little weakly thing;
but Mary was the happiest woman, she declared, in the world, and forgot
all her sorrows in nursing the poor baby; she went bravely through her
time, and vowed that it was the loveliest child in the world; and that
though Lady Tiptoff, whose confinement we read of as having taken place
the same day, might have a silk bed and a fine house in Grosvenor Square,
she never never could have such a beautiful child as our dear little Gus:
for after whom should we have named the boy, if not after our good kind
friend?  We had a little party at the christening, and I assure you were
very merry over our tea.

The mother, thank Heaven! was very well, and it did one's heart good to
see her in that attitude in which I think every woman, be she ever so
plain, looks beautiful--with her baby at her bosom.  The child was
sickly, but she did not see it; we were very poor, but what cared she?
She had no leisure to be sorrowful as I was: I had my last guinea now in
my pocket; and when _that_ was gone--ah! my heart sickened to think of
what was to come, and I prayed for strength and guidance, and in the
midst of my perplexities felt yet thankful that the danger of the
confinement was over; and that for the worst fortune which was to befall
us, my dear wife was at least prepared, and strong in health.

I told Mrs. Stokes that she must let us have a cheaper room--a garret
that should cost but a few shillings; and though the good woman bade me
remain in the apartments we occupied, yet, now that my wife was well, I
felt it would be a crime to deprive my kind landlady of her chief means
of livelihood; and at length she promised to get me a garret as I wanted,
and to make it as comfortable as might be; and little Jemima declared
that she would be glad beyond measure to wait on the mother and the
child.

The room, then, was made ready; and though I took some pains not to speak
of the arrangement too suddenly to Mary, yet there was no need of
disguise or hesitation; for when at last I told her--"Is that all?" said
she, and took my hand with one of her blessed smiles, and vowed that she
and Jemima would keep the room as pretty and neat as possible.  "And I
will cook your dinners," added she; "for you know you said I make the
best roly-poly puddings in the world."  God bless her!  I do think some
women almost love poverty: but I did not tell Mary how poor I was, nor
had she any idea how lawyers', and prison's, and doctors' fees had
diminished the sum of money which she brought me when we came to the
Fleet.

It was not, however, destined that she and her child should inhabit that
little garret.  We were to leave our lodgings on Monday morning; but on
Saturday evening the child was seized with convulsions, and all Sunday
the mother watched and prayed for it: but it pleased God to take the
innocent infant from us, and on Sunday, at midnight, it lay a corpse in
its mother's bosom.  Amen.  We have other children, happy and well, now
round about us, and from the father's heart the memory of this little
thing has almost faded; but I do believe that every day of her life the
mother thinks of the firstborn that was with her for so short a while:
many and many a time has she taken her daughters to the grave, in Saint
Bride's, where he lies buried; and she wears still at her neck a little
little lock of gold hair, which she took from the head of the infant as
he lay smiling in his coffin.  It has happened to me to forget the
child's birthday, but to her never; and often in the midst of common talk
comes something that shows she is thinking of the child still,--some
simple allusion that is to me inexpressibly affecting.

I shall not try to describe her grief, for such things are sacred and
secret; and a man has no business to place them on paper for all the
world to read.  Nor should I have mentioned the child's loss at all, but
that even that loss was the means of a great worldly blessing to us; as
my wife has often with tears and thanks acknowledged.

While my wife was weeping over her child, I am ashamed to say I was
distracted with other feelings besides those of grief for its loss; and I
have often since thought what a master--nay, destroyer--of the affections
want is, and have learned from experience to be thankful for _daily
bread_.  That acknowledgment of weakness which we make in imploring to be
relieved from hunger and from temptation, is surely wisely put in our
daily prayer.  Think of it you who are rich, and take heed how you turn a
beggar away.

The child lay there in its wicker cradle, with its sweet fixed smile in
its face (I think the angels in heaven must have been glad to welcome
that pretty innocent smile); and it was only the next day, after my wife
had gone to lie down, and I sat keeping watch by it, that I remembered
the condition of its parents, and thought, I can't tell with what a pang,
that I had not money left to bury the little thing, and wept bitter tears
of despair.  Now, at last, I thought I must apply to my poor mother, for
this was a sacred necessity; and I took paper, and wrote her a letter at
the baby's side, and told her of our condition.  But, thank Heaven!  I
never sent the letter; for as I went to the desk to get sealing-wax and
seal that dismal letter, my eyes fell upon the diamond pin that I had
quite forgotten, and that was lying in the drawer of the desk.

I looked into the bedroom,--my poor wife was asleep; she had been
watching for three nights and days, and had fallen asleep from sheer
fatigue; and I ran out to a pawnbroker's with the diamond, and received
seven guineas for it, and coming back put the money into the landlady's
hand, and told her to get what was needful.  My wife was still asleep
when I came back; and when she woke, we persuaded her to go downstairs to
the landlady's parlour; and meanwhile the necessary preparations were
made, and the poor child consigned to its coffin.

The next day, after all was over, Mrs. Stokes gave me back three out of
the seven guineas; and then I could not help sobbing out to her my doubts
and wretchedness, telling her that this was the last money I had; and
when that was gone I knew not what was to become of the best wife that
ever a man was blest with.

My wife was downstairs with the woman.  Poor Gus, who was with me, and
quite as much affected as any of the party, took me by the arm, and led
me downstairs; and we quite forgot all about the prison and the rules,
and walked a long long way across Blackfriars Bridge, the kind fellow
striving as much as possible to console me.

When we came back, it was in the evening.  The first person who met me in
the house was my kind mother, who fell into my arms with many tears, and
who rebuked me tenderly for not having told her of my necessities.  She
never should have known of them, she said; but she had not heard from me
since I wrote announcing the birth of the child, and she felt uneasy
about my silence; and meeting Mr. Smithers in the street, asked from him
news concerning me: whereupon that gentleman, with some little show of
alarm, told her that he thought her daughter-in-law was confined in an
uncomfortable place; that Mrs. Hoggarty had left us; finally, that I was
in prison.  This news at once despatched my poor mother on her travels,
and she had only just come from the prison, where she learned my address.

I asked her whether she had seen my wife, and how she found her.  Rather
to my amaze she said that Mary was out with the landlady when she
arrived; and eight--nine o'clock came, and she was absent still.

At ten o'clock returned--not my wife, but Mrs. Stokes, and with her a
gentleman, who shook hands with me on coming into the room, and said,
"Mr. Titmarsh!  I don't know whether you will remember me: my name is
Tiptoff.  I have brought you a note from Mrs. Titmarsh, and a message
from my wife, who sincerely commiserates your loss, and begs you will not
be uneasy at Mrs. Titmarsh's absence.  She has been good enough to
promise to pass the night with Lady Tiptoff; and I am sure you will not
object to her being away from you, while she is giving happiness to a
sick mother and a sick child."  After a few more words, my Lord left us.
My wife's note only said that Mrs. Stokes would tell me all.




CHAPTER XIII


IN WHICH IT IS SHOWN THAT A GOOD WIFE IS THE BEST DIAMOND A MAN CAN WEAR
IN HIS BOSOM

"Mrs. Titmarsh, ma'am," says Mrs. Stokes, "before I gratify your
curiosity, ma'am, permit me to observe that angels is scarce; and it's
rare to have one, much more two, in a family.  Both your son and your
daughter-in-law, ma'am, are of that uncommon sort; they are, now, reely,
ma'am."

My mother said she thanked God for both of us; and Mrs. Stokes
proceeded:--

"When the fu--- when the seminary, ma'am, was concluded this morning,
your poor daughter-in-law was glad to take shelter in my humble parlour,
ma'am; where she wept, and told a thousand stories of the little cherub
that's gone.  Heaven bless us! it was here but a month, and no one could
have thought it could have done such a many things in that time.  But a
mother's eyes are clear, ma'am; and I had just such another angel, my
dear little Antony, that was born before Jemima, and would have been
twenty-three now were he in this wicked world, ma'am.  However, I won't
speak of him, ma'am, but of what took place.

"You must know, ma'am, that Mrs. Titmarsh remained downstairs while Mr.
Samuel was talking with his friend Mr. Hoskins; and the poor thing would
not touch a bit of dinner, though we had it made comfortable; and after
dinner, it was with difficulty I could get her to sup a little drop of
wine-and-water, and dip a toast in it.  It was the first morsel that had
passed her lips for many a long hour, ma'am.

"Well, she would not speak, and I thought it best not to interrupt her;
but she sat and looked at my two youngest that were playing on the rug;
and just as Mr. Titmarsh and his friend Gus went out, the boy brought the
newspaper, ma'am,--it always comes from three to four, and I began
a-reading of it.  But I couldn't read much, for thinking of poor Mr.
Sam's sad face as he went out, and the sad story he told me about his
money being so low; and every now and then I stopped reading, and bade
Mrs. T. not to take on so; and told her some stories about my dear little
Antony.

"'Ah!' says she, sobbing, and looking at the young ones, 'you have other
children, Mrs. Stokes; but that--that was my only one;' and she flung
back in her chair, and cried fit to break her heart: and I knew that the
cry would do her good, and so went back to my paper--the _Morning Post_,
ma'am; I always read it, for I like to know what's a-going on in the West
End.

"The very first thing that my eyes lighted upon was this:--'Wanted,
immediately, a respectable person as wet-nurse.  Apply at No. ---,
Grosvenor Square.'  'Bless us and save us!' says I, 'here's poor Lady
Tiptoff ill;' for I knew her Ladyship's address, and how she was confined
on the very same day with Mrs. T.: and, for the matter of that, her
Ladyship knows my address, having visited here.

"A sudden thought came over me.  'My dear Mrs. Titmarsh,' said I, 'you
know how poor and how good your husband is?'

"'Yes,' says she, rather surprised.

"'Well, my dear,' says I, looking her hard in the face, 'Lady Tiptoff,
who knows him, wants a nurse for her son, Lord Poynings.  Will you be a
brave woman, and look for the place, and mayhap replace the little one
that God has taken from you?'

"She began to tremble and blush; and then I told her what you, Mr. Sam,
had told me the other day about your money matters; and no sooner did she
hear it than she sprung to her bonnet, and said, 'Come, come:' and in
five minutes she had me by the arm, and we walked together to Grosvenor
Square.  The air did her no harm, Mr. Sam, and during the whole of the
walk she never cried but once, and then it was at seeing a nursery-maid
in the Square.

"A great fellow in livery opens the door, and says, 'You're the forty-
fifth as come about this 'ere place; but, fust, let me ask you a
preliminary question.  Are you a Hirishwoman?'

"'No, sir,' says Mrs. T.

"'That suffishnt, mem,' says the gentleman in plush; 'I see you're not by
your axnt.  Step this way, ladies, if you please.  You'll find some more
candidix for the place upstairs; but I sent away forty-four happlicants,
because they _was_ Hirish.'

"We were taken upstairs over very soft carpets, and brought into a room,
and told by an old lady who was there to speak very softly, for my Lady
was only two rooms off.  And when I asked how the baby and her Ladyship
were, the old lady told me both were pretty well: only the doctor said
Lady Tiptoff was too delicate to nurse any longer; and so it was
considered necessary to have a wet-nurse.

"There was another young woman in the room--a tall fine woman as ever you
saw--that looked very angry and contempshious at Mrs. T. and me, and
said, 'I've brought a letter from the duchess whose daughter I nust; and
I think, Mrs. Blenkinsop, mem, my Lady Tiptoff may look far before she
finds such another nuss as me.  Five feet six high, had the small-pox,
married to a corporal in the Lifeguards, perfectly healthy, best of
charactiers, only drink water; and as for the child, ma'am, if her
Ladyship had six, I've a plenty for them all.'

"As the woman was making this speech, a little gentleman in black came in
from the next room, treading as if on velvet.  The woman got up, and made
him a low curtsey, and folding her arms on her great broad chest,
repeated the speech she had made before.  Mrs. T. did not get up from her
chair, but only made a sort of a bow; which, to be sure, I thought was
ill manners, as this gentleman was evidently the apothecary.  He looked
hard at her and said, 'Well, my good woman, and are you come about the
place too?'

"'Yes, sir,' says she, blushing.

"'You seem very delicate.  How old is your child?  How many have you had?
What character have you?'

"Your wife didn't answer a word; so I stepped up, and said, 'Sir,' says
I, 'this lady has just lost her first child, and isn't used to look for
places, being the daughter of a captain in the navy; so you'll excuse her
want of manners in not getting up when you came in.'

"The doctor at this sat down and began talking very kindly to her; he
said he was afraid that her application would be unsuccessful, as Mrs.
Horner came very strongly recommended from the Duchess of Doncaster,
whose relative Lady Tiptoff was; and presently my Lady appeared, looking
very pretty, ma'am, in an elegant lace-cap and a sweet muslin _robe-de-
sham_.

"A nurse came out of her Ladyship's room with her; and while my Lady was
talking to us, walked up and down in the next room with something in her
arms.

"First, my Lady spoke to Mrs. Horner, and then to Mrs. T.; but all the
while she was talking, Mrs. Titmarsh, rather rudely, as I thought, ma'am,
was looking into the next room: looking--looking at the baby there with
all her might.  My Lady asked her her name, and if she had any character;
and as she did not speak, I spoke up for her, and said she was the wife
of one of the best men in the world; that her Ladyship knew the
gentleman, too, and had brought him a haunch of venison.  Then Lady
Tiptoff looked up quite astonished, and I told the whole story: how you
had been head clerk, and that rascal, Brough, had brought you to ruin.
'Poor thing!' said my Lady: Mrs. Titmarsh did not speak, but still kept
looking at the baby; and the great big grenadier of a Mrs. Horner looked
angrily at her.

"'Poor thing!' says my Lady, taking Mrs. T.'s hand very kind, 'she seems
very young.  How old are you, my dear?'

"'Five weeks and two days!' says your wife, sobbing.

"Mrs. Horner burst into a laugh; but there was a tear in my Lady's eyes,
for she knew what the poor thing was a-thinking of.

"'Silence, woman!' says she angrily to the great grenadier woman; and at
this moment the child in the next room began crying.

"As soon as your wife heard the noise, she sprung from her chair and made
a stop forward, and put both her hands to her breast and said, 'The
child--the child--give it me!' and then began to cry again.

"My Lady looked at her for a moment, and then ran into the next room and
brought her the baby; and the baby clung to her as if he knew her: and a
pretty sight it was to see that dear woman with the child at her bosom.

"When my Lady saw it, what do you think she did?  After looking on it for
a bit, she put her arms round your wife's neck and kissed her.

"'My dear,' said she, 'I am sure you are as good as you are pretty, and
you shall keep the child: and I thank God for sending you to me!'

"These were her very words; and Dr. Bland, who was standing by, says,
'It's a second judgment of Solomon!'

"'I suppose, my Lady, you don't want _me_?' says the big woman, with
another curtsey.

"'Not in the least!' answers my Lady, haughtily, and the grenadier left
the room: and then I told all your story at full length, and Mrs.
Blenkinsop kept me to tea, and I saw the beautiful room that Mrs.
Titmarsh is to have next to Lady Tiptoff's; and when my Lord came home,
what does he do but insist upon coming back with me here in a hackney-
coach, as he said he must apologise to you for keeping your wife away."

I could not help, in my own mind, connecting this strange event which, in
the midst of our sorrow, came to console us, and in our poverty to give
us bread,--I could not help connecting it with the _diamond pin_, and
fancying that the disappearance of that ornament had somehow brought a
different and a better sort of luck into my family.  And though some
gents who read this, may call me a poor-spirited fellow for allowing my
wife to go out to service, who was bred a lady and ought to have servants
herself: yet, for my part, I confess I did not feel one minute's scruple
or mortification on the subject.  If you love a person, is it not a
pleasure to feel obliged to him?  And this, in consequence, I felt.  I
was proud and happy at being able to think that my dear wife should be
able to labour and earn bread for me, now misfortune had put it out of my
power to support me and her.  And now, instead of making any reflections
of my own upon prison discipline, I will recommend the reader to consult
that admirable chapter in the Life of Mr. Pickwick in which the same
theme is handled, and which shows how silly it is to deprive honest men
of the means of labour just at the moment when they most want it.  What
could I do?  There were one or two gents in the prison who could work
(literary gents,--one wrote his "Travels in Mesopotamia," and the other
his "Sketches at Almack's," in the place); but all the occupation I could
find was walking down Bridge Street, and then up Bridge Street, and
staring at Alderman Waithman's windows, and then at the black man who
swept the crossing.  I never gave him anything; but I envied him his
trade and his broom, and the money that continually fell into his old
hat.  But I was not allowed even to carry a broom.

Twice or thrice--for Lady Tiptoff did not wish her little boy often to
breathe the air of such a close place as Salisbury Square--my dear Mary
came in the thundering carriage to see me.  They were merry meetings;
and--if the truth must be told--twice, when nobody was by, I jumped into
the carriage and had a drive with her; and when I had seen her home,
jumped into another hackney-coach and drove back.  But this was only
twice; for the system was dangerous, and it might bring me into trouble,
and it cost three shillings from Grosvenor Square to Ludgate Hill.

Here, meanwhile, my good mother kept me company; and what should we read
of one day but the marriage of Mrs. Hoggarty and the Rev. Grimes Wapshot!
My mother, who never loved Mrs. H., now said that she should repent all
her life having allowed me to spend so much of my time with that odious
ungrateful woman; and added that she and I too were justly punished for
worshipping the mammon of unrighteousness and forgetting our natural
feelings for the sake of my aunt's paltry lucre.  "Well, Amen!" said I.
"This is the end of all our fine schemes!  My aunt's money and my aunt's
diamond were the causes of my ruin, and now they are clear gone, thank
Heaven! and I hope the old lady will be happy; and I must say I don't
envy the Rev. Grimes Wapshot."  So we put Mrs. Hoggarty out of our
thoughts, and made ourselves as comfortable as might be.

Rich and great people are slower in making Christians of their children
than we poor ones, and little Lord Poynings was not christened until the
month of June.  A duke was one godfather, and Mr. Edmund Preston, the
State Secretary, another; and that kind Lady Jane Preston, whom I have
before spoken of, was the godmother to her nephew.  She had not long been
made acquainted with my wife's history; and both she and her sister loved
her heartily and were very kind to her.  Indeed, there was not a single
soul in the house, high or low, but was fond of that good sweet creature;
and the very footmen were as ready to serve her as they were their own
mistress.

"I tell you what, sir," says one of them.  "You see, Tit my boy, I'm a
connyshure, and up to snough; and if ever I see a lady in my life, Mrs.
Titmarsh is one.  I can't be fimiliar with her--I've tried--"

"Have you, sir?" said I.

"Don't look so indignant!  I can't, I say, be fimiliar with her as I am
with you.  There's a somethink in her, a jenny-squaw, that haws me, sir!
and even my Lord's own man, that 'as 'ad as much success as any gentleman
in Europe--he says that, cuss him--"

"Mr. Charles," says I, "tell my Lord's own man that, if he wants to keep
his place and his whole skin, he will never address a single word to that
lady but such as a servant should utter in the presence of his mistress;
and take notice that I am a gentleman, though a poor one, and will murder
the first man who does her wrong!"

Mr. Charles only said "Gammin!" to this: but psha! in bragging about my
own spirit, I forgot to say what great good fortune my dear wife's
conduct procured for me.

On the christening-day, Mr. Preston offered her first a five, and then a
twenty-pound note; but she declined either; but she did not decline a
present that the two ladies made her together, and this was no other than
_my release from the Fleet_.  Lord Tiptoff's lawyer paid every one of the
bills against me, and that happy christening-day made me a free man.  Ah!
who shall tell the pleasure of that day, or the merry dinner we had in
Mary's room at Lord Tiptoff's house, when my Lord and my Lady came
upstairs to shake hands with me!

"I have been speaking to Mr. Preston," says my Lord, "the gentleman with
whom you had the memorable quarrel, and he has forgiven it, although he
was in the wrong, and promises to do something for you.  We are going
down, meanwhile, to his house at Richmond; and be sure, Mr. Titmarsh, I
will not fail to keep you in his mind."

"_Mrs_. Titmarsh will do that," says my Lady; "for Edmund is woefully
smitten with her!"  And Mary blushed, and I laughed, and we were all very
happy: and sure enough there came from Richmond a letter to me, stating
that I was appointed fourth clerk in the Tape and Sealing-wax Office,
with a salary of 80_l_. per annum.

Here perhaps my story ought to stop; for I was happy at last, and have
never since, thank Heaven! known want: but Gus insists that I should add
how I gave up the place in the Tape and Sealing-wax Office, and for what
reason.  That excellent Lady Jane Preston is long gone, and so is Mr. P---
off in an apoplexy, and there is no harm now in telling the story.

The fact was, that Mr. Preston had fallen in love with Mary in a much
more serious way than any of us imagined; for I do believe he invited his
brother-in-law to Richmond for no other purpose than to pay court to his
son's nurse.  And one day, as I was coming post-haste to thank him for
the place he had procured for me, being directed by Mr. Charles to the
"scrubbery," as he called it, which led down to the river--there, sure
enough, I found Mr. Preston, on his knees too, on the gravel-walk, and
before him Mary, holding the little lord.

"Dearest creature!" says Mr. Preston, "do but listen to me, and I'll make
your husband consul at Timbuctoo!  He shall never know of it, I tell you:
he _can_ never know of it.  I pledge you my word as a Cabinet Minister!
Oh, don't look at me in that arch way: by heavens, your eyes kill me!"

Mary, when she saw me, burst out laughing, and ran down the lawn; my Lord
making a huge crowing, too, and holding out his little fat hands.  Mr.
Preston, who was a heavy man, was slowly getting up, when, catching a
sight of me looking as fierce as the crater of Mount Etna,--he gave a
start back and lost his footing, and rolled over and over, walloping into
the water at the garden's edge.  It was not deep, and he came bubbling
and snorting out again in as much fright as fury.

"You d-d ungrateful villain!" says he, "what do you stand there laughing
for?"

"I'm waiting your orders for Timbuctoo, sir," says I, and laughed fit to
die; and so did my Lord Tiptoff and his party, who joined us on the lawn:
and Jeames the footman came forward and helped Mr. Preston out of the
water.

"Oh, you old sinner!" says my Lord, as his brother-in-law came up the
slope.  "Will that heart of yours be always so susceptible, you romantic,
apoplectic, immoral man?"

Mr. Preston went away, looking blue with rage, and ill-treated his wife
for a whole month afterwards.

"At any rate," says my Lord, "Titmarsh here has got a place through our
friend's unhappy attachment; and Mrs. Titmarsh has only laughed at him,
so there is no harm there.  It's an ill wind that blows nobody good, you
know."

"Such a wind as that, my Lord, with due respect to you, shall never do
good to me.  I have learned in the past few years what it is to make
friends with the mammon of unrighteousness; and that out of such
friendship no good comes in the end to honest men.  It shall never be
said that Sam Titmarsh got a place because a great man was in love with
his wife; and were the situation ten times as valuable, I should blush
every day I entered the office-doors in thinking of the base means by
which my fortune was made.  You have made me free, my Lord; and, thank
God! I am willing to work.  I can easily get a clerkship with the
assistance of my friends; and with that and my wife's income, we can
manage honestly to face the world."

This rather long speech I made with some animation; for, look you, I was
not over well pleased that his Lordship should think me capable of
speculating in any way on my wife's beauty.

My Lord at first turned red, and looked rather angry; but at last he held
out his hand and said, "You are right, Titmarsh, and I am wrong; and let
me tell you in confidence, that I think you are a very honest fellow.  You
shan't lose by your honesty, I promise you."

Nor did I: for I am at this present moment Lord Tiptoff's steward and
right-hand man: and am I not a happy father? and is not my wife loved and
respected by all the country? and is not Gus Hoskins my brother-in-law,
partner with his excellent father in the leather way, and the delight of
all his nephews and nieces for his tricks and fun?

As for Mr. Brough, that gentleman's history would fill a volume of
itself.  Since he vanished from the London world, he has become
celebrated on the Continent, where he has acted a thousand parts, and met
all sorts of changes of high and low fortune.  One thing we may at least
admire in the man, and that is, his undaunted courage; and I can't help
thinking, as I have said before, that there must be some good in him,
seeing the way in which his family are faithful to him.  With respect to
Roundhand, I had best also speak tenderly.  The case of Roundhand v. Tidd
is still in the memory of the public; nor can I ever understand how Bill
Tidd, so poetic as he was, could ever take on with such a fat, odious,
vulgar woman as Mrs. R., who was old enough to be his mother.

As soon as we were in prosperity, Mr. and Mrs. Grimes Wapshot made
overtures to be reconciled to us; and Mr. Wapshot laid bare to me all the
baseness of Mr. Smithers's conduct in the Brough transaction.  Smithers
had also endeavoured to pay his court to me, once when I went down to
Somersetshire; but I cut his pretensions short, as I have shown.  "He it
was," said Mr. Wapshot, "who induced Mrs. Grimes (Mrs. Hoggarty she was
then) to purchase the West Diddlesex shares: receiving, of course, a
large bonus for himself.  But directly he found that Mrs. Hoggarty had
fallen into the hands of Mr. Brough, and that he should lose the income
he made from the lawsuits with her tenants and from the management of her
landed property, he determined to rescue her from that villain Brough,
and came to town for the purpose.  He also," added Mr. Wapshot, "vented
his malignant slander against me; but Heaven was pleased to frustrate his
base schemes.  In the proceedings consequent on Brough's bankruptcy, Mr.
Smithers could not appear; for his own share in the transactions of the
Company would have been most certainly shown up.  During his absence from
London, I became the husband--the happy husband--of your aunt.  But
though, my dear sir, I have been the means of bringing her to grace, I
cannot disguise from you that Mrs. W. has faults which all my pastoral
care has not enabled me to eradicate.  She is close of her money,
sir--very close; nor can I make that charitable use of her property
which, as a clergyman, I ought to do; for she has tied up every shilling
of it, and only allows me half-a-crown a week for pocket-money.  In
temper, too, she is very violent.  During the first years of our union, I
strove with her; yea, I chastised her; but her perseverance, I must
confess, got the better of me.  I make no more remonstrances, but am as a
lamb in her hands, and she leads me whithersoever she pleases."

Mr. Wapshot concluded his tale by borrowing half-a-crown from me (it was
at the Somerset Coffee-house in the Strand, where he came, in the year
1832, to wait upon me), and I saw him go from thence into the gin-shop
opposite, and come out of the gin-shop half-an-hour afterwards, reeling
across the streets, and perfectly intoxicated.

He died next year: when his widow, who called herself Mrs.
Hoggarty-Grimes-Wapshot, of Castle Hoggarty, said that over the grave of
her saint all earthly resentments were forgotten, and proposed to come
and live with us; paying us, of course, a handsome remuneration.  But
this offer my wife and I respectfully declined; and once more she altered
her will, which once more she had made in our favour; called us
ungrateful wretches and pampered menials, and left all her property to
the Irish Hoggarties.  But seeing my wife one day in a carriage with Lady
Tiptoff, and hearing that we had been at the great ball at Tiptoff
Castle, and that I had grown to be a rich man, she changed her mind
again, sent for me on her death-bed, and left me the farms of Slopperton
and Squashtail, with all her savings for fifteen years.  Peace be to her
soul! for certainly she left me a very pretty property.

Though I am no literary man myself, my cousin Michael (who generally,
when he is short of coin, comes down and passes a few months with us)
says that my Memoirs may be of some use to the public (meaning, I
suspect, to himself); and if so, I am glad to serve him and them, and
hereby take farewell: bidding all gents who peruse this, to be cautious
of their money, if they have it; to be still more cautious of their
friends' money; to remember that great profits imply great risks; and
that the great shrewd capitalists of this country would not be content
with four per cent. for their money, if they could securely get more:
above all, I entreat them never to embark in any speculation, of which
the conduct is not perfectly clear to them, and of which the agents are
not perfectly open and loyal.

========================================
